---

title: Antibodies against protective antigen and methods of use for passive immunization and treatment of anthrax
abstract: A highly efficient method for generating human antibodies using recall technology is provided. In one aspect, human antibodies which are specific to the anthrax toxin are provided. In one aspect, human peripheral blood cells that have been pre-exposed to anthrax toxin are used in the SCID mouse model. This method results in high human antibody titers which are primarily of the IgG isotype and which contain antibodies of high specificity and affinity to desired antigens. The antibodies generated by this method can be used therapeutically and prophylactically for preventing or treating mammals exposed to anthrax. Thus, in one embodiment, a prophylactic or therapeutic agent used to counter the effects of anthrax toxin, released as a mechanism of bioterrorism, is provided. In one embodiment, a formulation and method for preventing and/or treating anthrax infection comprising a binding agent that prevents the assembly of the PA63 heptamer is also provided. Methods for diagnosis and methods to determine anthrax contamination are also described.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07442373&OS=07442373&RS=07442373
owner: Emergent Product Development Gaithersburg Inc.
number: 07442373
owner_city: Gaithersburg
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050124
---
This application is a continuation of U.S. application Ser. No. 11 040 580 filed Jan. 21 2005 now abandoned and is a continuation in part of PCT Application No. PCT US2003 36555 filed Nov. 14 2003 under 35 U.S.C. 120 and also claims benefit to U.S. provisional applications Ser. No. 60 538 721 filed Jan. 23 2004 and Ser. No. 60 562 421 filed Apr. 15 2004 all herein incorporated by reference.

This invention was made in part with the support of the United States Government under the following grants CCAT 52109B 7806 NIAID R43 AI52901 1A1 and NIAID R43 AI 58458 01. The Government has certain rights in this invention.

The present invention relates generally to fully human monoclonal antibodies method of making same and their use in preventive and therapeutic applications for anthrax. In one aspect antibodies that have binding specificity for anthrax protective antigen PA toxin are provided.

Anthrax is a zoonotic soil organism endemic to many parts of the world. The organism was one of the first biological warfare agents to be developed and continues to be a major threat in this regard. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC has emphasized that the United States faces a new wave of terrorism in the form of a biological attack. For example in late 2001 spores were intentionally distributed through the postal system causing 22 cases of anthrax including 5 deaths. Anthrax is a key toxin that can be employed by terrorists to debilitate a nation.

Although vaccine strains have been developed for anthrax currently there are concerns regarding their efficacy and availability. After inhalation by mammals spores germinate in the alveolar macrophages then migrate to lymph nodes where they multiply and enter the bloodstream. The vegetative bacteria excrete the tripartite exotoxin that is responsible for the etiology of the disease. Virulent strains of secrete a set of three distinct antigenic protein components protective antigen PA edema factor EF and lethal factor LF . PA can bind either LF or EF forming lethal toxin LeTx or edema toxin EdTx . Collectively these two toxins are seen as a complex exotoxin called anthrax toxin. Each component of the toxin is a thermolabile protein with a molecular weight exceeding 80 kDa. EF is a calmodulin dependent adenylate cyclase that is responsible for the edema seen in anthrax infections. LF is a zinc metalloprotease that is needed for the lethal effect of the anthrax toxin on macrophages. It is believed that PA contains the binding domain of anthrax toxin which binds to recently identified receptors on the cell surface called collectively anthrax toxin receptors ATRs and allows translocation of LF or EF into the cell by endocytosis.

Evidence that the hu PBL SCID system severe combined immunodeficient SCID mice engrafted with human peripheral blood leukocytes can be used to obtain recall antibody responses dates from the original publication of the method by Mosier and co workers. Mosier et al. 335 256 1988 herein incorporated by reference. In that report tetanus toxoid was administered to human PBL engrafted mice and human antibodies to tetanus were found in the serum post immunization. Since this original report many investigators have used the hu PBL SCID system to examine aspects of the human recall antibody response to multiple antigens. See for example Nonoyama S. et al. 151 3894 1993 Walker W. et al. 25 1425 1995 Else K. J. and Betts. C. J. 19 485 1997 all herein incorporated by reference. However reports describing the generation of useful monoclonal antibodies from such engrafted mice have been sporadic. Duchosal M. A. et al. 258 1991 Satoh N. et al. 47 113 1995 Uchibayashi N. et al. 14 313 1995 . Nguyen H. et al. 41 901 1997 Coccia M. A and P. Brams 5772 1998 and Smithson S. L. et al. 36 113 1999 all herein incorporated by reference.

There remains a need for an effective method to produce human monoclonal antibodies that are specific to a particular antigen. Moreover a need for a fully human monoclonal antibody specific to the anthrax toxin still remains. Accordingly in a preferred embodiment of the present invention a novel anti anthrax antibody that is fully human is provided. This new fully human anthrax antibody can be administered to a mammal to confer immunity to that mammal. Because the antibody is administered directly instead of the antigen this technique is called passive immunization. Thus in one embodiment of the present invention a method of passively immunizing a mammal is provided using one or more novel antibodies of the invention. Several embodiments of the present invention are also used to treat mammals that have been exposed to anthrax thereby preventing the toxic effects of anthrax post exposure and or reducing the severity of the illness.

In one embodiment of the present invention a composition and method to counter the effects of anthrax toxin that is released as a mechanism of bioterrorism are provided. In one embodiment a prophylactic treatment in the form of passive immunization is provided. In one embodiment antibodies to anthrax are administered to a mammal to prevent anthrax infection and or to treat anthrax infection. One advantage of a passive immunization strategy is that it may useful in conferring immediate to medium term protection and can also have benefits for non immunized patients who seek treatment after the point at which antibiotic therapy alone is ineffective. Casadevall A. 8 8 2002 Maynard J. A et al. 20 597 2002 herein incorporated by reference. Passive immunization according to some embodiments of the invention can confer short term long term and or permanent protection to recipients.

In some embodiments of the present invention antibodies that bind to the PA component of the tripartite anthrax exotoxin are provided. These antibodies will provide protection either as single agents or combined in a cocktail. A method to generate a series of fully human anti anthrax PA toxin antibodies is also provided.

In one embodiment a fully human monoclonal antibody or fragment thereof is disclosed which specifically recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin. In one variation the portion of an anthrax exotoxin is selected from the group consisting of protective antigen PA lethal factor LF and edema factor EF . In one embodiment the antibody recognizes only PA.

In one embodiment a fully human monoclonal antibody or fragment thereof that recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin and comprises an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID 2 SEQ ID 4 SEQ ID 6 SEQ ID 8 SEQ ID 10 SEQ ID 12 SEQ ID 14 and SEQ ID 16 is provided. In one embodiment two or more antibodies are provided. In one embodiment an antibody comprising SEQ ID 2 and SEQ 4 is provided. In another embodiment an antibody comprising SEQ ID 6 and SEQ 8 is provided. In a further embodiment an antibody comprising SEQ ID 2 SEQ 4 SEQ ID 6 and SEQ 8 is provided.

In one embodiment a fully human monoclonal antibody encoded at least in part by a polynucleotide comprising a nucleotide sequence selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID 1 SEQ ID 3 SEQ ID 5 SEQ ID 7 SEQ ID 9 SEQ ID 11 SEQ ID 13 and SEQ ID 15 is provided. In one embodiment two or more antibodies are provided. In another embodiment a hybridoma comprising one or more of the following nucleotide sequences SEQ ID 1 SEQ ID 3 SEQ ID 5 SEQ ID 7 SEQ ID 9 SEQ ID 11 SEQ ID 13 and SEQ ID 15 is provided.

In one embodiment one or more of the following antibodies or fragments thereof are provided antibody 21D9 antibody 22G12 antibody 1C6 and antibody 4H7. In a preferred embodiment two or three antibodies are provided. For example in one embodiment 21D9 and 1C6 are provided. In several embodiments the administration of two or more antibodies shows enhanced or synergistic effects. Chemical modifications mutations and other variants of these antibodies are also provided including but not limited to 21D9.1 and 22G12.1. Methods of making and using the antibodies or fragments thereof are also provided.

In a further embodiment a pharmaceutical composition for passively immunizing a mammal against anthrax wherein the pharmaceutical composition comprises one or more of the fully human monoclonal antibodies or fragments thereof described above is provided. In one embodiment the mammal has not been previously exposed to anthrax.

In one embodiment a pharmaceutical composition for treating a mammal exposed to anthrax wherein the pharmaceutical composition comprises one or more of the fully human monoclonal antibodies or fragments thereof described above is provided.

In one embodiment the pharmaceutical composition comprises two different fully human monoclonal antibodies or fragments thereof. In some embodiments the pharmaceutical composition comprises a monoclonal antibody that comprises less than 100 human protein sequences for example a humanized antibody or a partially human antibody . In a further embodiment the pharmaceutical composition further comprises Anthrax Vaccine Adsorbed AVA or recombinant protective antigen rPA . In one embodiment the pharmaceutical composition comprises an antibiotic.

In another embodiment the immunoglobulin or fragment thereof comprises an immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region comprising FR1 CDR1 FR2 CDR2 FR3 CDR3 and FR1 wherein the variable region is comprised of the amino acid sequence shown in . A CDR is a complementarity determining region. An FR is a frame work region. In one embodiment an antibody comprising CDR1 CDR2 and CDR3 shown in SEQ ID 2 is provided.

In another embodiment the immunoglobulin or fragment thereof comprises an immunoglobulin light chain variable region comprising FR1 CDR1 FR2 CDR2 FR3 CDR3 and FR4 wherein the variable region is comprised of the amino acid sequence shown in . In one embodiment an antibody comprising heavy chain CDR1 CDR2 and CDR3 all as shown in is provided. In another embodiment an antibody comprising light chain CDR1 CDR2 and CDR3 all as shown in is provided. In a preferred embodiment an antibody comprising the heavy and light chain CDRs shown in and is provided.

In one preferred embodiment of the present invention the fully human immunoglobulin or fragment thereof is a single chain that recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin.

In one preferred embodiment a fully human immunoglobulin or fragment thereof is disclosed that recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin wherein the immunoglobulin or fragment thereof comprises an immunoglobulin heavy chain comprising at least a portion of the amino acid sequence shown in and or an immunoglobulin light chain comprising at least a portion of the amino acid sequence shown in . In one embodiment the antibody comprises an immunoglobulin heavy chain comprising at least a portion of the amino acid sequence shown in and or an immunoglobulin light chain comprising at least a portion of the amino acid sequence shown in . In one embodiment the antibody comprises an immunoglobulin heavy chain comprising at least a portion of the amino acid sequence shown in and or an immunoglobulin light chain comprising at least a portion of the amino acid sequence shown in .

In one preferred embodiment a fully human immunoglobulin or fragment thereof is disclosed that recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin wherein the immunoglobulin or fragment thereof comprises an immunoglobulin light chain comprising at least one complementary determining region selected from the group consisting of CDR1 CDR2and CDR3 wherein the CDR1 is comprised of the amino acid sequence as shown in the CDR2is comprised of the amino acid sequence as shown in and the CDR3is comprised of the amino acid sequence as shown in .

In another preferred embodiment a fully human immunoglobulin or fragment thereof is disclosed that recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin wherein the immunoglobulin or fragment thereof comprises an immunoglobulin heavy chain or light chain variable region comprising the amino acid sequence shown in .

In another preferred embodiment a fully human immunoglobulin or fragment thereof is disclosed that recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin wherein said immunoglobulin or fragment thereof comprises an immunoglobulin heavy chain or light chain variable region comprising the amino acid sequence shown in .

In another preferred embodiment a fully human immunoglobulin or fragment thereof is disclosed that recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin wherein said immunoglobulin or fragment thereof comprises an immunoglobulin heavy chain or light chain variable region comprising the amino acid sequence shown in .

In accordance with other embodiments of the invention the nucleotide sequences shown respectively in and are disclosed. These nucleotide sequences encode a heavy chain variable region and a light chain variable region respectively of a fully human immunoglobulin or fragment thereof that recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin.

In accordance with other embodiments of the invention the nucleotide sequences shown in are disclosed. These nucleotide sequences encode a heavy chain variable region and a light chain variable region respectively of a fully human immunoglobulin or fragment thereof that recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin.

In accordance with other embodiments of the invention the nucleotide sequences shown in are disclosed. These nucleotide sequences encode a heavy chain variable region and a light chain variable region respectively of a fully human immunoglobulin or fragment thereof that recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin.

In accordance with other embodiments of the invention the nucleotide sequences shown in are disclosed. These nucleotide sequences encode a heavy chain variable region and a light chain variable region respectively of a fully human immunoglobulin or fragment thereof that recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin.

In one embodiment of the invention a method for passively immunizing a mammal is provided. In one embodiment the method comprises administering an immunizing dose of one or more fully human monoclonal antibodies to a mammal wherein said one or more fully human monoclonal antibodies comprise an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID 2 SEQ ID 4 SEQ ID 6 SEQ ID 8 SEQ ID 10 SEQ ID 12 SEQ ID 14 and SEQ ID 16. In one embodiment the mammal has not been exposed to anthrax. In another embodiment the mammal has been exposed to anthrax and the method is operable to immunize the mammal against the effects of subsequent exposures to anthrax.

In one embodiment of the invention a method for treating a mammal that has been exposed to anthrax is provided. In one embodiment the method comprises administering a therapeutic dose of one or more fully human monoclonal antibodies to a mammal wherein said one or more fully human monoclonal antibodies comprise an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID 2 SEQ ID 4 SEQ ID 6 SEQ ID 8 SEQ ID 10 SEQ ID 12 SEQ ID 14 and SEQ ID 16.

In one embodiment the method comprises providing one or more antibiotics to the mammal. In another embodiment one or more additional agents are also given to the mammal wherein the agent comprises an antibody that contains less than 100 human protein sequences.

In one embodiment at least two different antibodies are administered to a mammal. In one embodiment the two antibodies differ by at least one amino acid. In one embodiment the two antibodies are administered sequentially to said mammal e.g. one antibody immediately after the other or one antibody within minutes hours days weeks months etc after the other . In one embodiment the two antibodies are administered simultaneously to said mammal. In another embodiment the first antibody binds to at least one different epitope than the second antibody thereby exerting a different mechanism of action. In one embodiment both antibodies work by the same mechanism of action. In some embodiments three or more antibodies are provided to a mammal. In preferred embodiments one two or three antibodies are administered for prevention and or treatment of anthrax. One of skill in the art will understand that more than three antibodies can also be administered.

In one embodiment of the invention the method comprises administering one or more additional therapeutic agents. Additional therapeutic agents include but are not limited to one or more vaccines e.g. AVA and rPA antibiotics e.g. ciprofloxacin hydrochloride doxycycline and penicillin and or other antibodies. The additional therapeutic agents can be administered simultaneously or sequentially with said one or more fully human monoclonal antibodies. In one embodiment an antibiotic and an antibody are administered shortly after anthrax exposure followed by administration of a commercially available vaccine such as AVA or rPA. One advantage of such combination therapy is that immediate and long term protection can be achieved.

In one embodiment of the present invention a method of screening anthrax exotoxin in a sample is provided. In one embodiment the method comprises contacting at least a portion of the sample with one or more fully human monoclonal antibodies comprise an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID 2 SEQ ID 4 SEQ ID 6 SEQ ID 8 SEQ ID 10 SEQ ID 12 SEQ ID 14 and SEQ ID 16 and determining binding of anthrax exotoxin with said antibody. In one embodiment the binding is an indicator of the presence anthrax in said sample and the absence of binding is an indicator of the absence of anthrax in said sample.

In one embodiment of the present invention a kit to determine the presence or absence of anthrax exotoxin in a sample is provided. The kit can be a compilation of materials an article of manufacture and or a system of materials assembled for a common purpose. In one embodiment the kit comprises one or more fully human monoclonal antibodies comprising an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID 2 SEQ ID 4 SEQ ID 6 SEQ ID 8 SEQ ID 10 SEQ ID 12 SEQ ID 14 and SEQ ID 16. Two or more antibodies can be provided in the kit. In a further embodiment the kit includes an assay to determine the reaction of anthrax exotoxin with said antibody wherein said reaction is an indicator of the presence or absence of anthrax in said sample. Instructions regarding the use of the assay can also be included. The assay can be a binding test. An ELISA can also be used. In one embodiment the kit is disposable.

In some embodiments the kit or method described above is used detect anthrax in biological fluids such as human serum saliva blood cells etc. In one embodiment the sample is mammalian tissue. In another embodiment the sample is inorganic or non biological. In one embodiment the kit and method will have utility in determining not just the presence but the absence of anthrax contamination.

In one embodiment of the current invention a kit to protect a mammal from anthrax is provided. In one embodiment the kit comprises one or more fully human monoclonal antibodies comprises an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID 2 SEQ ID 4 SEQ ID 6 SEQ ID 8 SEQ ID 10 SEQ ID 12 SEQ ID 14 and SEQ ID 16. In one embodiment a medical device for delivering the antibody composition is included. The antibody composition can comprise one antibody two antibodies or three or more antibodies. The composition can be contained within or disposed onto the medical device. Alternatively the composition is independent from said medical device. For example the kit can include a syringe that contains one or more antibodies in a pre determined dose. Or the kit can include a vial of one or more antibodies which is to be drawn into the syringe at the time of administration. In one embodiment the medical device is a syringe patch nasal spray or inhaler. Instructions for using the kit can also be included.

In one embodiment the kit to protect a mammal from anthrax is to confer immunity to the mammal wherein said mammal has not been exposed to anthrax. In another embodiment the kit is to confer treatment to the mammal wherein the mammal has been exposed to anthrax. In some embodiments the kit includes an additional therapeutic agent such as an antibiotic e.g. ciprofloxacin doxycycline and or penicillin . The kit can also include a vaccine such as AVA and rPA. These additional ingredients can be packaged separately from the monoclonal antibodies or can be combined with the monoclonal antibodies.

In one embodiment of the present invention a method for immunizing a mammal and or treating a mammal is provided. In one embodiment the method comprises providing an antibody for administration to a mammal. The antibody prevents the assembly of a PA63 heptamer. An effective dose of the antibody is administered to the mammal thereby preventing the assembly of the PA63 heptamer thereby inhibiting transport of at least one of EF and LF into a mammalian host cell thereby protecting the mammal from anthrax infection. Inhibiting the transport of at least one of EF and LF into the host cell comprises one or more of the following actions preventing the entry of said at least one of EF and LF into the host cell decreasing the number of said at least one of EF and LF that enters the host cell and increasing the length of time for said at least one of EF and LF to enter the host cell. Inhibiting the transport of EF and or LF may include any action that disrupts the natural toxic course of EF and or LF.

In one embodiment the antibody prevents the assembly of the PA63 heptamer by binding to a site on a PA83. In another embodiment the method comprises providing one or more non antibody agents that are operable to inhibit transport of said at least one of EF and LF into said mammalian host cell.

In one embodiment the antibody is a monoclonal antibody. In a further embodiment the antibody is a fully human monoclonal antibody. In yet another embodiment the antibody for preventing heptamer assembly comprises the amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of one or more of the following SEQ ID 2 SEQ ID 4 SEQ ID 14 and SEQ ID 16.

In one embodiment the method for immunizing a mammal and or treating a mammal by preventing PA63 hepatmer formation comprises providing a first antibody and a second antibody to the mammal wherein the two antibodies differ by at least one amino acid. In one embodiment three or more antibodies are used.

In one embodiment a pharmaceutical formulation for protecting a mammal from one or more toxic effects of anthrax is provided. The formulation can be for immunizing a mammal or for treating a mammal. In one embodiment the formulation includes a binding agent such as an antibody wherein the binding agent binds to at least a portion of an anthrax toxin e.g. PA EF and or LF . In one embodiment the binding agent interferes with the assembly of a PA63 oligomer. PA comprises a protein having a weight of about 83 kD PA83 that is cleaved into a protein having a weight of about 63 kD PA63 . The binding agent inhibits the access of at least one of EF and LF to at least a portion of a host mammalian cell thereby preventing one or more toxic effects of anthrax in said mammal.

In one embodiment the pharmaceutical formulation is preventative and formulated for administration to a mammal that has not previously been exposed to anthrax. In one embodiment the formulation is to immunize a mammal against one or more subsequent exposures to anthrax and may in some cases serve to supplement a pre existing immunity. In another embodiment the pharmaceutical formulation is therapeutic and is formulated for administration to a mammal that has been exposed to anthrax.

In one embodiment the binding agent is a monoclonal antibody. In another embodiment the binding agent is a fully human monoclonal antibody. In one embodiment the binding agent comprises the amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of one or more of the following SEQ ID 2 SEQ ID 4 SEQ ID 6 SEQ ID 8 SEQ ID 10 SEQ ID 12 SEQ ID 14 and SEQ ID 16. In another embodiment the formulation comprises one two or more than two antibodies. In one embodiment the binding agent comprises a first binding agent and a second binding agent wherein the two binding agents differ by at least one amino acid. The two binding agents may or may not bind to the same portion of the exotoxin. In one embodiment the two binding agents bind to different portion of PA thereby exerting a synergistic effect when co administered.

In accordance with another embodiment of the invention a method is disclosed for inhibiting the assembly of PA the binding of the PA to ATRS or the binding of LF or EF to the PA heptamer in a human. Preferably the method comprises administering to such human the antibody of any of the immunoglobulins or fragments thereof described above including those encoded by the sequences listed in and .

In one embodiment of the present invention a method of generating a fully human monoclonal antibody which recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin is provided. In one embodiment the method comprises administering cells such as peripheral blood mononuclear cells lymphocytes from one or more human donors exposed to anthrax to an immuno compromised animal isolating at least one cell from said animal and fusing the cell s with a fusion partner thereby generating a hybridoma wherein the hybridoma produces a fully human monoclonal antibody which recognizes at least a portion of the anthrax exotoxin. In a preferred embodiment one or more fully human monoclonal antibodies produced by the methods described herein are provided. In one embodiment a cell line that generates fully human antibodies is obtained.

In one embodiment the method for generating antibodies comprises screening the generated antibodies. In another embodiment the method includes transforming at least a portion of the cells with Epstein Barr Virus EBV . In yet another embodiment the method comprises characterizing the animal s immune response using a test bleed. In a further embodiment one or more booster injections of anthrax antigen are administered to the animal. One or more injections of anti CD8 can also be administered. In one embodiment a double selection method e.g. HAT and ouabain to select against undesirable cells is used.

In one embodiment the method for generating antibodies uses cells from human donors that have been vaccinated against anthrax. A human donor that has been inadvertently exposed to anthrax can also be used.

In one embodiment the method for generating antibodies uses immuno compromised immuno deficient animals such as the SCID mouse. One of skill in the art will understand that the SCID mouse or other mammal can be irradiated to further compromise the immune system. In one embodiment the fusion partner is a hybridoma. In one embodiment the fusion partner is a myeloma. In one embodiment the fusion partner is derived from a mouse myeloma MOPC2 or P3 63Ag8.653.

A preferred embodiment of the present invention provides a prophylactic or therapeutic agent to counter the effects of anthrax toxin that is released as a mechanism of bioterrorism. Thus in one embodiment of the present invention a potent counter terrorism measure is provided. Antibodies which bind to one or more components of the tripartite anthrax exotoxin the methods of making said antibodies and the methods of using said antibodies are provided. In a preferred embodiment a method of passive immunization is used to protect a mammal against anthrax infection. Passive immunization as used herein shall be given its ordinary meaning and shall also mean the introduction of antibodies for example from an individual with active immunity or of genetically engineered or synthetic antibodies to treat infection. Passive immunization shall also include the administration of one or more antibodies or fragments thereof to confer immunity to a specific pathogen or toxin

In several embodiments the antibodies provide protection either as single agents or combined in a cocktail. Anthrax as defined herein shall be given its ordinary meaning and shall also include the toxin secreted by and shall include the tripartite anthrax toxin synthetic or naturally occurring and shall also be defined broadly to include one or more of the following components synthetic or naturally occurring protective antigen PA lethal factor LF and edema factor EF . Thus antibodies to anthrax shall include antibodies to any portion of one or more components of the anthrax toxin. Moreover as used herein the singular forms a an and the include plural reference unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. Thus for example a reference to a host cell includes a plurality of such host cells and a reference to an antibody is a reference to one or more antibodies and equivalents thereof known to those skilled in the art.

The term fully human antibodies as used herein shall mean antibodies with 100 human protein sequences. A fully human monoclonal antibody to anthrax may be generated by administering human cells typically from one or more human donors exposed to anthrax to an immuno compromised animal isolating a lymphocytic cell from that animal and fusing the lymphocytic cell with a fusion partner which then produces a fully human monoclonal antibody which recognizes at least a portion of an anthrax exotoxin. The terms antibody and immunoglobulin shall be used interchangeably. Antibodies for immunizing mammals and or for treating mammals are provided in preferred embodiments of the invention. Preferred mammals include humans but non human mammals livestock and domesticated mammals may also benefit from certain embodiments of the invention.

As shown generally in in one embodiment a method of preparing a fully human monoclonal antibody which specifically recognizes at least a portion of the protective antigen PA of an anthrax exotoxin is provided. In one embodiment this method includes obtaining peripheral blood mononuclear cells from human donors. After obtaining the peripheral blood mononuclear cells from donors the blood cells are administered to an immuno compromised animal. The lymphocytic cells are isolated and fused with a hybridoma fusion partner.

In a preferred embodiment blood cells from donors who have been exposed to anthrax are obtained. Such exposure may have occurred naturally through exposure or may have occurred by vaccination. Moreover in one embodiment exposure may have occurred decades years or days prior to obtaining the donor s blood cells. In one embodiment the memory of said exposure is captured or recalled and is selectably expanded by immunizing the engrafted SCID mice. Thus in a preferred embodiment said recall technology is used to generate human monoclonal antibodies. In one embodiment the human donor has been vaccinated against anthrax. The use of human blood cells that have been pre exposed to anthrax or another target antigen yields surprising and unexpected advantages. These advantages include the generation of antibodies with higher affinity higher specificity and more potent neutralization capabilities.

In another embodiment unexposed or na ve blood cells are used. In one embodiment the unexposed blood cells are exposed to anthrax ex vivo or in vitro prior to engraftment in the immuno deficient mouse. Thus said initially unexposed cells are transformed into exposed cells and can be used in accordance with the recall technology described above.

In a preferred embodiment peripheral blood mononuclear cells are obtained from a donor. In another embodiment other cell types are obtained including but not limited to lymphocytes splenocytes bone marrow lymph node cells and immune cells.

In one embodiment the blood cells are administered to an immuno compromised or immuno deficient animal. In one embodiment the animal is a SCID mouse. In one embodiment the animal is irradiated.

In one aspect of the invention the animal s immune response is characterized using a test bleed. In another embodiment the generated antibodies are screened and isolated. In yet another embodiment the lymphocytic cells are transformed with EBV. In one embodiment one or more booster injections of anthrax antigen are administered to the immuno compromised animal. In another embodiment one or more injections of anti human CD8 is administered to the animal. In yet another aspect a double selection method to select against undesirable cells is used including but not limited to using HAT and ouabain. In one embodiment of the present invention the hybridoma fusion partner is the mouse myeloma P3 63Ag8.653. In another embodiment of the present invention the hybridoma fusion partner is derived from the mouse myeloma P3 63Ag8.653.

In one embodiment of the present invention a series of human anti anthrax PA toxin antibodies is provided. In one embodiment a monoclonal antibody AVP 21D9 or 21D9 is provided. As illustrated in antibody 21D9 was effective in RAW cell assays in toxic inhibition. The ICof 21D9 was found to be in the picomolar range and in approximately equimolar stoichiometry with the input PA toxin. The equilibrium dissociation constant K as determined by BiaCore analysis revealed this embodiment to bind antigen with high affinity in the picomolar range Table 1 . Deduced amino acid sequence from the 21D9 hybridoma heavy and light chain cDNA allowed assignment to known VH and VL gene families although significant mutation away from these germline sequences was also observed thereby indicating the occurrence of somatic hypermutation. In one embodiment the mechanism by which 21D9 provides protection is also provided.

Antibody 21D9 and other antibodies described herein can be used for human use in vivo for prophylaxis and treatment of Anthrax Class A biowarfare toxins. Thus in several embodiments a method for preventing anthrax infection is provided. In one embodiment a method for treating mammals to prevent anthrax infection is provided. In a further embodiment a method to treat mammals that have been exposed to anthrax is provided. In particular shows the determination of AVP 21D9 ICusing RAW 264.7 cell based assay. The results demonstrate that 1.2 nM PA and 0.56 nM LF in a 96 well assay on confluent RAW 264.7 cells cause 100 cell lysis. The AVP 21D9 was assessed at various concentrations for the ability to inhibit the lethal toxin. From the dose response curve an ICvalues was estimated. AVP 1C6 and AVP 22G12 ICdeterminations were carried out likewise. The ICvalues for AVP 21D9 AVP 1C6 and AVP 22G12 was 0.21 nM 0.36 nM and 0.46 nM respectively.

In one embodiment antibody 22G12 and methods of making and using same are provided. In another embodiment antibody 1C6 and methods of making and using same are provided. In a further embodiment antibody 4H7 and methods of making and using same are provided. Chemical modifications mutations and other variants of these antibodies are also provided including but not limited to 21D9.1 and 22G12.1.

Preferred embodiments provide a fully human monoclonal antibody that specifically binds to a component of an anthrax exotoxin or combinations of components thereof. The anthrax exotoxin can be in tripartite form. The anthrax toxin can be naturally occurring or synthetic. In a tripartite form the anthrax exotoxin comprises PA EF and LF.

In preferred embodiments a monoclonal antibody is produced by rescuing the genes encoding antibody variable region from the antibody producing cells and establishing stable recombinant cell lines producing whole IgG kappa or IgG lambda. In one embodiment antibody producing cells recovered from the immunized animal are subjected to cell fusion with an appropriate fusion partner. The resulting hybridomas are then screened in terms of the activity of the produced antibodies. The hybridomas subjected to selection are screened first in terms of the binding activity to a component of the tripartite anthrax exotoxin. In one embodiment the hybridomas are selected based on ability to bind to PA LF and or EF proteins in an immunoassay such as an ELISA test and also a bioassay. In one embodiment the hybridoma shows protection in the bioassay. The cells from positive wells are used to isolate mRNA. From the mRNA cDNA is reverse transcribed. The variable domains are PCR amplified using primers for the 5 end of the variable chain and constant region or frame work primers.

In one embodiment the amino acid sequences constituting the variable regions of the antibodies having a desired binding activity to PA LF and or EF and the nucleotide sequences encoding the same is provided. Several embodiments provide immunoglobulin variable regions containing the amino acid and nucleotide sequences shown in and .

In a further embodiment cDNA encoding the immunoglobulin variable regions containing the nucleotide sequences shown in and and variants thereof is provided. In one embodiment these amino acid sequences or cDNA nucleotide sequences are not necessarily identical but may vary so long as the specific binding activity to PA LF and or EF is maintained. In another embodiment variation in nucleotide sequence is accommodated. In several embodiments the site corresponding to CDR is highly variable. In the CDR region even entire amino acids may vary on some occasions. Results from experimental data show that in one embodiment the heavy chain of 21D9 exhibits a VH3 class a 3 43 VH locus 26 mutations from the germ line 6 19 1 DH RF and JH4B. Results from experimental data show that in one embodiment the light chain of 21D9 exhibits a VK1 light chain class a L12 locus 14 mutations from the germ line and JK1.

In one embodiment each immunoglobulin molecule consists of heavy chains having a larger molecular weight and light chains having a smaller molecular weight. The heavy and light chains each carries a region called a variable region in about 110 amino acid residues at the N terminus which are different between the molecules. Variable regions of a heavy chain and a light chain are designated VH and VL respectively. The antigen binding site is formed by forming a dimer between the heavy chain variable region VH and the light chain variable region VL. In one embodiment the coupling of the antigen binding site and the antigen is through electrostatic interaction. The variable region consists of three CDRs and four frameworks. The CDR forms a complementary steric structure with the antigen molecule and determines the specificity of the antibody. The three CDRs inserted between the four framework regions FRs are present like a mosaic in the variable region E. A. Kabat et al. Sequences of proteins of immunological interest vol. I 5th edition NIH Publication 1991 . The amino acid sequences of FRs are well conserved but those of CDR are highly variable and may thus be called hypervariable regions. Among the amino acid sequences of the antibody specifically recognizing PA LF and or EF a CDR that determines the binding activity to antigens is provided in some embodiments. Preferred embodiments provide CDRs shown in and .

The cDNAs bearing the nucleotide sequences coding the variable regions in immunoglobulin molecules can be cloned from hybridomas that produce the monoclonal antibody to PA LF and or EF of the tripartite anthrax exotoxin. To amplify the sequences PCR can be performed. To identify active clones ELISA can be used to determine binding to PA LF and or EF of the tripartite anthrax exotoxin. Further studies on affinities of an antibody that can bind to PA LF and or EF of the tripartite anthrax exotoxin can be determined with kinetic and thermodynamic studies using apparatus such as BiaCore Biacore Piscataway N.J. surface plasmon resonance apparatus for measuring binding affinity and binding kinetics. Thus in one embodiment specific cDNA sequences are provided.

In one embodiment a monoclonal antibody that can block oligomerization of the PA component of anthrax exotoxin is provided. Accordingly a monoclonal antibody of preferred embodiments can have preventive or therapeutic uses. A preferred monoclonal antibody can be used in a pharmaceutical composition as a treatment for a mammal exposed to anthrax exotoxin. Accordingly preferred embodiments provide methods of passive immunization of a mammal against anthrax and or treating a mammal exposed to anthrax.

A monoclonal antibody of several embodiments can be administered as a pharmaceutical composition. Thus in one embodiment the antibody can be administered by several different routes including but not limited to parenterally topically and orally. The term parenterally as used herein shall be given its ordinary meaning and shall also include subcutaneous intravenous intraarterial injection or infusion techniques without limitation. In one embodiment the antibody is administered intramuscularly. The term topically as used herein shall be given its ordinary meaning and shall also encompasses administration rectally and by inhalation spray as well as the more common routes of the skin and the mucous membranes of the mouth and nose. In some embodiments one or more anti anthrax antibodies are administered via a syringe patch inhalants and or oral formulation. Pre prepared and pre dosed anti anthrax antibody formulations can be available in kits so that individuals have easy and quick access to the antibody in the event that those persons are warned of an impending anthrax exposure or have discovered that they have recently been exposed to anthrax. Such pre dosed formulations e.g. syringes patches sprays oral compositions may be particularly useful for the military. Government workers and individuals working in hospitals may also benefit from such anti anthrax preparations. Such pre prepared kits may also be made available to the general public as a safety measure.

One skilled in the art will understand the appropriate dosage to be administered. Actual dosage levels of preferred antibody in a pharmaceutical composition may be varied so as to administer an amount of a preferred antibody that is effective to achieve the desired therapeutic response for a particular patient. The selected dosage level will depend upon the activity of the particular agent the route of administration the severity of the condition being treated and the condition and prior medical history of the patient being treated. If desired the effective daily dose may be divided into multiple doses for purposes of administration e.g. two to four separate doses per day. It will be understood however that the specific dose level for any particular patient will depend upon a variety of factors including the body weight general health diet time and route of administration combination with other drugs and the severity of the particular disease being treated.

According to several embodiments of the present invention the pharmaceutical formulation can be in a variety of forms including but not limited to injectable fluids suppositories powder tablets capsules syrups suspensions liquids and elixirs. The preferred route is by injection. In one embodiment an antibody preparation is pre packaged in self injectable devices such as syringes. One advantage of such pre packaged antibody devices is that individuals could protect themselves on short notice in response to a biological attack or threat of a biological attack.

Preferred embodiments of the present invention provide a kit for identifying the presence of anthrax exotoxin in a sample. In a preferred kit there is a monoclonal antibody which specifically recognizes at least a portion of a component of an anthrax exotoxin. A sample is contacted with a monoclonal antibody which specifically recognizes at least a portion of a component of an anthrax exotoxin. If an anthrax exotoxin is present then the binding of the anthrax exotoxin with the monoclonal antibody can be determined. The term kit as used herein shall be given its ordinary meaning and shall also include a compilation collection or group of materials used for a common goal or purpose. A kit to test for the presence or absence of anthrax according to on embodiment of the invention includes one or more of the following an anti anthrax antibody a swabbing material gloves an assay kit and instructions.

In one embodiment passive immunization is provided in conjunction with one or more other therapies including but not limited to antibiotic therapy. In one embodiment ciprofloxacin hydrochloride and or other antibiotics are administered before after and or simultaneously with one or more of the antibodies or fragments thereof described herein. In some embodiments the treatment of anthrax infection by two or more therapies provides a synergistic effect.

The disclosure below is of specific examples setting forth preferred methods for making agents according to several embodiments of the present invention. These examples are not intended to limit the scope but rather to exemplify preferred embodiments. For example although the following examples describe the generation of antibodies to anthrax antibodies to other antigens can also be made by following the examples set forth below. Various adaptations and modifications to adapt the protocols described herein will be understood by those skilled in the art.

Flat bottom microtiter plates Nunc F96 Maxisorp were coated with 50 of Protective Antigen PA or Lethal Factor LF List Biological Laboratories Campbell Calif. at a concentration of 1 g mL in PBS overnight at 4 C. Plates were washed four times with PBS with Tween 20 at 0.1 and 50 l of diluted sera was added to the wells for one hour at room temperature. Plates were washed as before and 50 l of secondary antibody HRP conjugated Goat anti Human IgG Fcy specific or HRP conjugated Goat anti Human IgM Fc5 specific Jackson ImmunoResearch West Grove Pa. were added and incubated for one hour at room temperature. After another wash step 100 L of a substrate solution containing 0.4 mg mL OPD O phenlenediamine dihydrochloride in citrate buffer 0.025 M at pH 5.0 was added after 15 minutes 25 l of 3N HCl was added to stop the reaction and plates were then read on a Microplate reader VersaMax Molecular Devices Sunnyvale Calif. at 490 nm.

The presence of neutralizing protective antibody to anthrax toxins PA and LF in the antisera were determined using an in vitro protection bioassay with the mouse macrophage RAW 264.7 target cell line. Hanna P. et al. 90 10198 1993 . PA 100 ng ml and LF 50 ng ml were pre incubated with the indicated dilutions of antiserum for 30 minutes at 37 C. in a working volume of 100 l of DMEM medium supplemented with 10 fetal calf serum 2 mM L glutamine 100 IU ml penicillin and 100 g ml streptomycin. This 100 l volume was subsequently transferred into a 96 well flat bottom tissue culture plate containing 1 10RAW 264.7 cells well in 100 l of the same medium. The culture was incubated for 3 hours at 37 C. The wells were washed twice with media. The residual attached cells were lysed and the released Lactate dehydrogenase LDH levels were measured using a CytoTox 96 kit Promega Madison Wis. . Briefly 10 l Lysis Solution was added to 100 l media per well and the mix incubated 45 minutes in a humidified chamber at 37 C. 5 CO. An aliquot of the lysed material 50 l was transferred to a new plate and 50 l assay buffer added. The plate was incubated for 30 minutes prior to adding 50 l stop solution. The plates were read at 490 nm using a Tecan Spectra Fluor Zurich Switzerland reader.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were enriched from whole blood of anthrax vaccinated donors by density gradient centrifugation using Histopaque 1077 1 Sigma St. Louis Mo. . One of skill in the art will understand that other types of cells can also be used in accordance with several embodiments of the present invention. Typically one unit of blood from donors was obtained. Female SCID bg 12 week old mice were each engrafted via i.p. inoculation with 2.5 10isolated human PBMC. They were treated concomitantly i.p. with a volume of conditioned medium from the OKT8 mouse hybridoma grown in Ex cell 620 hybridoma serum free medium JRH KS and 2 mM L glutamine which contained 0.2 mg of the anti CD8 antibody used directly without further purification . The mice were immunized with a combination of PA and LF i.p. 2 g each adsorbed to Alum Imject Pierce Rockford Ill. and subsequently boosted i.p. on day 7 19 and day 26. Mice were inoculated with 0.5 ml of EBV obtained from spent conditioned culture medium of the B95 8 marmoset cell line on day 7. Test bleeds were obtained from the orbital sinus on days 14 and 29. Two consecutive i.p. and iv boosts with PA and LF were administered 5 g via each route on day 40 and 41 both in saline prior to harvesting cells for fusion on day 42 also at which time an additional test bleed sample was obtained.

Splenocytes as well as lymphoblastoid cell line LCL tumors were harvested on day 42 from those mice showing positive test bleeds in indirect ELISA. Human hybridomas were generated from these in separate fusions using a murine myeloma P3 63Ag8.653 with PEG 1500 Sigma St. Louis Mo. as described by Kearney J F Radbruch A Liesegang B Rajewski K 1979 with the modification that the P3 63Ag8.653 lymphocyte ratio for fusion was between 1 3 1 5. A mouse myeloma cell line that has lost immunoglobulin expression but permits the construction of antibody secreting hybridoma cell lines. J Immunol 123 1548 1558.

Although P3 63Ag8.653 was used in this exemplary method one skilled in the art will understand that several fusion partners can be used in accordance with various embodiments of the current invention including but not limited to cells derived from the mouse myeloma MOPC2 triomas etc. Double selection to select against the EBV LCL and the unfused P3 63Ag8.653 fusion partner was carried out using a combination of HAT selection and ouabain. A concentration of 8 M ouabain Sigma St. Louis Mo. was used. One skilled in the art will appreciate that other poisons or toxins that interfere with the Na K ATPase can also be used in accordance with several embodiments of the present invention. In addition one skilled in the art will understand that other selection methods can also be used.

16 days after fusion hybridoma supernatants from 96 well plates were tested in indirect ELISA. Approximately 17 out of 1248 wells 13 plates showed an initial positive ELISA signal on PA. All of them were chosen for further analysis and were subcloned at 5 cells well on a feeder layer of irradiated NHLF Cambrex Baltimore Md. in RPMI Omega San Diego Calif. supplemented with 10 FBS 20 hybridoma cloning factor IGEN Gaithersbourg Md. 5 ng ml human IL6 I 188 Leinco 1 HT Sigma 1 Vitamins Omega 1 Sodium pyruvate Omega 1 NEAA Omega 2 L glutamine Omega and without antibiotics. The subcloning plates were tested in indirect ELISA after 10 days. Individual colonies from highly positive wells were hand picked under a microscope using Pasteur pipets drawn out to fine points. After 2 weeks individually picked clones were retested in indirect ELISA. Positive cells were recovered and the transcript mRNA encoding the immunoglobulins were reverse transcribed to form cDNA. Although the methodology for antibody 21D9 is described herein one of skill in the art will understand that the exemplary methodology described herein can also be used to make and test the other antibodies described and claimed herein.

Total RNA was prepared from specific ELISA positive hybridomas using RNeasy Mini Kit Qiagen Valencia Calif. . Mixture of VH and VL cDNAs were synthesized and amplified in a same tube using One Step RT PCR Kit Qiagen Valencia Calif. . Cycling parameters were 50 C. for 35 min 95 C. for 15 min 35 cycles of 94 C. for 30 sec 52 C. for 20 sec and 72 C. for 1 min 15 sec and 72 C. for 5 min.

The RT PCR was followed by nested PCR using High Fidelity Platinum PCR Mix Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . A micro liter of RT PCR products was used for VH VL or VL specific cDNA amplification in the separate tube. At substantially the same time restriction enzyme sites were introduced at both ends. Cycling parameters were 1 cycle of 94 C. for 2 min 6 C. for 30 sec and 68 C. for 45 sec 35 cycles of 94 C. for 40 sec 54 C. for 25 sec and 68 C. for 45 sec and 68 C. for 5 min.

Each specific PCR product was separately purified digested with restriction enzymes and subcloned into appropriate mammalian full length Ig expression vectors as described below.

VH PCR products are digested with BsrG I and Apa I and ligated into pEEG1.1 vector that is linearlized by Spl I and Apa I double digestion.

VL PCR products are digested with Age I and Spl I and ligated into pEEK.1.1 vector linearlized by Xma I and Spl I double digestion.

VL PCR products are digested with Apa I and Avr II and ligated into pEELg vector linearlized by Apa I and Avr II double digestion. The positive clones were identified after transient co transfection by determining expression in the supernatants by indirect ELISA on PA coated plates. CHO K1 cells were transfected with different combinations of IgG and IgK cDNAs using Lipofectamine 2000 Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . The supernatants were harvested about 48 hours to about 72 hours after transfection. Multiple positive clones were sequenced with the ABI 3700 automatic sequencer Applied Biosystems Foster City Calif. and analyzed with Sequencher v4.1.4 software Gene Codes Ann Arbor MI .

Ig heavy chain or light chain expression vector were double digested with Not I and Sal I and then both fragments were ligated to form a double gene expression vector. CHO K1 cells in 6 well plate were transfected with the double gene expression vector using Lipofectamine 2000 Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . After 24 hrs transfection cells were transferred to a 10 cm dish with selection medium D.MEM supplemented with 10 dialyzed FBS 50 M L methionine sulphoximine MSX penicillin streptomycin GS supplement . Two weeks later MSX resistant transfectants were isolated and expanded. Anti PA antibody high producing clones were selected by measuring the supernatant with PA specific ELISA assay. MSX concentration was increased from 50 M to 100 M to enhance the antibody productivity.

A stable cell line was cultured in 10 dialyzed FBS in ExCell 302 Serum Free Medium JRH 1000M with 1 GS JRH 100 M and 25 100 M L Methionine Sulphoximine Sigma . Cells were treated with trypsin Omega and split 1 5. The culture medium was switched to 5 FBS containing media and the cells were cultured 2 days. When the cells adapted to growing in 5 FBS containing media the media was changed to serum free medium containing 2.5 dialyzed FBS for 1 2 days then to 100 of serum free media. At this point the cells were no longer adherent and then tranfered to and cultured in Integra flasks for small scale production in serum free media. Purification was carried out by filtering the spent culture media through a 0.2 filter and then loaded directly to a HiTrap Protein A column Pharmacia followed by washing with 20 mM Sodium phosphate pH 7.4 and the antibody was eluted with 0.1 M glycine HCl pH3.4 and immediately neutralized with 1 10 volume of 1M Tris HCl pH 8.0. The protein content in eluted fractions was determined by absorbance at 280 nm the fractions containing antibody were pooled and dialyzed against phosphate buffered saline pH 7.4 2 500 volumes and filter sterilized through a 0.2 filter. The antibody was further characterized by SDS PAGE and the purity exceeded 95 .

Affinity constants were determined using the principal of surface plasmon resonance SPR with a Biacore 3000 Biacore Inc. . A Biacore CM5 chip was used with affinity purified goat anti human IgG A M Jackson Immuno Research conjugated to two flowcells of the CM5 chip according to manufacturer s instructions. An optimal concentration of an antibody preparation is first introduced into one of the two flowcells and is captured by the anti human Ig. Next a defined concentration of antigen is introduced into both flowcells for a defined period of time using the flowcell without antibody as a reference signal. As antigen binds to the captured antibody of interest there is a change in the SPR signal which is proportional to the amount of antigen bound. After a defined period of time antigen solution is replaced with buffer and dissociation of the antigen from the antibody is then measured again by the SPR signal. Curve fitting software provided by Biacore generates estimates of the association and dissociation rates and affinities.

The results from this study are summarized in Table 1 below. The equilibrium dissociation constant K for recombinant form of the 21D9 1C6 4H7 and 22G12 MAb was determined by BiaCore analyses. The rate constants kand kwere evaluated directly from the sensogram in the BiaCore analysis and the Kwas deduced.

Flat bottom microtiter plates Nunc F96 Maxisorp were coated overnight at 4 C. with 50 l of Goat anti Human IgG Fcy specific Jackson ImmunoResearch at 1 g mL in PBS. Plates were washed four times with PBS 0.1 Tween 20. Meanwhile in a separate preparation plate dilutions of standards in duplicate and unknowns were prepared in 100 l volume of PBS with 1 mg ml BSA. A purified monoclonal human IgG1 myeloma protein Sigma St. Louis Mo. was used as the standard and a different IgG1 myeloma protein Athens Research Athens Ga. served as an internal calibrator for comparison. Diluted test samples 50 l were transferred to the wells of the assay plate and incubated for one hour at room temperature. Plates were washed as before and 50 l of the detecting antibody 1 4000 in PBS with 1 mg ml BSA. Goat anti Human Kappa HRP Southern Biotechnology Associates Inc. Birmingham Ala. was added and incubated for one hour at room temperature. After another wash step 100 l of a substrate solution containing 0.4 mg ml OPD O phenlenediamine dihydrochloride in citrate buffer 0.025 M at pH 5.0 was added. Following a 15 minute substrate incubation 25 l of 3N HCl stop solution was added and plates were read on a Microplate reader VersaMax Molecular Devices Sunnyvale Calif. at 490 nm. Unknowns were interpolated from standard curve values using SoftMaxPro v4.0 software Sunnyvale Calif. .

Testbleeds from mice engrafted with human PBMC from an anthrax vaccinated donor and further boosted via immunization in vivo were obtained. shows comparison results of the anti anthrax toxin levels in the donor plasma as compared to the sera of engrafted mice. These figures show an IgG response to PA83 in engrafted sera. The presence of IgG antibody to anthrax toxin PA83 components in sera of engrafted SCID mice sera were determined by ELISA after the first and second boosts. The specific levels of IgG and donor levels are shown. The IgG response from Donor X064 0042 cells engrafted into SCID mice at day 15 A and day 30 C . The IgG response from Donor X064 043 cells engrafted into SCID mice at day 15 E and day 30 G . Control data with PBS is also shown.

A series of 14 individual fusions was carried out with cells obtained from various compartments either peritoneal wash PW spleen SP or LCL tumors TU within the peritoneal cavity of the engrafted mice. In several fusions the cells were pooled from several engrafted mice determined to be producing specific anti anthrax toxin antisera by Indirect ELISA and RAW Cell bioassay prior to fusion. A summary of the fusion results is shown in Table 2.

Hybridomas were initially selected based on their ability to bind to PA 83 kD protein adsorbed to polystyrene microtiter plate wells in an indirect ELISA. A wide range of values for the relative amount of specific anti PA antibody in the supernatants was observed. In parallel each of the supernatants was tested individually in the Anthrax toxin protection RAW cell bioassay.

A dose response curve of hybridoma derived 21D9 in the RAW cell bioassay was used to evaluate the effective in vitro ICprotective concentration using a cocktail of the PA 83 kD and LF toxins. An antibody ICof 0.21 nM was observed for AVP 21D9 and IC50s for the other antibodies are shown in the inset table .

The 21D9 antibody was found to bind to the intact 83 kD form as well as the cleaved 63 kD form of the PA toxin but to a lesser degree to the heptamer as determined by BiaCore analysis Pharmacia Peapack N.J. . Additionally there was no evidence that the antibody was able to inhibit LF binding to PA 63 kD heptamer as determined by sequential incubations in the BiaCore . This finding potentially implicates the domain 2 on the PA toxin as the epitope blocked by this antibody.

The nucleotide sequences of the 21D9 MAb heavy and light chains variable regions were determined and .

The alignment of variable regions using V BASE DNAPLOT software 18 showed that 21D9 heavy chain used VH gene from VH3 family 3 43 locus D region segment 6 19 in first reading frame with N region addition and JH4b. 21D9 light chain was from the VKI family L12 locus and used the JK1 region segment. The number of mutations from most closely related germline were 26 heavy chain and 14 light chain respectively. Comparisons with germline V genes suggest that the 21D9 V regions had undergone extensive somatic mutations characteristic of an Ag driven immune response. Table 3 provided below shows the germline deviation of the antibodies.

Anthrax exotoxins the dominant virulence factors produced by are a tripartite combination of protective antigen PA lethal factor LF and edema factor EF . Although not wishing to be bound by this theory these toxins are thought to have an important role in anthrax pathogenesis initially to impair the immune system permitting the anthrax bacterium to evade immune surveillance to disseminate and reach high concentrations and later in the infection the toxins may contribute directly to death in the host animals including humans. Antibodies that neutralize the PA component of the exotoxin could provide an effective protection from anthrax toxin exposure early and potentially late in the infection. In one embodiment the generation of a panel of very potent fully human anti PA neutralizing antibodies derived from PBMCs obtained from vaccinated donors is provided.

The antibodies were generated through the combined use of in vivo immunization of SCID mice reconstituted with human PBMC U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 476 996 5 698 767 5 811 524 5 958 765 6 413 771 and 6 537 809 all herein incorporated by reference subsequent recovery of human B cells expressing anti PA antibodies and immortalization via cell fusion with the mouse myeloma cells. Human immunoglobulin cDNAs were isolated and subcloned into the mammalian expression vector. Recombinant antibodies were first screened by an in vitro neutralization assay using the RAW264.7 mouse macrophage cell line. Furthermore selected antibodies were evaluated for neutralization of lethal toxin in vivo in the Fisher 344 rat bolus toxin challenge model Maynard 2002 Wild 2003 herein incorporated by reference .

Analysis of the variable regions indicated that antibodies recovered from SCID mice were diverse and hyper mutated. Among these antibodies a single IV administration of AVP 21D9 or AVP 22G12 was found to confer full protection with only 0.5 AVP 21D9 or 1 AVP 22G12 molar excess relative to PA in the rat toxin challenge prophylaxis model. Aglycosylated PA neutralizing antibodies also protected rats from lethal toxin challenge. Although not wishing to be bound by the following theory it is believed that the PA toxin neutralizing activity in vivo is not depended on Fc mediated effector functions.

In one embodiment these potent fully human anti PA toxin neutralizing antibodies generated may be used for in vivo human use for prophylaxis and or treatment against Anthrax Class A bioterrorism toxins.

In one embodiment antibodies that bind to the PA component of the tripartite anthrax toxin and which provide protection as single agents are provided. In one embodiment antibody 21D9 is provided. In another embodiment antibody 22G12 is provided. In a further embodiment antibody 1C6 is provided. In one embodiment these antibodies are used as single agent in preventing and or treating anthrax infection. In other embodiments combination of two or more of these antibodies are used to treat mammals who have been exposed to aerosolized spores or exposed to other forms of anthrax.

In some embodiments two or more anti anthrax antibodies are administered to the same patient. The antibodies can be administered simultaneously or sequentially. In one embodiment administration of two or more antibodies provided a synergistic effect. For example shows rat survival data when a combination of AVP 22G12 and AVP 21D9 are administered together. When administered together even at very low concentrations the combination has an enhanced activity as compared to the individually administered antibodies. It is important to note that shows rat survival data in a very sensitive rat model survival data is shown in minutes. Further although AVP 22G12 is an effective anti anthrax antibody the survival data for AVP 22G12 in this model is similar to that for the IgG K control. This is because extremely low doses of AVP 22G12 were administered to the animals. At higher doses AVP 22G12 like AVP 21D9 is an effective and efficacious anti anthrax antibody.

In one embodiment two or more antibodies that exert their actions via different mechanisms are administered to a mammal. In this manner the treatment and prevention of anthrax infection may be enhanced because the two or more antibodies are acting on different pathways. In this manner an anti anthrax embodiment according to one embodiment of the invention can be combined with an anti anthrax antibody of the prior art. Further an anti anthrax embodiment according to one embodiment of the invention can also be combined with another anti anthrax prophylactic or therapeutic such an antibiotic.

In one embodiment antibodies that bind to PA with a range of high affinities from about 82 pM to about 700 pM as determined by surface plasmon resonance BiaCore 3000 is provided. Experimental data showed that antibodies 1C6 21D9 and 22G12 recognize unique non competing sites and also 21D9 22G12 and 1C6 do not appear to interfere with PA recognition of soluble TEM 8. The biological efficacy of these three antibodies were determined in an in vitro anthrax lethal toxin neutralization assay. All three antibodies protected RAW 264.7 cell from toxin induced cell death and provided 50 neutralization at sub equimolar ratio of antibody to toxin .

A panel of anthrax toxin neutralizing human monoclonal antibodies was evaluated for neutralization of anthrax lethal toxin in vivo in the Fisher 344 rat bolus toxin challenge model. The following experiment compared five human antibodies that neutralize anthrax lethal toxin in vitro in an in vivo rat toxin challenge model. The most potent inhibitor of the anthrax toxin AVP 21D9 protected rat with as little as about 0.5 antibody to toxin in vivo. This corresponds to about 0.12 nmols 200 250 g rat. According to one embodiment of the invention AVP 21D9 was shown to be a potent inhibitor of anthrax toxin in vitro with an estimated ICof 0.2 nM. The potency ranking observed in the in vitro assay was matched in the rat in vivo protection assay. Removing the carbohydrates associated with the constant domains of the IgG did not reduce the potency of the antibody. In some embodiments the carbohydrates are useful for the retention of Fc mediated effector functions. AVP 22G12 was also potent at inhibiting the toxin in vivo at 1 but not as potent as AVP 21D9 at the 0.5 dose. Removal of the glycosylation site in AVP 22G12 did impact on its potency suggesting that although the effector functions are not required in the absence of the carbohydrates the overall structure of the antibody is impacted to reduce its efficacy to 80 survival at the designated 5 hour time point which dropped to 60 due to an additional death at 12 hours. At the lower dose of AVP 22G12 no protection was observed but the time to death was delayed significantly. AVP 1C6 at 1 was only 80 protective and failed to protect or delay time to death at the lower dose. The in vivo potency trend observed AVP21D9 AVP 22G12 AVP 1C6 is the similar to the potency in vitro and correlates well with affinity of antibody to PA.

Accordingly vaccination with Anthrax Vaccine Adsorbed can induce the production of a range of protective antibodies. The experiments showed that the human anti anthrax toxin antibodies according to several embodiments of the invention are potent inhibitors of the lethal toxin in vivo. The three parental antibodies and the two aglycosylated forms described may be therapeutically useful against anthrax infection and in the passive protection of high risk individuals. In particular the two most potent anthrax toxin neutralizing antibody AVP 21D9 and AVP 22G12 were completely effective at a dose corresponding to 0.12 nmols rat and 0.25 nmols rat respectively. One of skill in the art will understand the appropriate dosages to prevent or treat anthrax infection in humans and other animals.

The in vivo anthrax toxin neutralization experiments were performed basically as described by Ivins B E Ristroph J D Nelson G O. Influence of body weight on response of Fischer 344 rats to anthrax lethal toxin. 1989 55 8 2098 herein incorporated by reference. Male Fisher 344 rats with jugular vein catheters weighing between 200 250 g were purchased from Charles River Laboratories Wilmington Mass. . Human anti anthrax PA IgG monoclonal antibodies AVP 21D9 AVP 22G12 AVP 1C6 AVP 21D9. and AVP22G12.1 were produced from recombinant CHO cell lines adapted for growth in serum free media. The human IgG monoclonal antibodies were purified by affinity chromatography on HiTrap Protein A dialysed against PBS pH7.4 and filter sterilized. Rats were anaesthetized in an Isofluorane Abbot II EZ anesthesia chamber Euthanex Corp. Pa. following manufactures guidelines. The antibody was administered via the catheter in 0.2 ml PBS 0.1 BSA pH 7.4 and at either 5 minutes 17 hour or a week later lethal toxin PA 20 g LF 4 g in 0.2 ml PBS 0.1 BSA pH 7.4 was administered via the same route. Five animals were used in each test group and four animals in each control. Test and control experiments were carried out at the same time using the same batch of reconstituted PA and LF toxins List Laboratories CA. . Animals were monitored for discomfort and time of death versus survival as assessed on the basis of cessation of breathing and heartbeat. Rats were maintained under anaesthesia for 5 hr post exposure to lethal toxin or until death to minimize discomfort. Rats that survived were monitored for 24 hours and then euthanized by carbon dioxide asphyxiation.

Effect Of Anti Anthrax PA Antibodies On Protection Of Rats From Lethal Toxin Challenge illustrates the protection profile of the three antibodies AVP 21D9 22G12 and 1C6 in the rat model at two doses 0.5 and 1 molar ratios relative to toxin challenge. AVP 21D9 protected rats at 0.5 and no deaths were observed in the 5hr following toxin administration likewise AVP 22G12 at 1 also showed complete protection. However with AVP22G12 at 0.5 the time to death was prolonged to 255 min. The administrations of lethal toxin 5 min after the infusion of 0.5 or 1 control human control IgG resulted in time to death of 85 120 min. AVP 1C6 at 1 conferred 80 protection and at 0.5 was not protective.

Effect of Antibody Glycosylation on Anti Anthrax PA Antibodies on Protection of Rats from Lethal Toxin Challenge Aglycosylated antibodies corresponding to AVP 21D9 or AVP 22G12 were generated by mutating a N glycosylation site N297Q in the Fc region. These antibodies are designated as AVP 21D9.1 and AVP 22G12.1 respectively and compared to the glycosylated counterparts in the rat toxin challenge prophylaxis model. As described above antibody was intravenously administered 5 minutes prior to the lethal toxin PA LF challenge. Both AVP 21D9 and AVP 21D9.1 fully protected rats against anthrax toxin with 0.5 molar excess relative to PA toxin whilst AVP 22G12.1 was slightly less potent than the parent molecule at 1 as shown in .

Duration of A VP 21D9 Antibody Mediated Protection of Rats from Lethal Toxin Challenge To investigate the duration of protection afforded by a fully human antibody in Fischer rats AVP 21D9 was intravenously administered 17 hours or 1 week prior to the lethal toxin PA LF challenge. As shown in a single administration of AVP 21D9 at 1 protected 100 when challenged 17 hrs later. Over the extended period of time administration of AVP 21D9 at 10 dose showed 80 protection. Almost all control animals died within 120 min one outlier had delayed time of death to 230 min.

Accordingly the results showed that a single IV dose of AVP 21D9 or AVP 22G12 was found to confer full protection with only 0.5 AVP 21D9 and 1 AVP 22G12 molar excess relative to the anthrax toxin in the rat challenge prophylaxis model. AVP 21D9 AVP 22G12 and AVP 1C6 protect rats from anthrax lethal toxin at low dose. Aglycosylated versions of the most potent antibodies are also protective in vivo in the rat model according to one embodiment. The protective effect of AVP 21D9 persists for at least one week in rats. These potent fully human anti PA toxin neutralizing antibodies are attractive candidates for development for in vivo human use as prophylaxis and or treatment against Anthrax Class A bioterrorism toxins.

Potent anthrax toxin neutralizing human monoclonal antibodies were generated from peripheral blood lymphocytes obtained from Anthrax Vaccine Adsorbed AVA immune donors. In this particular experiment donors were recruited that had been actively immunized with the current licensed anthrax vaccine AVA . Despite vaccination the serum levels of anti PA83 specific IgG and IgM were relatively low 2 3 g ml in comparison to the anti tetanus responses in both donors. In this embodiment a SCID HuPBL platform was used to demonstrate that the inventors could selectively direct the recall response by immunization of the chimeric animals. Immunization of the chimeric mice with recombinant PA83 resulted in a significant increase in specific IgG in some of the engrafted mice in one case as high as 2 mg ml mouse 4152 . In comparing first and second bleeds for both sets of chimeric mice it is clear that a specific response was selectively enhanced in the animals upon boosting with antigen see .

Not wishing to be bound by the following theory it is believed that in mice that responded well to antigen challenge the inventors recalled the human memory B cell response and recruited specific human helper T cells. The specific recall leads to proliferation of antigen specific plasma cells.

The antibody producing cells in the chimeric mice were recovered from the spleen and peritoneal washes in sufficient numbers to permit fusion with a standard mouse myeloma P3 63Ag8.653 Kearney JF Radbruch A Liesegang B Rajewsky K A new mouse myeloma cell line that has lost immunoglobulin expression but permits the construction of antibody secreting hybrid cell lines. 1979. 123 4 1548 herein incorporated by reference to form hybridomas. The formation of mouse human hybridomas using a murine fusion partner with human derived plasma cells can result in unstable hybrids which can be challenging to clone expand and isolate. Accordingly in one embodiment the inventors rescued the transcripts encoded by mRNA from a small cluster of cells and generating stable recombinant CHO cell lines and testing these for the activity. Hence the fusion with P3 63Ag8.653 with the human cells results in hybrids of antibody producing cell which permits identification of positive wells for specific IgG production and the rescue of immunoglobulin transcripts.

No particular heavy chain family or light chains dominated the human anti PA response. In all but two cases the inventors could assign Dsegments usage. The array of Jand Jsegments observed in the panel suggest that the approach is capturing the diversity present in the natural response to anthrax PA via vaccination with AVA. Another striking feature of the antibodies according to one embodiment is the exceptional high affinity for the target antigen and the very slow off rates. Similar high affinities and slow off rates for anti tetanus toxoid antibodies derived from engrafted HuPBL SCID mice boosted with antigen. Thus this may be a general feature of the protective anti bacterial toxin response in humans.

Currently in the event of an inadvertent spore exposure two preventative measures can be taken. If the risk can be assessed well in advance vaccination can be employed. In the event of near term or immediate post exposure antibiotic such as Cipro may be effective. Anthrax Vaccine Adsorbed AVA is the only licensed human anthrax vaccine in the United States. The vaccine is known to contain a mixture of cell products including PA LF and EF however the exact amounts are unknown Tumbull P C Broster M G Carman J A Manchee R J Melling J Development of antibodies to protective antigen and lethal factor components of anthrax toxin in humans and guinea pigs and their relevance to protective immunity. 1986. 52 2 356 herein incorporated by reference . The immunization schedule consists of three subcutaneous injections at 0 2 and 4 weeks and booster vaccination at 6 12 and 18 months and it is suggested that annual boost may be required to maintain immunity. Mass vaccination in the event of anthrax spore release is an unlikely scenario. First the time taken for effectiveness of such vaccination based on AVA or various rPA molecules in development may be too short weeks as opposed to minutes. The utilization of antibiotic can inhibit bacterial growth and spread and may prevent some of the symptoms but the administration needs to be timely and preferably prophylactically even as such the toxins released during the early stages of an infection may impair the immune system to cause lasting damage. In some instances a combination of inhibiting anthrax bacteria and toxins is required early in an infection. High affinity human monoclonal PA neutralizing antibodies may provide immediate neutralization of the anthrax toxins.

In this experiment the inventors accessed the human IgG response to the PA83 component of AVA and isolated a panel of high affinity potent PA neutralizing monoclonal antibodies. These antibodies were selected on the basis of binding to PA83 the form of the anthrax toxin released by the bacteria prior to cell bound furin processing and lethal toxin inhibition. Some of the embodiments described herein will be particularly useful for the generation of fully human monoclonal antibodies against various infectious disease targets from vaccinated or naturally exposed yet protected individuals.

Selection of Donor Plasma obtained at the time of blood collection by venipuncture from anthrax vaccinated donors were pre screened against a panel of antigens including components of the anthrax exotoxin PA and LF in an ELISA for both IgG and IgM. An internal calibrator was incorporated into each assay consisting of a control antiserum containing both IgG and IgM anti tetanus toxoid. The IgG and IgM titres were compared across assays performed on different days thereby permitting more robust comparisons of the entire donor panel.

Engraftment of SCID mice with human PBMC from pre selected A VA immune donors Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were enriched from whole blood of AVA immune donors by density gradient using Histopaque. SCID bg 12 week old mice were each engrafted via i.p. injection with 2.5 10human PBMC. They were treated concomitantly i.p. with a volume of conditioned medium which contains 0.2 mg of the anti CD8 monoclonal antibody. The mice were immediately immunized i.p. with the recombinant PA and LF List Laboratories 10 g each adsorbed to Alum Imject Pierce Rockford Ill. and subsequently boosted ip 8 28 day later. Mice were inoculated with 0.5 ml of EBV obtained from spent conditioned culture medium day 15 following engraftment. Test bleeds were obtained from the orbital sinus on days 15 and 30. Two consecutive iv and i.p. boosts with the appropriate toxins were administered typically 5 g each on day 35 and day 36 both in saline prior to harvesting cells for fusion on day 37 also at which time an additional test bleed sample was obtained. The total IgG and specific PA IgG combined with potency in the RAW 264.7 cell bioassay were determined for the bleeds.

Generation of human hybridomas Splenocytes peritoneal washes as well as lymphoblastoid cell line LCL human lymphocyte derived tumors were harvested on day 37 from those mice showing positive test bleeds in PA ELISA and the appropriate bioassay described below . Human hybridomas were generated from these in separate fusions using a mouse myeloma cell line P3 63Ag8.653 Kearney J F Radbruch A Liesegang B Rajewsky K A new mouse myeloma cell line that has lost immunoglobulin expression but permits the construction of antibody secreting hybrid cell lines. 1979 123 4 1548 herein incorporated by reference with PEG 1500. Double selection to select against the EBV LCL and the un fused fusion partner was carried out using a combination of HAT selection and ouabain.

Variable Region IgH and IgL cDNA cloning and expression Total RNA was prepared from specific ELISA positive hybridomas using RNeasy Mini Kit Qiagen Valencia Calif. . Mixture of VH and VL cDNAs were synthesized and amplified in a same tube using One Step RT PCR Kit Qiagen Valencia Calif. . Cycling parameters were 50 C. for 35 min 95 C. for 15 min 35 cycles of 94 C. for 30 sec 52 C. for 20 sec and 72 C. for 1 min 15 sec and 72 C. for 5 min.

The RT PCR was followed by nested PCR with High Fidelity Platinum PCR Mix Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . A microliter of RT PCR products were used for VH VL or VL specific cDNA amplification in the separate tube. At the same time restriction enzyme sites were introduced at both ends. Cycling parameters were 1 cycle of 94 C. for 2 min 60 C. for 30 sec and 68 C. for 45 sec 35 cycles of 94 C. for 40 sec 54 C. for 25 sec and 68 C. for 45 sec and 68 C. for 5 min.

The each specific PCR products were separately purified digested with restriction enzymes and subcloned into appropriate mammalian full length Ig expression vectors as described below.

VH PCR products are digested with BsrG I and Apa I and ligated into pEEG1.1 vector that is linearlized by Spl I and Apa I double digestion.

VLK PCR products were digested with Age I and Spl I and ligated into pEEK1.1. vector linearlized by Xma I and Spl I double digestion.

VL PCR products were digested with Apa I and Avr II and ligated into pEELg vector linearlized by Apa I and Avr II double digestion.

The positive clones were identified after transient co transfection by determining expression in the supernatants by indirect ELISA on PA coated plates. CHO KI cells were transfected with different combinations of IgG and IgK cDNAs using Lipofectamine 2000 Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . The supernatants were harvested 48 72 h after transfection. Multiple positive clones were sequenced with the ABI 3700 automatic sequencer Applied Biosystems Foster City Calif. and analyzed with Sequencher v4.1.4 software Gene Codes Ann Arbor Mich. .

Stable cell line establishment Ig heavy chain or light chain expression vector were double digested with Not I and Sal I and then both fragments were ligated to form a double gene expression vector. CHO K1 cells in 6 well plate were transfected with the double gene expression vector using Lipofectamine 2000 Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . After 24 hrs transfection cells were transferred to 10 cm dish with selection medium D.MEM supplemented with 10 dialyzed FBS 50 m L methionine sulphoximine MSX penicillin streptomycin GS supplement . Two weeks later MSX resistant transfectants were isolated and expanded. High producing clones were selected by measuring the antibody levels in supernatants in a PA specific ELISA assay. MSX concentration was increased from 50 to 100 M to enhance the antibody productivity.

Antigen Binding ELISA The presence of antibody to anthrax toxin components in human sera engrafted SCID mouse sera supernatants of hybridomas or transiently transfected CHO K1 cells were determined by ELISA. Briefly flat bottom microtiter plates Nunc F96 Maxisorp were coated with the appropriate component of the tripartite exotoxin such as PA or LF diluted sera was added to the wells for one hour at room temperature. Plates were washed and secondary antibody goat anti human IgG HRP Fc specific or goat anti human IgM HRP Fc specific was added and incubated for one hour at room temperature. After another wash step a substrate solution containing OPD O phenlenediamine dihydrochloride in citrate buffer was added. After 15 minutes 3 N HCl was added to stop the reaction and plates were read on a Microplate reader at 490 nm.

Human Ig Quantification by ELISA Flat bottom microtiter plates Nunc F96 Maxisorp were coated overnight at 4 C. with 50 l of goat anti human IgG Fc specific at 1 g ml in PBS. Plates were washed four times with PBS 0.1 Tween 20. Meanwhile in a separate preparation plate dilutions of standards in duplicate and unknowns were prepared in 100 l volume of PBS with 1 mg ml BSA. A purified monoclonal human IgG1 or protein was used as the standard and a different IgG1 or protein serves as an internal calibrator for comparison. Diluted test samples 50 l were transferred to the wells of the assay plate and incubated for one hour at room temperature. Plates were washed as before and 50 l of the detecting antibody goat anti human kappa or lambda HRP was added incubated for one hour at room temperature and developed as described above. RAW 264.7 cell line in vitro bioassays were performed as described earlier.

Binding Affinity Determinations Affinity constants were determined using the principal of surface plasmon resonance SPR with a BiaCore 3000 BiaCore Inc. . Affinity purified goat anti human IgG Jackson ImmunoResearch was conjugated to two flow cells of the CM5 chip according to manufacturer s instructions. An optimal concentration of an antibody preparation was first introduced into one of the two flowcells and was captured by the anti human IgG. Next a defined concentration of antigen was introduced into both flow cells for a defined period of time using the flow cell without antibody as a reference signal. As antigen bound to the captured antibody of interest there was a change in the SPR signal which was proportional to the amount of antigen bound. After a defined period of time antigen solution was replaced with buffer and the dissociation of the antigen from the antibody was then measured again by the SPR signal. Curve fitting software provided by BiaCore generated estimates of the association and dissociation rates from which affinities were calculated.

General The range of antibodies generated were diverse with evidence of extensive hyper mutation and all were of very high affinity for PA83 1 10M. Moreover all were potent inhibitor of anthrax lethal toxin in vitro. Accordingly in one embodiment the generation of a panel of potent human monoclonal antibodies derived from anthrax vaccine adsorbed immune donors is provided. Protection against anthrax toxin challenge in an in vitro cell culture assay correlates well with affinity with the highest affinity antibody AVP 21D9 Kd 82 pM exhibiting the most potent toxin inhibition.

Donor Screening Donors sera X064 004b and X064 019 were screened for IgG and IgM against tetanus toxoid PA and LF by ELISA. shows that both donors had significant IgG responses to tetanus toxoid and some albeit low levels of specific IgG antibody against PA and LF.

Chimeric Engraft Screening The PBL s from donor X064 004b and X064 019 were engrafted into mice designated X040 042 and X040 043 respectively. After boosting sera from engrafted mice were screened for human IgG against PA. As shown in the initial bleed after the first boost is plotted alongside the X064 004b donor sera. One engraft had an anti PA IgG level that is 9 higher than the donor sera. Moreover as shown in the second bleed from the engrafted mice a range of 8 30 fold increase in specific anti PA IgG is observed. This increase in specific IgG over time in the engrafted mice is even more pronounced in the second engraft using cells from donor X064 01. The increase in specific anti PA IgG in the second bleed is more than 500 fold relative to specific anti PA in the donor sera.

Immunoglobulin Sequence Analysis Following fusion cells producing human anti anthrax PA IgG were selected and the cDNA encoding the immunoglobulin variable regions were rescued from ELISA positive wells and sequenced. The cDNA templates were used to establish stable CHO K1 cell lines producing antibodies. Four neutralizing anti PA antibodies were discovered by this approach. The VH families were represented by the VH3 VH1 and VH4. Likewise the VL families were represented by VK1 and VL3. Both VH and VL regions contained evidence of hyper mutation away from the germline. Table 3 below lists the antibodies isolated by this approach and the D and J regions are assigned where possible using DNAPLOT from Vbase.

The immunoglobulin sequence derived from the cDNA encoding the variable regions were used to search Vbase and the VH class VH locus DH and JH segments were assigned for the VH regions. Likewise VL class VL locus and JL segments were assigned for the VL regions. Comparing the actual sequences and closest matched V family members the extent of somatic hyper mutation could be ascertained.

Kinetics of Binding The equilibrium dissociation constant K for recombinant form of the antibodies were determined by BiaCore analyses. The rate constants kand kwere evaluated directly from the sensogram in the BiaCore analysis and the Kwas deduced. The results are summarized in Table 1 provided above.

In one embodiment one feature of many of the protective antibodies is the very slow off rate which contribute to the very high affinities 8.21 10M to 7.1 10M. The slow off rate may confer significant physiological advantages for toxin neutralization in vivo.

In vitro Lethal Toxin Inhibition All the antibodies were initially selected based on binding to PA83 and secondly on inhibition of lethal toxin in a Raw 264.7 cell based in vitro assay. Only clones exhibiting toxin neutralization in a qualitative assay were developed further. The Raw 264.7 cell assay was adapted to compare the various antibodies for potency of toxin inhibition. In a typical antibody dose response curve is reconstructed to provide an estimate of the ICfor AVP 21D9 AVP 1C6 and AVP 22G12. Again the inhibitory potency ranking of all the selected antibodies were reflecting the same ranking observed for the binding to PA83.

In one embodiment of the invention passive immunization is provided in conjunction with one or more other therapies including but not limited to antibiotic therapy. In one embodiment ciprofloxacin hydrochloride and or other antibiotics are administered before after and or simultaneously with one or more of the antibodies or fragments thereof described herein. In one embodiment one or more antibiotics and antibodies are administered first followed by vaccination with AVA and or rPA thereby conferring both immediate and long term protection. In other embodiments doxycycline can be administered. In other embodiments ciprofloxacin doxycycline and or penicillin can be administered. One of skill in the art will understand that several antibiotics including but not limited to ciprofloxacin doxycycline and penicillin can be combined with one or more anti anthrax antibodies to exert a preventive and or therapeutic effect. The specific methodology and results of an experiment conducted to confirm the combined effects of antibody therapy and an exemplary antibiotic ciprofloxacin are described in detail as follows.

Methods Hartley guinea pigs 250 300 g n 9 group and Swiss Webster mice 25 30 g n 10 group were challenged by nasal instillation with 5 LDspores 24 hours prior to twice daily subcutaneous injections of ciprofloxacin for 6 days and or a single intraperitoneal injection of anti PA mAb AVP 21D9 . Animal survival was monitored.

Results Control animals challenged with anthrax spores died within 7 days. AVP 21D9 provided protection and delayed the mean time of death however animals often succumbed to infection over the following weeks. The EDdose of ciprofloxacin 3 mg day 6 days protected the animals over a 20 day period drug toxicity was noted with a dose of 5.4 mg day. When AVP 21D9 1.5 15 mg was combined with a low non protective dose of ciprofloxacin 1.12 mg day we observed synergistic protection of the animals for 30 days however higher doses of ciprofloxacin were proportionately less effective. Similarly Swiss Webster mice were challenged with 5 LDAmes. Ciprofloxacin 0.9 mg day combined with 500 g AVP 21D9 protected 100 of the animals for more than 30 days while ciprofloxacin alone protected 60 and 21D9 alone protected 40 . All survivors were re challenged with 5LDvalues of Ames spores by nasal instillation.

In view of the above results it is believed that due to the asynchronous and delayed germination of the inhaled anthrax spores prophylactic treatment of exposed individuals in some embodiments may require prolonged administration of antibiotics. Thus in some embodiments of the invention a formulation and method to achieve synergistic protection of guinea pigs and mice against anthrax comprising human mAb to PA and ciprofloxacin is provided. In one embodiment levels of ciprofloxacin used in combination therapy will be less than that needed if ciprofloxacin was used alone. This antibody antibiotic combination may be beneficial in the clinical care of patients exposed to spores.

Although not wishing to be bound by this theory it is believed that the toxic effects of anthrax are initiated by PA. It is believed that PA83 initially adheres to the membrane of the host cell where it is then cleaved by a membrane bound furin or furin like protease which cleaves PA83 into two segments PA63 and PA20. PA63 which is membrane bound assembles in groups of seven monomers sometimes called a heptamer or more broadly a multimer or oligomer thereby forming a heptameric channel. The haptamer binds EF and LF and allows EF and LF to enter the host cell to exert their toxic effects.

Although previous researchers have attempted to prevent the binding of EF and LF to PA63 the inventors believe that this is the first report of a composition and method that prevents anthrax toxicity by preventing the assembly of the PA63 heptamer.

The specific methodology and results of an experiment conducted to evaluate the mechanism of action of anti anthrax toxins is described below.

Materials and Methods The binding of the monoclonal antibodies to distinct or overlapping epitopes on PA83 was determined by surface plasmon resonance. Anti human IgG capture antibody goat anti human Fc gamma specific Jackson ImmunoResearch was coupled to a CM 5 chip through standard amine chemistry using an immobilization guide provide by the Biacore Biacore Inc N.J. whereby a response unit RU value of 10 000 units was approached. The first human monoclonal antibody was applied followed by pooled human non immune IgG blocking antibody PA83 PA83 and LF both purchased from List Biological Labs Calif. followed sequentially with the second and third monoclonal antibodies. The order in which the antibodies were applied was changed in subsequent runs to cover all permutations with a vast excess of human polyclonal IgG blocking between steps. The test reagents PA MAbs were applied at 20 g m1 in HBS EP buffer provide by Biacore the blocking antibody human IgG K1 Sigma Co Mo. was used at 40 g ml. The resulting binding data is presented in .

To map the antibody recognition to distinct portion of the PA83 western blot analysis was undertaken. In a schematic of fragments of PA83 generated by trypsin and chymotrypsin digests based on the sequences and mapping studies previously described is shown Welkos S L Lowe J R Eden McCutchan F Vodkin M Leppla S H Schmidt J J Sequence and analysis of the DNA encoding protective antigen of Gene 69 1988 2 287 300 Novak J M Stein M P Little S F Leppla S H Friedlander A M Functional characterization of protease treated protective antigen 267 1992 24 17186 93 both herein incorporated by reference . Intact PA83 trypsin chymotrypsin and a combination of trypsin and chymotrypsin generated PA fragments were probed with human monoclonal antibodies AVP 1C6 AVP 22G12 and AVP 21D9 in a western blot .

To investigate whether the antibody bound to PA83 blocked subsequent processing PA83 was pre incubated with antibodies and treated with trypsin. The resulting mixtures were pulled down with protein A and analysed by SDS PAGE and Coomassie staining .

The role of antibodies in inhibiting the binding of lethal factor to PA63 oligomer was again investigated by surface plasmon resonance. PA63 PA63 oligomer List Laboratories Calif. was immobilized on a BiaCore CM5 chip essentially as described above antibody captured and lethal factor applied. The binding events were monitored and are presented in a sensogram . Also the role of antibodies in blocking binding of the anthrax toxin PA83 to its receptor was investigated in a similar manner. Anti human Fc gamma was conjugated to the CM5 chip human monoclonal anti PA antibody was captured PA83 was bound and the soluble anthrax toxin receptor was applied plasmid encoding full length ATR was kindly provided by Dr. Ken Bradley UCLA . Again each binding event was monitored by surface plasmon resonance .

Finally to determine if the antibodies inhibited the formation of PA63 heptamer equimolar amounts of PA83 0.25 nmol and anti PA antibody 0.25 nmol were mixed in 70 l of PBS. After 30 minutes incubation at room temperature the mixture was transferred to 4 C. and 10 l of ice cold trypsin 50 g ml was added for 5 minutes. Trypsin was inactivated by the addition of 5 l trypsin and chymotrypsin inhibitor 10 mg ml . Citric phosphate buffer 115 l of 0.1 M pH 5.0 was then added to bring the pH to 5.0 to facilitate PA63 oligomerization. SDS loading buffer was added and the mixtures placed on boiling water for 10 minutes. Polypeptides were separated in a 10 Bis Tris gel under reducing condition. Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie blue staining .

Results Sequential binding of anti PA antibodies to PA83 indicated that they bound to distinct non overlapping epitopes . Western blot analysis of intact PA 83 indicated all three antibodies recognized linear epitopes on PA83 . AVP 21D9 and AVP 1C6 mapped to the carboxyl domain PA47 generated by chymotrypsin digestion. The binding of AVP 22G12 mapped to the chymotrypsin generated fragment PA37 which contains the natural furin cleavage site. Treating PA83 with trypsin abolished AVP 22G12 binding in the western blot. Initially this suggested that AVP 22G12 itself might act by inhibiting the cleavage of PA83 to PA63. To test this hypothesis PA83 was pre incubated with antibody prior to trypsin addition the resulting mixture was analyzed. Surprisingly AVP 22G12 bound to PA83 permits cleavage by trypsin implying that it binds close to and possibly spans the accessible cleavage site .

To determine whether the antibodies efficacy was in part due to inhibiting LF binding to PA63 oligomer the interactions between PA63 oligomer antibody and LF were investigated. AVP 22G12 did not bind to preformed PA63 oligomer thus by default did not appear to compete for EF LF binding though AVP 21D9 had very weak binding possibly due to the presence of a small amount of PA63 monomer and AVP 1C6 bound to the PA 63 oligomer neither inhibited LF binding . All the antibodies bound PA83 which subsequently bound soluble ATR SATR . However partial inhibition of sATR binding was observed on AVP 1C6 captured PA83 hinting at a possible mode of action.

In this particular example AVP 21D9 and AVP 22G12 did not inhibit PA83 and sATR interaction nor did they appear to prevent subsequent processing to PA63 or the binding of LF to PA 63 oligomer. Yet paradoxically they were the two most potent inhibitors of anthrax lethal toxin PA LF in vitro and in vivo in rats. AVP 22G12 bound to native PA83 denatured PA83 and PA37 but not to the preformed heptamer or monomer PA63. Cleavage of PA83 to PA63 and PA20 completely abolished the binding of AVP 22G12. However if PA83 was bound to the antibody and subsequently cleaved by trypsin the resulting PA63 PA20 antibody complex remains bound and . These observations implied that at least for AVP 22G12 the step of toxin neutralization probably occurred prior to heptamer assembly. In natural exposure to anthrax upon cleavage of PA83 to PA63 and the release of PA20 the PA63 spontaneously forms a heptamer.

An oligomer of PA63 can be formed in vitro by treating PA83 with trypsin and adjusting the pH 5.0. Once formed it is stable in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulphate SDS as shown in lane 1 of . Antibody bound PA83 was cleaved by trypsin to mimic the natural furin like protease to generate PA63 PA20 and pH was adjusted to 5.0 to facilitate heptamer assembly. The mixtures were examined by SDS PAGE. In the absence of anti PA antibody Lane 1 or in the presence of an isotype matched control antibody Lane 5 the PA63 oligomer formed readily. Both AVP 22G12 and AVP 21D9 Lanes 2 and 3 completely inhibited heptamer formation . Since western blot analysis had shown that the two antibodies bind to distinct regions of PA83 the antibodies prevented the oligomer formation via distinct mechanisms. It was demonstrated that AVP 22G12 binds to a linear epitope on PA83 that possibly spans PA63 and PA20 cleavage site but still permits access to protease site and the clipped molecule retains PA20. It is plausible that the retention of PA20 on the antibody antigen complex may hinder the subsequent heptamer formation. Whereas AVP 21D9 bound to a distal linear epitope within the PA47 polypeptide and prevented PA oligomer formation possibly by masking potential assembly interfaces. It has previously been demonstrated that correct pore assembly is needed to facilitate LF and EF entry into cells thus blocking this portal molecule effectively protects against the effects of both EF and LF anthrax toxin s .

Thus in view of the above results it is believed that in some embodiments fully human antibodies generated in response to AVA vaccination neutralize anthrax exotoxin PA by interfering with and or preventing PA63 oligomer assembly.

Antibodies to Anthrax Made by Other Methods In several embodiments of the present invention a composition and method to treat and or prevent anthrax that prevents PA63 oligomer assembly is provided. The phrase prevents PA63 assembly as used herein shall be given its ordinary meaning and shall also mean partially substantially or fully inhibiting interfering with and or disrupting the assembly of PA63 into an oligomer. In one embodiment the composition used to prevent PA63 heptamer assembly is a binding agent such as the anti anthrax antibodies generated by the methods of the present invention. For example in one embodiment the antibody is a fully human monoclonal antibody generated using immuno compromised mice. In other embodiments however antibodies created by the engineering of bacteriophages to display human monoclonal antibodies on their surface are used. In yet other embodiments the composition comprises a mouse monoclonal antibody. In other embodiments polyclonal antibodies are used. In yet other embodiments humanized or chimeric antibodies are used. Methods of making the antibodies described above e.g. making humanized antibodies non human monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal antibodies are well known in the art.

In one embodiment a composition and method for treating a mammal exposed to anthrax or passively immunizing a mammal pre exposure is provided. In one embodiment the method comprises administering a binding agent to a mammal wherein the binding agent prevents the assembly of a PA63 heptamer. By preventing the assembly of the PA63 oligomer the binding agent in some embodiments inhibits transport of EF and or LF into a mammalian host cell thereby protecting the mammal from the toxic effects of anthrax. As discussed above the binding agent can be a monoclonal or polyclonal antibody. The binding agent can be fully human humanized or non human. Thus any binding agent that prevents or otherwise interferes with the assembly of a PA63 oligomer can be used according to an embodiment of the current invention. Indeed the binding agent need not be an antibody. For example small molecules such as peptides that can bind to a site on the PA63 molecule or otherwise prevent the assembly of the PA63 heptamer can also be used Bachhawat Sikder K. and Kodadek T. 2003 . Mixed element capture agents MECAs A simple strategy for the construction of synthetic high affinity protein capture ligands. J Amer Chem Soc 125 13995 14004 herein incorporated by reference .

In some embodiments the binding agent prevents assembly of the PA heptamer by binding to a site on the PA63 molecule. In other embodiments the binding agent prevents assembly of the PA heptamer by binding to a site on the PA20 molecule. In further embodiments the binding agent prevents assembly of the PA heptamer by binding to a site on the PA83 molecule. In yet other embodiments the binding agent prevents assembly of the PA heptamer by binding to a non PA molecule that is needed for PA assembly.

Although several different binding agents can be used in accordance with certain embodiments of the present invention antibodies as opposed to non antibody agents may be particularly advantageous because antibodies may bind with greater affinity and specificity to the desired epitope thus preventing the assembly of PA63 more effectively. Further fully human antibodies are especially advantageous because fully human antibodies may exert fewer side effects in the body and are likely to be eliminated less rapidly from the body thereby reducing the frequency and amount of dosing. Further fully human antibodies may have higher affinities and specificities.

While a number of preferred embodiments of the invention and variations thereof have been described in detail other modifications and methods of use will be readily apparent to those of skill in the art. Accordingly it should be understood that various applications modifications and substitutions may be made of equivalents without departing from the spirit of the invention or the scope of the claims.

