---

title: Multimedia content navigation and playback
abstract: In accordance with the present invention, a filtering process is based on the output side of a multimedia decoder. A navigator monitors the current play position of the multimedia content and compares that position with navigation objects. Each navigation object defines a start position, a stop position, and an filtering action to perform on the portion of the multimedia content that begins at the start position and ends at the stop position. When the current play position falls within the portion of multimedia content defined by a particular navigation object, the navigator activates the filtering action that was assigned to the navigation object. Filtering actions include skipping, muting, reframing, etc., the portion of multimedia content defined by a navigation object. A variety of systems may be used to implement the present invention, such as computer systems (consumer and server), television systems, and audio systems.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07577970&OS=07577970&RS=07577970
owner: Clearplay Inc.
number: 07577970
owner_city: Salt Lake City
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050307
---
This application is a continuation of and claims priority to co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 694 873 filed Oct. 23 2000 and entitled Multimedia Content Navigation and Playback the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference herein.

The present invention relates to filtering multimedia content. More specifically the present invention relates to methods systems and computer program products for automatically identifying and filtering portions of multimedia content during the decoding process.

Often movies and other multimedia content contain scenes or language that are unsuitable for viewers of some ages. To help consumers determine whether a particular movie is appropriate for an audience of a given age the Motion Picture Association of America MPAA has developed the now familiar NC 17 R PG 13 PG G rating system. Other organizations have developed similar rating systems for other types of multimedia content such as television programming computer software video games and music.

Both the quantity and context of potentially objectionable material are significant factors in assigning multimedia content a rating. However a relatively small amount of mature focused subject matter may be sufficient to remove multimedia content from a rating category recommended for younger children. For example in a motion picture setting a single scene of particularly explicit violence sexuality or language may require an R rating for what would otherwise be a PG or PG 13 movie. As a result even if an R rated motion picture has a general public appeal individuals trying to avoid R rated content and teenagers restricted by the R rating may choose not to view a motion picture that they would otherwise desire to view if it were not for the inclusion of the explicit scene.

Many consumers may prefer an alternate version of the multimedia content such as a version that has been modified to make the content more suitable for all ages. To provide modified versions of multimedia works the prior art has focused on manipulating the multimedia source. The details of how multimedia content is modified depends largely on the type of access the source media supports. For linear access media such as videotape or audiotape undesired content is edited from the tape and the remaining ends are spliced back together. The process is repeated for each portion of undesired content the multimedia source contains. Due to the need for specialized tools and expertise it is impractical for individual consumers to perform this type of editing. While third parties could perform this editing to modify content on a consumer s behalf the process is highly inefficient because it requires physically handling and repeating the editing for each individual tape.

Modifying direct access media such as DVD also has focused on modifying the multimedia source. Unlike linear media direct access media allows for accessing any arbitrary portion of the multimedia content in roughly the same amount of time as any other arbitrary portion of the multimedia content. Direct access media allows for the creation and distribution of multiple versions of multimedia content including versions that may be suitable to most ages and storing the versions on a single medium. The decoding process creates various continuous multimedia streams by identifying selecting retrieving and transmitting content segments from a number of available segments stored on the content source.

To help in explaining the prior art for creating multiple versions of a multimedia work on a single source a high level description of the basic components found in a system for presenting multimedia content may be useful. Typically such systems include a multimedia source a decoder and an output device. The decoder is a translator between the format used to store or transmit the multimedia content and the format used for intermediate processing and ultimately presenting the multimedia content at the output device. For example multimedia content may be encrypted to prevent piracy and compressed to conserve storage space or bandwidth. Prior to presentation the multimedia content must be decrypted and or uncompressed operations usually performed by the decoder.

The prior art teaches creation and distribution of multiple versions of a direct access multimedia work on a single storage medium by breaking the multimedia content into various segments and including alternate interchangeable segments where appropriate. Each individually accessible segment is rated and labeled based on the content it contains considering such factors as subject matter context and explicitness. One or more indexes of the segments are created for presenting each of the multiple versions of the multimedia content. For example one index may reference segments that would be considered a PG version of the multimedia whereas another index may reference segments that would be considered an R version of the content. Alternatively the segments themselves or a single index may include a rating that is compared to a rating selected by a user.

There are a variety of benefits to the prior art s indexing of interchangeable segments to provide for multiple versions of a multimedia work on a single storage medium. Use of storage space can be optimized because segments common to the multiple versions need only be stored once. Consumers may be given the option of setting their own level of tolerance for specific subject matter and the different multimedia versions may contain alternate segments with varying levels of explicitness. The inclusion of segment indexing on the content source also enables the seamless playback of selected segments i.e. without gaps and pauses when used in conjunction with a buffer. Seamless playback is achieved by providing the segment index on the content source thus governing the selection and ordering of the interchangeable segments prior to the data entering the buffer.

The use of a buffer compensates for latency that may be experienced in reading from different physical areas of direct access media. While read mechanisms are moved from one disc location to another no reading of the requested content from the direct access media occurs. This is a problem because as a general rule the playback rate for multimedia content exceeds the access rate by a fairly significant margin. For example a playback rate of 30 frames per second is common for multimedia content. Therefore a random access must take less than 1 30th of a second approximately 33 milliseconds or the random access will result in a pause during playback while the reading mechanism moves to the next start point. A typical 16 DVD drive for a personal computer however has an average access rate of approximately 95 milliseconds nearly three times the 33 milliseconds allowed for seamless playback. Moreover according to a standard of the National Television Standards Committee NTSC only 5 to 6 milliseconds are allowed between painting the last pixel of one frame and painting the first pixel of the next frame. Those of skill in the art will recognize that the above calculations are exemplary of the time constraints involved in reading multimedia content from direct access media for output to a PC or television even though no time is allotted to decoding the multimedia content after it has been read time that would need to be added to the access time for more precise latency calculations.

Once access occurs DVD drives are capable of reading multimedia content from a DVD at a rate that exceeds the playback rate. To address access latency the DVD specification teaches reading multimedia content into a track buffer. The track buffer size and amount of multimedia content that must be read into the track buffer depend on several factors including the factors described above such as access time decoding time playback rate etc. When stored on a DVD a segment index as taught in the prior art with corresponding navigation commands identifies and orders the content segments to be read into the track buffer enabling seamless playback of multiple version of the multimedia content. However segment indexes that are external to the content source are unable to completely control the navigation commands within the initial segment identification selection retrieval process since external indexes can interact with position codes only available at the end of the decoding process. As a result external segment indexes may be unable to use the DVD track buffer in addressing access latency as taught in the prior art.

As an alternative to buffering segments from separate versions of multimedia content may be interlaced. This allows for essentially sequential reading of the media with unwanted segments being read and discarded or skipped. The skips however represent relatively small movements of the read mechanism. Generally small movements involve a much shorter access time than large movements and therefore introduce only minimal latency.

Nevertheless the prior art for including multiple versions of a multimedia work on a single direct access media suffers from several practical limitations that prevent it from wide spread use. One significant problem is that content producers must be willing to create and broadly distribute multiple versions of the multimedia work and accommodate any additional production efforts in organizing and labeling the content segments including interchangeable segments for use with the segment indexes or maps. The indexes in combination with the corresponding segments define a work and are stored directly on the source media at the time the media is produced. In short while the prior art offers a tool for authoring multiple versions of a multimedia work that tool is not useful in and of itself to consumers.

A further problem in the prior art is that existing encoding technologies must be licensed in order to integrate segment indexes on a direct access storage medium and decoding technologies must be licensed to create a decoder that uses the segment indexes on a multimedia work to seamlessly playback multiple versions stored on the direct access medium. In the case of DVD the Motion Pictures Entertainment Group MPEG controls the compression technology for encoding and decoding multimedia files. Furthermore because producers of multimedia content generally want to prevent unauthorized copies of their multimedia work they also employ copy protection technologies. The most common copy protection technologies for DVD media are controlled by the DVD Copy Control Association DVD CCA which controls the licensing of their Content Scramble System technology CSS . Decoder developers license the relevant MPEG and CSS technology under fairly strict agreements that dictate how the technology may be used. In short the time and cost associated with licensing existing compression and copy protection technologies or developing proprietary compression and copy protection technologies may be significant costs prohibitive to the wide spread use of the prior art s segment indexing for providing multiple versions of a multimedia work on a single direct access storage medium.

Additionally the teachings of the prior art do not provide a solution for filtering direct access multimedia content that has already been duplicated and distributed without regard to presenting the content in a manner that is more suitable for most ages. At the time of filing this patent application over 5000 multimedia titles have been released on DVD without using the multiple version technology of the prior art to provide customers the ability to view and hear alternate versions of the content in a manner that is more suitable for most ages.

The prior art also has taught that audio portions of multimedia content may be identified and filtered during the decoding process by examining the closed caption information for the audio stream and muting the volume during segments of the stream that contain words matching with a predetermined set of words that are considered unsuitable for most ages. This art is limited in its application since it cannot identify and filter video segments and since it can only function with audio streams that contain closed captioning information. Furthermore filtering audio content based on closed captioning information is imprecise due to poor synchronization between closed captioning information and the corresponding audio content.

These and other problems with the prior art are overcome by the present invention which is directed toward automatically identifying and filtering portions of multimedia content during the decoding process. As taught in the prior state of the art the technology for presenting original multimedia content that is suitable for most ages has been concentrated on altering the multimedia at its source. Unlike the prior art s control of the input or source side of a decoder the present invention permits filtering multimedia content at the output side of a decoder. As a result the present invention may be practiced without necessarily imposing any particular requirements on the source of the multimedia content.

The present invention includes the creation of navigation objects to define portions of the multimedia content that should be filtered. Each navigation object contains a start position a stop position and a filtering action to be performed on the portion of the multimedia content that is defined by the start position and stop position. The navigation objects are placed in an object store. There is no particular limitation on the format of the navigation objects and the object store. For example the object store may be a file such as a database and the navigation objects may be records within the database.

Navigator software reads navigation objects from the object store and monitors the decoder for the current position code of the multimedia as the multimedia content is being decoded. For DVD multimedia the position code may be a time code that identifies portions of the multimedia content by hours minutes seconds and frame number. The position code is compared against the start and stop positions defined in each navigation object. When playback reaches a portion of the multimedia defined by a particular navigation object the navigator activates the editing action assigned to that navigation object.

For example one type of filtering action is a skip. When the navigator determines that the time code for the multimedia content currently being decoded has reached the start position of a navigation object with a skip filtering action the navigator instructs the decoder to discontinue decoding at the current multimedia position and to resume decoding at the stop position of the navigation object. By discontinuing the decoding process at the start position of the navigation object and resuming the decoding process at the stop position of the navigation object the portion of the multimedia content defined by the start and stop positions of the multimedia content is never decoded and as a result is never transferred to a multimedia output device such as a video display. In some cases the navigator may not begin accessing the stop position to resume the decoding process until after determining that the start position for discontinuing decoding has been accessed preventing the Navigator from using a read buffer to compensate for the access time required in moving the read mechanism from the start position to the stop position where decoding will resume.

Mute is another type of filtering action. When the navigator determines that the time code for the multimedia content currently being decoded has reached the start position of a navigation object with a mute filtering action the navigator suppresses the audio decoding. Suppressing audio decoding may be accomplished by setting the volume of the multimedia content to be inaudible. Muting continues until the navigator determines that the time code for the multimedia content then being decoded reaches the stop position defined in the navigation object. Once the stop position has been reached the volume is returned the level in effect prior to the navigator activating the mute filtering action. Unlike the skip action the muted portion of the multimedia content is decoded and may be transferred to an output device such as speaker but with the volume set to be inaudible or with the audio decoding suppressed in some other way the muted portion is effectively filtered from the multimedia content.

A further type of filtering action is a reframe. In cases where the visual information presented to the viewer only contains unsuitable material in a certain physical area of a scene the multimedia content can be enlarged if needed and then positioned in the viewing frame in a manner that effectively crops the objectionable information from view. The sizing and framing can be adjusted during the reframe action to continually crop the objectionable material from view. When the navigator determines that the position code for the multimedia content currently being decoded has reached the end position of a reframe navigation object the navigator instructs the current multimedia to resume to the original framing. For example if the multimedia includes a head to toe shot of a person with a bloody leg wound the content can be resized and reframed to show only a head to waist shot.

Depending on the multimedia content some editing actions may produce more noticeable discontinuities irregularities or artifacts than others. To reduce a user s perception of potential artifacts incremental editing actions or editing actions with an incremental component provide for gradual transitions before and or after an editing action. For example the display of video content may fade from normal to blank prior to a skip editing action and after the editing action from blank back to normal. Similarly muting actions may fade audio volume in and out to insure smooth transitions for editing actions. As used in this application editing actions should be interpreted broadly to encompass all types of actions that may be useful in editing multimedia content including incremental editing actions that are either separate from or combined with other editing actions.

Depending on the multimedia content some filtering actions may produce more noticeable discontinuities irregularities or artifacts than others. To reduce a user s perception of potential artifacts incremental filtering actions or filtering actions with an incremental component provide for gradual transitions before and or after a filtering action. For example the display of video content may fade from normal to blank prior to a skip filtering action and after the filtering action from blank back to normal. Similarly muting actions may fade audio volume in and out to insure smooth transitions for filtering actions. As used in this application filtering actions should be interpreted broadly to encompass all types of actions that may be useful in filtering multimedia content including incremental filtering actions that are either separate from or combined with other filtering actions.

The present invention may be practiced in a variety of computerized systems including servers personal computers television systems and audio systems. A typical system for a personal computer includes a DVD drive with decoding hardware and or software navigator software with navigation objects for a particular DVD title a computer display for video output and speakers for audio output. For television systems with a conventional DVD player and television set the navigator software and navigation objects may be stored in a remote control device that communicates with the DVD player and television set over a traditional infrared channel. Alternatively the television system may include a DVD player that includes the navigator software and navigation object store.

Additional features and advantages of the invention will be set forth in the description which follows and in part will be obvious from the description or may be learned by the practice of the invention. The features and advantages of the invention may be realized and obtained by means of the instruments and combinations particularly pointed out in the appended claims. These and other features of the present invention will become more fully apparent from the following description and appended claims or may be learned by the practice of the invention as set forth hereinafter.

The present invention extends to methods systems and computer program products for automatically identifying and filtering portions of multimedia content during the decoding process. The embodiments of the present invention may comprise a special purpose or general purpose computer including various computer hardware a television system an audio system and or combinations of the foregoing. These embodiments are discussed in greater detail below. However in all cases the described embodiments should be viewed a exemplary of the present invention rather than as limiting it s scope.

Embodiments within the scope of the present invention also include computer readable media for carrying or having computer executable instructions or data structures stored thereon. Such computer readable media may be any available media that can be accessed by a general purpose or special purpose computer. By way of example and not limitation such computer readable media can comprise RAM ROM EEPROM CD ROM or other optical disk storage magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to carry or store desired program code means in the form of computer executable instructions or data structures and which can be accessed by a general purpose or special purpose computer. When information is transferred or provided over a network or another communications link or connection either hardwired wireless or a combination of hardwired or wireless to a computer the computer properly views the connection as a computer readable medium. Thus any such a connection is properly termed a computer readable medium. Combinations of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media. Computer executable instructions comprise for example instructions and data which cause a general purpose computer special purpose computer or special purpose processing device to perform a certain function or group of functions.

Those skilled in the art will appreciate that the invention may be practiced in network computing environments with many types of computer system configurations including personal computers hand held devices multi processor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by local and remote processing devices that are linked either by hardwired links wireless links or by a combination of hardwired or wireless links through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing the invention includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a conventional computer including a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. The system memory includes read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help transfer information between elements within the computer such as during start up may be stored in ROM .

The computer may also include a magnetic hard disk drive for reading from and writing to a magnetic hard disk a magnetic disk drive for reading from or writing to a removable magnetic disk and an optical disk drive for reading from or writing to removable optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. The magnetic hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are connected to the system bus by a hard disk drive interface a magnetic disk drive interface and an optical drive interface respectively. The drives and their associated computer readable media provide nonvolatile storage of computer executable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . Although the exemplary environment described herein employs a magnetic hard disk a removable magnetic disk and a removable optical disk other types of computer readable media for storing data can be used including magnetic cassettes flash memory cards digital video disks Bernoulli cartridges RAMs ROMs and the like.

Program code means comprising one or more program modules may be stored on the hard disk magnetic disk optical disk ROM or RAM including an operating system one or more application programs other program modules and program data . A user may enter commands and information into the computer through keyboard pointing device or other input devices not shown such as a microphone joy stick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a serial port interface coupled to system bus . Alternatively the input devices may be connected by other interfaces such as a parallel port a game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or another display device is also connected to system bus via an interface such as video adapter . In addition to the monitor personal computers typically include other peripheral output devices not shown such as speakers and printers.

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as remote computers and . Remote computers and may each be another personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically include many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer although only memory storage devices and and their associated application programs and have been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN that are presented here by way of example and not limitation. Such networking environments are commonplace in office wide or enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the local network through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer may include a modem a wireless link or other means for establishing communications over the wide area network such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external is connected to the system bus via the serial port interface . In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing communications over wide area network may be used.

Turning next to a high level block diagram identifying the basic components of a system for filtering multimedia content are shown. The basic components include content source decoders navigator and output device . Content source provides multimedia to decoder for decoding navigator controls decoder so that filtered content does not reach output device and output device plays the multimedia content it receives. As used in this application the term multimedia should be interpreted broadly to include audio content video content or both.

The present invention does not require a particular content source . Any data source that is capable of providing multimedia content such as a DVD a CD a memory a hard disk a removable disk a tape cartridge and virtually all other types of magnetic or optical media may operate as content source . Those of skill in the art will recognize that the above media includes read only read write and write once varieties whether stored in an analog or digital format. All necessary hardware and software for accessing these media types are also part of content source . Content source as described above provides an example of multimedia source means.

Multimedia source generally provides encoded content. Encoding represents a difference in the formats that are typically used for storing or transmitting multimedia content and the formats used for intermediate processing of the multimedia content. Decoders translate between the storage and intermediate formats. For example stored MPEG content is both compressed and encrypted. Prior to being played at an output device the stored MPEG content is decrypted and uncompressed by decoders . Decoders may comprise hardware software or some combination of hardware and software. Due to the large amount of data involved in playing multimedia content decoders frequently have some mechanism for transferring data directly to output device . Decoders are an exemplary embodiment of decoder means.

Output device provides an example of output means for playing multimedia content and should be interpreted to include any device that is capable of playing multimedia content so that the content may be perceived. For a computer system like the one described with reference to output device may include a video card a video display an audio card and speakers. Alternatively output device may be a television or audio system. Television systems and audio systems cover a wide range of equipment. A simple audio system may comprise little more than an amplifier and speakers. Likewise a simple television system may be a conventional television that includes one or more speakers and a television screen. More sophisticated television and audio systems may include audio and video receivers that perform sophisticated processing of audio and video content to improve sound and picture quality.

Output device may comprise combinations of computer television and audio systems. For example home theaters represent a combination audio and television systems. These systems typically include multiple content sources such as components for videotape audiotape DVD CD cable and satellite connections etc. Audio and or television systems also may be combined with computer systems. Therefore output device should be construed as including the foregoing audio television and computer systems operating either individually or in some combination. Furthermore when used in this application computer system whether for a consumer or operating as a server television system and audio system may identify a system s capabilities rather than its primary or ordinary use. These capabilities are not necessarily exclusive of one another. For example a television playing music through its speakers is properly considered an audio system because it is capable of operating as an audio system. That the television ordinarily operates as part of a television system does not preclude it from operating as an audio system. As a result terms like consumer system server system television system and audio system should be given their broadest possible interpretation to include any system capable of operating in the identified capacity.

Navigator is software and or hardware that control the decoders by determining if the content being decoded needs to be filtered. Navigator is one example of multimedia navigation means. It should be emphasized that content source decoders output device and navigator have been drawn separately only to aid in their description. Some embodiments may combine content source decoders and navigator into a single set top box for use with a television and or audio system. Similarly a computer system may combine portions of decoder with output device and portions of decoder with content source . Many other embodiments are possible and therefore the present invention imposes no requirement that these four components must exist separately from each other. As such the corresponding multimedia source means decoder means output means and multimedia navigation means also need not exist separately from each other and may be combined together as is appropriate for a given embodiment of the present invention. It is also possible for content source decoders output device and or navigator to be located remotely from each other and linked together with a communication link.

As noted previously B and C are block diagrams of three exemplary systems that provide greater detail for the basic components shown in . However the present invention is not limited to any particular physical organization of the components shown in . Those of skill in the art will recognize that these basic components are subject to a wide range of embodiments including a single physical device or several physical devices. Therefore and all other figures should be viewed as exemplary of embodiments according to the present invention rather than as restrictions on the present invention s scope.

Similar to includes navigator content source audio and video decoders and output device all located at consumer system . Content source includes DVD and DVD drive . The bidirectional arrow between content source and audio and video decoders indicates that content source provides multimedia content to audio and video decoders and that audio and video decoders send commands to content source when performing filtering operations.

Navigator monitors decoders by continuously updating the time code of the multimedia content being decoded. Time codes are an example of positions used in identifying portions of multimedia content. In the case of time codes positioning is based on an elapsed playing time from the start of the content. For other applications positions may relate to physical quantities such as the length of tape moving from one spool to another in a videotape or audiotape. The present invention does not necessarily require any particular type of positioning for identifying portions of multimedia content. In one embodiment the time code updates occur every 1 10th of a second but the present invention does not require any particular update interval. The description of provides some insight regarding factors that should be considered in selecting an appropriate update interval. 

Communication between Navigator and audio and video decoders occurs through a vendor independent interface . The vendor independent interface allows navigator to use the same commands for a number of different content sources. Microsoft s DirectX is a set of application programming interfaces that provides a vendor independent interface for content sources in computer systems running a variety of Microsoft operating systems. Audio and video decoders receive commands through vendor independent interface and issue the proper commands for the specific content source

Audio and video decoders provide audio content and video content to output device . Output device includes graphics adapter video display audio adaptor and speakers . Video display may be any device capable of displaying video content regardless of format including a computer display device a television screen etc.

Usually graphics adaptors and audio adaptors provide some decoding technology so that the amount of data moving between content source and output device is minimized. Graphics adaptors and audio adaptors also provide additional processing for translating multimedia content from the intermediate processing format to a format more suitable for display and audio playback. For example many graphics adaptors offer video acceleration technology to enhance display speeds by offloading processing tasks from other system components. In the case of graphics and audio adaptors the actual transition between decoders and output device may be a somewhat fuzzy. To the extent graphics adaptor and audio adapter perform decoding portions of those adaptors may be properly construed as part of decoders

Navigator includes navigation software and object store . Bi directional arrow indicates the flow of data between navigation software and object store . Object store contains a plurality of navigation objects . Within object store navigation objects may be stored as individual files that are specific to particular multimedia content they may be stored in one or more common databases or some other data management system may be used. The present invention does not impose any limitation on how navigation objects are stored in object store

Each navigation object defines when start and stop an filtering action should occur for a particular system and provides a description of why the navigation object was created. Start and stop positions and are stored as time codes in hours minutes seconds frame format actions may be either skip or mute the description is a text field and configuration is an identifier used to determine if navigation object applies to a particular consumer system . The values indicate that the start position is 00 30 10 15 stop position is 00 30 15 00 the filtering action is skip the description is scene of bloodshed and the configuration is 2.1. More detail regarding navigation objects such as navigation object will be provided with reference to .

As navigator monitors audio and video decoders for the time code of the multimedia content currently being decoded the time code is compared to the navigation objects in object store . When the position code falls within the start and stop positions defined by a navigation object navigator activates the filtering action assigned to the navigation object. For navigation object a time code within the approximately four second range of 00 30 10 15 00 30 15 00 result in navigator issuing a command to audio and video decoders to skip to the end of the range so that the multimedia content within the range is not decoded and is not given to output device . The process of filtering multimedia content will be described in more detail with reference to A and .

As in includes a content source audio and video decoders and output device . In however object store is located at server system and all other components are located at consumer system . As shown by start stop action description and configuration the contents of navigation object remain unchanged.

Content source including DVD drive and DVD have been combined with audio and video decoders vendor independent interface and navigation software into a single device. Communication between navigation software and object store occurs over communication link . Communication link is an example of communication means and should be interpreted to include any communication link for exchanging data between computerized systems. The particular communication protocols for implementing communication link will vary from one embodiment to another. In at least a portion of communication link may include the Internet.

Output device includes a television with video input and an audio receiver with an audio input . Audio receiver is connected to speakers . As noted earlier the sophistication and complexity of output device depends on the implementation of a particular embodiment. As shown output device is relatively simple but a variety of components such as video and audio receivers amplifiers additional speakers etc. may be added without departing from the present invention. Furthermore it is not necessary that output device include both video and audio components. If multimedia content includes only audio content the video components are not needed. Likewise if the multimedia content includes only video data the audio components of output device may be eliminated.

Moving next to navigator content source audio and video decoders and output device are all present. Like includes a server remote system and a consumer system . For the embodiment shown in navigator C is located at server remote system and content source audio and video decoders and output device are located at the consumer system

Navigator includes server navigation software and object store with data being exchanged as bi directional arrow indicates. Start stop action description and configuration show that the contents of navigation object remain unchanged from navigation objects and . Content source includes DVD drive and DVD and output device includes graphics adaptor video display audio adapter and speakers . Because content source and output device are identical to the corresponding elements in their descriptions will not be repeated here.

In contrast to client navigator software had been added to audio and video decoders and vendor independent interface . Client navigator software supports communication between navigation software and vendor independent interface through communication link . In some embodiments no client navigator software will be necessary whereas in other embodiments some type of communication interface supporting communication link may be necessary. For example suppose consumer system is a personal computer server remote system is a server computer and at least a portion of communication link includes the Internet. Client navigator software may be helpful in establishing communication link and in passing information between consumer system and server remote system

Now suppose content source and audio and video decoders are combined as in a conventional DVD player. Server remote system may be embodied in a remote control unit that controls the operation of the DVD player over an infrared or other communication channel. Neither client navigator software nor vendor independent interface may be needed for this case because server remote system is capable of direct communication with the DVD player and the DVD player assumes responsibility for controlling audio and video decoders

Several exemplary methods of operation for the present invention will be described with reference to the flowcharts illustrated by A and in connection with the mocked up position codes and navigation objects presented in . shows a sample method for filtering multimedia content according to the present invention. Although A and show the method as a sequence of events the present invention is not necessarily limited to any particular ordering. Because the methods may be practiced in both consumer and server systems parentheses have been used to identify information that is usually specific to a server.

Beginning with a consumer system such as the one shown in an object store may be part of a larger data storage. For example a separate object store may exist for multimedia content stored on individual DVD titles. Because many object stores have been created at block the multimedia content title is retrieved from the content source. Alternatively a single object store may contain navigation objects corresponding to more than one DVD title. At block with the title identifier the object store and corresponding navigation objects that are specific to a particular DVD title are selected. Receive fee block will be described later with reference to a server system. At block the first navigation object for the DVD title identified at is retrieved.

Turning briefly to a navigation object is shown in the context of multimedia content. Content positions identify various positions labeled P P P P P P and P that are associated with the multimedia content. The navigation object portion of the content begins at start P and ends at stop P . Skip is the filtering action assigned to the navigation object and scene of bloodshed is a text description of the navigation object portion of the multimedia content. Configuration identifies the hardware and software configuration of a consumer system to which the navigation object applies. For example configuration may include the make model and software revisions for the consumer s computer DVD drive graphics card sound card and may further identify the DVD decoder and the consumer computer s motherboard.

The motivation behind configuration is that different consumer systems may introduce variations in how navigation objects are processed. As those variations are identified navigation objects may be customized for a particular consumer system without impacting other consumer systems. The configuration identifier may be generated according to any scheme for tracking versions of objects. In the configuration identifier includes a major and minor revision separated by a period.

Returning now to a navigation object as described above has been retrieved at block . Decision block determines whether the configuration identifier of the navigation object matches the configuration of the consumer system. Matching does not necessarily require exact equality between the configuration identifier and the consumer system. For example if major and minor revisions are used a match may only require equality of the major revision. Alternatively the configuration identifier of a navigation object may match all consumer configurations. Configuration identifiers potentially may include expressions with wildcard characters for matching one or more characters numeric operators for determining the matching conditions and the like. If no match occurs returning to block retrieves the next navigation object.

Retrieving a content identifier selecting navigation objects retrieving a navigation object and determining whether the configuration identifier matches the consumer system configuration have been enclosed within a dashed line to indicate that they are all examples of acts that may occur within a step for providing an object store having navigation objects.

With a navigation object identified the decoders begin decoding the multimedia content received from the DVD. Once decoded the content is transferred to the output device where in can be played for a consumer. While decoding the multimedia content the position code is updated continuously . The acts of decoding transferring and continuously updating the position code have been enclosed in a dashed line to indicate that they are examples of acts that are included within a step for using a decoder to determine when multimedia content is within a navigation object .

A step for filtering multimedia content includes the acts of comparing the updated position code to the navigation object identified in block to determine if the updated position code lies within the navigation object and the act of activating an filtering action when appropriate. If the updated position code is not within the navigation object decoding continues at block . But if the updated position code is within the navigation object the filtering action is activated . Following activation of the filtering action the next navigation object is retrieved at block .

Using the navigation object illustrated in the method of will be described in greater detail. The navigation object is retrieved in block and passes the configuration match test of block . After the multimedia content is decoded at block and transferred to the output device at block the position code is updated at block . Pcorresponds to the updated position code. Because Pis not within the start and stop positions and more multimedia content is decoded transferred to the output device and the position code is updated again .

The updated position code is now P. Palso marks the beginning of the navigation object portion of the multimedia content defined by the start and stop positions and of the navigation object. The video filtering action skip is activated in block . Activating the video filtering action sends a command to the decoder to discontinue decoding immediately and resume decoding at stop position . The content shown between Pand Pis skipped. Following the skip the next navigation object is retrieved at block and the acts describe above are repeated.

Abruptly discontinuing and resuming the decoding may lead to noticeable artifacts that detract from the experience intended by the multimedia content. To diminish the potential for artifacts filtering actions may be incrementally activated or separate incremental filtering action may be used. For example a fade out e.g. normal to blank display filtering action may precede a skip filtering action and a fade in e.g. blank to normal display filtering action may follow a skip filtering action. Alternatively the fading out and fading in may be included as part of the skip filtering acting itself with the start and stop positions being adjusted accordingly. The length of fade out and fade in may be set explicitly or use an appropriately determined default value. Incremental filtering actions need not be limited to a specific amount of change such as normal to blank display but rather should be interpreted to include any given change such as normal to one half intensity over some interval. Furthermore incremental filtering actions may be used to adjust virtually any characteristic of multimedia content.

Where multimedia content includes visual information being presented to a viewer it is possible that unsuitable material may be localized to only a certain physical area of the scene as it is presented. In these cases one or more navigation objects with reframe filtering actions may be appropriate. The entire scene need not be skipped because the viewing frame may be positioned to avoid showing the unsuitable material and the remaining content may be enlarged to provide a full size display. By continually adjusting the framing and sizing of multimedia content during a scene the unsuitable material is effectively cropped from view.

Each reframe navigation object is capable of performing a number of reframe resize actions including the ability to reframe and resize on a frame by frame basis. Therefore the number of reframe navigation objects used in cropping a particular scene depends on a variety of factors including how the scene changes with time. A single navigation object may be sufficient to filter a relatively static scene whereas more dynamic scenes will likely require multiple navigation objects. For example one navigation object may be adequate to reframe a scene showing an essentially static full body view of a person with a severe leg wound to a scene that includes only the person s head and torso. However for more dynamic scenes such as a scene where the person with the severe leg wound is involved in a violent struggle or altercation with another person multiple reframe navigation objects may be required for improved results.

Positions P P P P P P and Pare separated by the update interval. Those of skill in the art will recognize that a shorter update interval will allow for more precise filtering. For example if start were shortly after position P multimedia decoding and output would continue until position P showing nearly of the multimedia content that was to be filtered. With an update interval occurring ten times each second only a minimal amount of multimedia content that should be filtered e.g. less than 1 10th of a second will be displayed at the output device. As has been implied by the description of configuration identifier it is reasonable to expect some variability in consumer systems and the invention should not be interpreted as requiring exact precision in filtering multimedia content. Variations on the order of a few seconds may be tolerated and accounted for by expanding the portion of content defined by a navigation object although the variations will reduce the quality of filtering as perceived by a consumer because scenes may be terminated prior to being completely displayed.

The differences enclosed in parentheses for server operation are relatively minor and those of skill in the art will recognize that a consumer and server may cooperate each performing a portion of the processing that is needed. provides an exemplary system where processing is shared between a server system and a consumer system. Nevertheless the following will describe the processing as it would occur at a server system similar to the one shown in but with only the output device located at the consumer system.

At block the server receives the DVD title identifier so that the proper navigation objects can be selected in block . The server receives a fee from the consumer system in block for allowing the consumer system access to the navigation objects. The fee may be a subscription for a particular time period a specific number of accesses etc. The first navigation object for the DVD title identified at is retrieved in block and checked for a configuration match in block . Because the configuration match is checked at the server the consumer system supplies its configuration information or identifier. As described above receiving a content identifier selecting navigation objects receiving a fee retrieving a navigation object and determining whether the configuration identifier matches the consumer system configuration have been enclosed within a dashed line to indicate that they are all examples of acts that may occur within a step for the server system providing an object store having navigation objects.

Decoding the multimedia content may occur at either the consumer system or the server system. However sending decoded multimedia from a server system to a consumer system requires substantial communication bandwidth. At block the multimedia content is transferred to the output device. The server system then queries the client system decoder to update the position code. Alternatively if the decoding occurred at the server system the position code may be updated without making a request to the consumer system. The acts of decoding transferring and continuously updating or querying for the position code have been enclosed in a dashed line to indicate that they are examples of acts that are included within a step for the server system using a decoder to determine when multimedia content is within a navigation object .

The server system performing a step for filtering multimedia content includes the acts of i comparing the updated position code to the navigation object identified in block to determine if the updated position code lies within the navigation object and ii activating or sending an filtering action at the proper time. Decoding continues at block for updated position codes that are not within the navigation object. Otherwise the filtering action is activated or sent for updated position codes within the navigation object. Activating occurs when the decoder is located at the consumer system but if the decoder is located at the consumer system the filtering action must be sent to the consumer system for processing. The next navigation object is retrieved at block following activation of the filtering action and processing continues as described above. The analysis of will not be repeated for a server system because the server operation is substantially identical to the description provided above for a consumer system.

Decision block determines if an updated or queried position code is within the navigation object identified in blocks and . If so decision block determines whether or not an filtering action is active. For portions of multimedia content within a navigation object where the filtering action is active or has been sent in the case of server systems decoding can continue at block . If the filtering action is not active or has not been sent block activates or sends the filtering action and then continues decoding at block .

If decision block determines that the updated or queried position code is not within the navigation object decision block determines whether or not an filtering action is active or has been sent. If no filtering action is active or has been sent decoding continues at block . However if an filtering action has been activated or sent and the updated position code is no longer within the navigation object block activates or sends and end action and continues by identifying the next navigation object in blocks and .

In general some filtering may be accomplished with one action like the video action of while others require ongoing actions like the audio action of . The mocked up position codes and audio navigation object shown in help explain the differences between single action filtering of multimedia content and continuous or ongoing filtering of multimedia content. Content positions identify various positions labeled P P P P P P and P that are associated with the multimedia content. The navigation object portion of the content begins at start P and ends at stop P . Mute is the filtering action assigned to the navigation object and F word is a text description of the navigation object portion of the multimedia content. Like configuration of configuration identifies the hardware and software configuration of a consumer system to which the navigation object applies.

After the multimedia content is decoded at block and transferred to the output device at block the position code is updated at block . Pcorresponds to the updated position code. Because Pis not within the start position and stop position and no filtering action is active or sent more multimedia content is decoded transferred to the output device and the position code is updated again .

The updated position code is now P. Palso marks the beginning of the navigation object portion of the multimedia content defined by the start and stop positions and of the navigation object as determined in decision block . Because not action is active or sent decision block continues by activating or sending the filtering action assigned to the navigation object to mute audio content and once again content is decoded transferred to the output device and the position code is updated or queried .

Muting in its most simple form involves setting the volume level of the audio content to be inaudible. Therefore a mute command may be sent to the output device without using the decoders. Alternatively a mute command sent to the decoder may eliminate or suppress the audio content. Those of skill in the art will recognize that audio content may include one or more channels and that muting may apply to one or more of those channels.

Now the updated or queried position code is P. Decision block determines that the updated or queried position code is within the navigation object but an filtering action is active or has been sent so block decodes content block transfers content to the output device and block updates or queries the position code. The audio content continues to be decoded and the muting action continues to be activated.

At this point the updated or queried position code is P. Now decision block determines that the updated or queried position code is no longer within the navigation object but decision block indicates that the muting action is active or has been sent. Block activates or sends and end action to end the muting of the audio content and the decoding continues at block . For DVD content the result would be that the video content is played at the output device but the portion of the audio content containing an obscenity as defined by the navigation object is filtered out and not played at the output device.

Abruptly altering multimedia content may lead to noticeable artifacts that detract from the experience intended by the multimedia content. To diminish the potential for artifacts filtering actions may be incrementally activated or separate incremental filtering action may be used. For example a fade out e.g. normal to no volume filtering action may precede a mute filtering action and a fade in e.g. no volume to normal filtering action may follow a mute filtering action. Alternatively the fading out and fading in may be included as part of the mute filtering acting itself with the start and stop positions being adjusted accordingly. The length of fade out and fade in may be set explicitly or use an appropriately determined default value. Incremental filtering actions are not limited to any particular amount of change such as normal to no volume but rather should be interpreted to include any change such as normal to one half volume over some interval. Furthermore incremental filtering actions may adjust virtually any characteristic of multimedia content.

Like the method shown in the method shown in may be practiced at both client systems and server system. However the methods will not be described in a server system because the distinctions between a consumer system and a server system have been adequately identified in the description of .

Navigation objects may be disabled by including an indication within the navigation objects that they should not be part of the filtering process. The act of retrieving navigation objects as shown in blocks and of may ignore navigation objects that have been marked as disabled so they are not retrieved. Alternatively a separate act could be performed to eliminate disabled navigation objects from being used in filtering multimedia content.

The acts of receiving a password displaying or sending a representation of the navigation objects receiving a response identifying navigation objects to disable and disabling navigation objects have been enclosed in a dashed line to indicate that they are examples of acts that are included within a step for deactivating navigation objects . As with the exemplary methods previously described deactivating navigation objects may be practiced in either a consumer system or a server system.

In the step for charging for access to the navigation objects block identifies the act of determining if a user has an established account. For example if a user is a current subscriber then no charge occurs. Alternatively the charge could be taken from a prepaid account without prompting the user not shown . If no established account exists the user is prompted for the fee such as entering a credit card number or some other form of electronic currency at block and the fee is received at block . A step for providing navigation objects follows that includes the act of retrieving the navigation objects and sending the navigation objects to the consumer system . The act of downloading free navigation software that makes use of the navigation objects also may be included an inducement for the fee based service of accessing navigation objects.

The present invention may be embodied in other specific forms without departing from its spirit or essential characteristics. The described embodiments are to be considered in all respects only as illustrative and not restrictive. The scope of the invention is therefore indicated by the appended claims rather than by the foregoing description. All changes which come within the meaning and range of equivalency of the claims are to be embraced within their scope.

