---

title: Active micromixer using surface acoustic wave streaming
abstract: An active micromixer uses a surface acoustic wave, preferably a Rayleigh wave, propagating on a piezoelectric substrate to induce acoustic streaming in a fluid in a microfluidic channel. The surface acoustic wave can be generated by applying an RF excitation signal to at least one interdigital transducer on the piezoelectric substrate. The active micromixer can rapidly mix quiescent fluids or laminar streams in low Reynolds number flows. The active micromixer has no moving parts (other than the SAW transducer) and is, therefore, more reliable, less damaging to sensitive fluids, and less susceptible to fouling and channel clogging than other types of active and passive micromixers. The active micromixer is adaptable to a wide range of geometries, can be easily fabricated, and can be integrated in a microfluidic system, reducing dead volume. Finally, the active micromixer has on-demand on/off mixing capability and can be operated at low power.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07942568&OS=07942568&RS=07942568
owner: Sandia Corporation
number: 07942568
owner_city: Albuquerque
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050617
---
This invention was made with Government support under contract no. DE AC04 94AL85000 awarded by the U.S. Department of Energy to Sandia Corporation. The Government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to fluid mixing in microfluidic devices and in particular to a micromixer that actively mixes fluids using surface acoustic wave induced acoustic streaming.

Microfluidic devices control and manipulate fluid flows with length scales less than about one millimeter and fluid volumes of less than about a microliter. Microfluidic systems are now in widespread use for a host of applications including biochemical analysis drug screening biosensors chemical reactions cell sorting sequencing of nucleic acids and transport of small volumes of materials. Many of these applications require efficient mixing of biological materials and chemical reagents for the necessary reactions to occur. For these applications rapid homogenization of two fluid streams in a minimal amount of space is generally highly desirable.

When the dimensions are several hundred micrometers or less pressure flows are laminar and uniaxial. The Reynolds number i.e. the ratio of inertial to viscous forces is small on the order of unity and mixing is purely diffusive. For this reason a molecular diffusion based mixing process can take tens of seconds up to several minutes. Moreover the mixing time in solutions containing complex biomolecules or other large particles can increase to hours as compared to simple proteins. Even at the scale of microchannels diffusion based mixing is slow compared to convection of material along the channel as described by the Peclet number i.e. the ratio of convective to diffusive transport typically greater than one hundred . For example in water flowing at a velocity of about 1 cm sec in a 100 m wide channel mixing lengths can be up to tens of centimeters. These mixing times and lengths are far too long for practical portable microfluidic systems especially when large particles are to be mixed.

To improve mixing efficacy and homogenization of fluid streams in a microchannel rapid folding and stretching of the fluid is essential to reduce the mixing time. Rapid stretching and folding of the fluid can be accomplished by using passive or active mixing methods. Passive micromixers rely on forcing liquids through static geometries to fold and stretch the fluid thereby increasing the interfacial area between adjacent fluid streams. Multiple stage laminations and flow splitting have been used to increase dramatically the interfacial area. See J. Branebjerg et al. Fast mixing by lamination San Diego Calif. 1996 and N. Schwesinger et al. A modular microfluid system with an integrated micromixer 6 99 1996 . Recently chaotic advection using complicated three dimensional serpentine twisted channels has been used to achieve seemingly random and chaotic particle trajectories within fluid channels. See R. H. Liu et al. Passive mixing in a three dimensional serpentine microchannel 9 190 2000 D. J. Beebe et al. Passive mixing in microchannels Fabrication and flow experiments 2 343 2001 and R. A. Vijayendran et al. Evaluation of a three dimensional micromixer in a surface based biosensor 19 1824 2003 . However to date such passive micromixers lack efficiency at low Reynolds number. More recently a passive micromixer using bas relief features has been demonstrated to provide efficacious mixing even at low Reynolds number. See A. D. Stroock et al. Chaotic mixer for microchannels 295 647 2002 . The bas relief structure was used to generate transverse flows in the microchannel such that liquid streams twisted over one another. However a significant disadvantage is that in order to generate the chaotic advection required for mixing complex three dimensional microstructures must be fabricated. Further these meandering paths and complex flow structures can generate dead volume. Such dead volumes can cause sample loss decreased throughput increased detection time and can easily foul when using complex solutions. Moreover passive mixing methods require fluid flow for mixing to occur.

Active micromixers rely on internal mixing forces within a fluid carrying channel typically using moving parts. Active micromixers can be driven for example by pressure temperature electrohydrodynamic dielectrophoretic electrokinetic magnetohydrodynamic or ultrasonic actuators. Active micromixers can have greater mixing efficacy than passive micromixers especially for flows at low Reynolds number. Further the mixing can be switched on and off as desired and can be done in the absence of fluid flow. This assures that the chemical reaction time is faster than the residence time in the microchannel. However active micromixers require an external power source and the integration of active mixers in microfluidic systems can also be challenging requiring complicated actuation structures and costly and complex fabrication processes.

It is well known that ultrasonic actuation can significantly influence the pressure variation within fluids. Acoustic pressure variation can be large enough to cause cavitation where the pressure forces exceed the intermolecular cohesion forces. Though bubble formation and collapse can induce mixing a secondary mechanism exists when the acoustic energy is dissipated by viscous stress. The nonlinear hydrodynamic coupling of high amplitude sound waves with the dissipative fluid medium creates an acoustic pressure gradient within the fluid. This large nonlinear gradient results in a steady fluid flow in a process known as quartz wind or acoustic streaming.

Active micromixers based on acoustic streaming have produced liquid oscillations using thickness mode resonances in zinc oxide ZnO induced ultrasonic vibration of thin silicon membranes to actively mix fluids using lead zirconate titanate PZT and moved liquid droplets using 128 Y cut X propagating lithium niobate 128 YX LiNbO . Typically these micromixers use transducer disks attached to the exterior of a fluidic channel to convert radio frequency electrical energy into an ultrasonic acoustic wave normal to the disk. See X. Zhu and E. S. Kim Microfluidic motion generation with acoustic waves 66 355 1998 Z. Yang et al. Ultrasonic micromixer for microfluidic systems 93 266 2001 and G. G. Yaralioglu et al. Ultrasonic Mixing in Microfluidic Channels Using Integrated Transducers 76 3694 2004 .

Acoustic streaming can also be generated by a surface acoustic wave SAW device. A Rayleigh wave can readily radiate longitudinal waves into a fluid when the SAW propagation surface is in contact with the fluid. The SAW streaming force resulting from a leaky Rayleigh wave can be much greater than other types of acoustic streaming forces such as attenuated plane waves traveling in a bulk liquid. However early studies that used 128 YX LiNbOto perturb fluids only considered acoustic wave streaming in open systems and did not use the streaming force for fluid mixing in closed channels. See T. Uchida et al. Investigation of Acoustic Streaming Excited by Surface Acoustic Waves 1995 1081 1995 K. Miyamoto et al. Nonlinear vibration of liquid droplets by surface acoustic wave excitation 41 3465 2002 and S. Shiokawa and Y. Matsui The Dynamics of SAW Streaming and its Application to Fluid Devices 360 53 1995 all of which are incorporated herein by reference.

Therefore a need still exists for an efficient active micromixer based on SAW streaming that can be integrated in a closed microfluidic system.

The present invention is directed to an active micromixer comprising a piezoelectric substrate having a surface at least one interdigital transducer on the surface of the substrate a microfluidic channel containing a fluid acoustically coupled to the surface of the substrate and an RF signal generator for exciting the at least one interdigital transducer and generating a SAW that propagates on the surface of the substrate to the channel and couples energy into the fluid in an active mixing region of the channel.

The piezoelectric substrate can a crystal plate such as 128 YX LiNbO 36 YX LiTaO crystalline quartz zinc oxide or aluminum nitride. The at least one interdigital transducer can comprise two opposing interdigital transducers to contra propagate acoustic waves along the free surface of the substrate to the fluid interface. The interdigital transducer can be unfocused or focused using structures such as waveguides and acoustic horns to concentrate the acoustic field at the active mixing region of the channel.

The energy coupling of the SAW induces acoustic streaming in the fluid thereby actively mixing the fluid streams. The SAW is preferably a Rayleigh wave that couples strongly to the fluid. Active mixing using acoustic streaming has a number of advantages over other types of active micromixers. The steaming based active micromixer has improved efficiency and improved reliability since it has no moving parts. Further the lack of a mechanical actuator may be less damaging to biological molecules in the fluids. The lack of mechanical contact with the fluid prevents the micromixer from being susceptible to biofouling and channel clogging and can be used to remove non specifically bound materials from surfaces. The surface acoustic wave transducer can couple to the fluid directly or remotely through the walls of the channel. Further the active micromixer is adaptable to a wide range of geometries can be easily fabricated and can be integrated in a microfluidic system reducing dead volume. Further the active micromixer has on demand on off mixing capability and can be operated at low power. The SAW based active micromixer is particularly useful in fluidic applications in which the Reynolds number is small.

The active micromixer of the present invention comprises a SAW transducer integrated with a microfluidic channel to enable mixing of fluid in the channel by SAW streaming. In is shown a schematic top view of an exemplary SAW based active micromixer of the present invention. The active micromixer is built on a piezoelectric substrate . When a radio frequency RF voltage is applied to the SAW transducer a SAW is generated on the surface of the substrate . Therefore electric energy of an RF voltage source is transduced into the mechanical energy of the SAW . The SAW propagates on the free surface of the substrate to the microfluidic channel where the mechanical energy of the acoustic wave is dissipated in a fluid contained in the channel . The lateral width or acoustic aperture of the propagating SAW defines an active mixing region within the channel . The fluid can be quiescent or flowing. For example fluid flowing from two or more input fluid streams and can enter the microfluidic channel e.g. a Y junction channel upstream from the active mixing region . When flow in the microfluidic channel is laminar mixing across the joined adjacent fluid streams and upstream from the active mixing region is diffusive and very slow. However when the adjacent streams and enter the active mixing region they are mixed by rapid folding and stretching of the fluid by SAW streaming resulting in a mixed fluid stream downstream from the active mixing region .

The substrate can be a precisely oriented piezoelectric crystal plate that can generate a SAW having an out of plane component. The SAW is preferably a Rayleigh wave that has a strong normal displacement. However other types of surface waves with weaker out of plane components such as impure shear waves can also be generated. For example the crystal plate can comprise ST quartz zinc oxide ZnO aluminum nitride AlN lithium niobate LiNbO or lithium tantalate LiTaO . The electromagnetic coupling coefficient K is a measure of the efficiency of the piezoelectric material in converting an applied electrical signal into mechanical energy of the SAW. Preferably the substrate comprises a strong piezoelectric material such as 128 YX LiNbO which has a large electromechanical coupling coefficient. The electromechanical coupling coefficient for 128 YX LiNbO K 5.5 is much larger than quartz ZnO or AlN i.e. K 0.16 1.1 and 0.4 respectively which also generate Rayleigh waves. The substrate can comprise a piezoelectric optical material. For example a LiNbOsubstrate enables the combination of fluidic handling surface cleaning and optical detection using total internal reflection fluorescence.

Alternatively since the SAW propagates along the surface the substrate can comprise a thin piezoelectric crystal layer that is thicker than the SAW penetration depth i.e. greater than a few acoustic wavelength thickness on a rigid nonpiezoelectric substrate. For example the substrate can comprise a thin film of AlN ZnO or LiNbOon a glass or semiconductor substrate. These materials can be deposited by sputtering or sol gel methods. Alternatively the surface of the substrate can comprise a piezoelectric portion and a nonpiezoelectric but elastic portion. The SAW can be generated on the piezoelectric portion of the surface and can propagate on the nonpiezoelectric portion of the surface to the channel.

The SAW can be generated by a transducer comprising at least one interdigital transducer IDT on the surface of the piezoelectric substrate . An IDT comprises a fingerlike periodic pattern of parallel in plane electrodes and . Adjacent fingers from the opposing electrodes and form finger pairs. The spatial periodicity or spatial wavelength of the IDT is the distance between the centerlines of adjacent finger pairs. When a RF drive voltage is applied to contact pads and a spatially periodic surface concentrated electric field distribution is established between the spatially periodic electrode fingers that penetrates into the piezoelectric substrate . Because of the piezoelectric coupling an elastic strain distribution with periodicity is created in the substrate thereby generating the SAW . To generate the correct surface wave the proper axis of the piezoelectric crystal is preferably aligned with the IDT . The strength of the outputted SAW can be controlled by changing the overlap of the electrodes number of finger pairs their periodicity the finger pattern and the power input. Other IDT geometries can be used to minimize phase distortion insertion loss control bandwidth etc. For example the finger pattern can comprise a split finger geometry wherein each finger is split into two finger electrodes i.e. with four fingers per period rather than two as with the single finger electrode geometry . This split finger geometry has been shown to minimize interelectrode reflections of the acoustic wave within the IDT structure. See D. Royer and E. Dieulesaint Springer 2000 and C. K. Campbell Academic Press 1998 .

The SAW transducer is most efficient when the excitation frequency of the RF source is such that the physical spacing between alternate finger pairs of the IDT corresponds to the wavelength of the SAW i.e. at the synchronous frequency . Typically a SAW transducer can operate at a frequency that is about 10 to 100 times higher than a bulk acoustic wave resonator. Therefore the SAW frequency can be approximately 20 MHz to 1 GHz or higher. The acoustic wavelength of the SAW is inversely related to the frequency by the velocity in the piezoelectric material. The SAW velocity depends on the elasticity density and piezoelectric properties for a particular crystal cut and orientation. SAW velocities are typically about five orders of magnitude smaller than those of electromagnetic waves. Therefore acoustic wavelengths are typically 2 100 m.

Preferably the active micromixer comprises two opposing IDTs to provide a dual excitation as shown . Together the transducers generate two contra propagating SAWs that irradiate the central microfluidic channel from opposite sides. However since each IDT typically generates bidirectional SAWs that propagate symmetrically in opposite directions acoustic reflectors not shown can be fabricated at each end of the substrate to reflect the outwardly propagating surface waves and thereby reinforce the inwardly propagating SAWs . Various grating structures are known to provide efficient acoustic reflectors. These reflection grating structures include shallow grooves etched into the surface or open circuited or short circuited thin film metal strips deposited on the substrate surface. Asymmetries can also be created within the IDT structure itself to make the transducer more unidirectional. Alternatively acoustically lossy terminations not shown can be fabricated at each end of the substrate to absorb the outwardly propagating surface waves.

The overlap of the finger electrodes defines an acoustic aperture or effective width of the SAW beam exiting the IDT . For large acoustic apertures i.e. widths much greater than the acoustic wavelength beam spreading due to diffractive effects can be ignored and the length of the active mixing region will be approximately equal to the acoustic aperture of the exiting beam.

Alternatively the IDT can be a focusing IDT to compress the SAW beamwidth and concentrate the acoustic field at the active mixing region or for coupling into an acoustic waveguide. Increasing the acoustic power density can be especially beneficial for rapid mixing in localized regions. The focusing IDT can use curved metal fingers to generate a converging SAW having a certain aperture angle. Preferably the finger shape follows lines of constant SAW group velocity which can be calculated taking into account the anisotropy of the piezoelectric crystal. See M. G. Cohen Optical Study of Ultrasonic Diffraction and Focusing in Anisotropic Media 38 10 3821 1967 and S. R. Fang et al. SAW Focusing by Circular Arc Interdigital Transducers on YZ LiNbO36 2 178 1989 which are incorporated herein by reference.

A waveguide can also be used to focus or bend the SAW beam control beam spreading or define the acoustic aperture of the beam. An acoustic waveguide is a geometric structure that confines the lateral extent of the acoustic wave and binds the wave to the guide. An acoustic wave can be bound by a waveguide having a central waveguiding region that is slower than an outer cladding region. Because the acoustic wave travels slower in the central region it is pulled in laterally to the central region similar to a refractive index guided optical wave. Such waveguides may be especially useful for integrated microfluidic devices to enable efficient use of the substrate area and increase functionality and performance of the device.

SAW waveguides are primarily of two types. Overlay waveguides can comprise a strip of slower material e.g. a metallic film that is deposited on top of the central waveguiding region of the piezoelectric substrate. Another type of overlay waveguide is the slot waveguide wherein the substrate is coated with a faster material except for an open slot over the central region. Alternatively the waveguide can be a topographic waveguide comprising a raised rectangular ridge or wedge that provides a central guiding region alternatively the ridge can be defined by lateral grooves formed in the substrate . Such ridge waveguides can provide strong confinement of a SAW beam permitting relatively sharp bends or strong focusing of the SAW without excessive radiation leakage. The strength of the confinement is a function of the acoustic frequency and can be controlled by the aspect ratio and geometry of the ridge.

The waveguide can be tapered to provide an acoustic horn that compresses the beam width of the propagating SAW. In is shown a schematic top view of the exemplary SAW based active micromixer that further comprises an acoustic horn . The acoustic horn compresses the Rayleigh SAW to provide a concentrated acoustic field at the active mixing region of the channel . By using the acoustic horn the acoustic power density can be greatly increased by lateral field confinement. As with the focusing IDT such acoustic wave amplification may be especially beneficial for improving the efficacy of active mixing using SAW streaming.

In is shown a schematic side sectional view of the exemplary active micromixer . A Rayleigh SAW generated by an IDT propagates along the free surface of the piezoelectric substrate to the channel . A Rayleigh SAW mode has a displacement normal to the surface and comprises a retrograde elliptical motion along the wave propagation direction. When the propagating Rayleigh SAW reaches a solid liquid boundary this normal displacement can radiate into the fluid and the Rayleigh wave becomes leaky.

Also shown in is an exploded side view of the active mixing region . The leaky Raleigh SAW radiates a longitudinal wave into the fluid at the Rayleigh angle given by the acoustic law of refraction i.e. is equal to the arc sin of the wave velocity in the liquid divided by the wave velocity in the solid . For a 128 YX LiNbORayleigh wave converting to a longitudinal wave in water the Rayleigh angle is about 23 to the surface normal. The leaky Rayleigh wave decays along the propagation path where the piezoelectric surface is in contact with the fluid . Therefore the leaky Rayleigh SAW converts to the longitudinal wave within several acoustic wavelengths on the solid surface. Typically the SAW frequency is chosen such that at least one wavelength exists within the width of the microfluidic channel . Additionally the wavelength can be chosen to be larger than particles in the fluid such as biological cells to minimize disruption. For example the acoustic velocity of a Rayleigh SAW in 128 YX LiNbOis 3994 m sec. Therefore for a SAW frequency of 90 MHz the acoustic wavelength is about 44 m.

If the longitudinal wave has a high enough intensity acoustic streaming is induced in the fluid resulting in efficient folding and stretching of the fluid in the channel . The acoustic attenuation depends on the viscosity and density of the fluid at the SAW frequency. The acoustic streaming force scales as the frequency squared attenuation cubed displacement squared and as the wavenumber in the fluid. Therefore the acoustic streaming force is highly dependent on viscous losses in the fluid. In particular SAW streaming can induce large gradients in the fluid because the effective radiation lost to the fluid is generated by the unique boundary conditions at the interface. Indeed Shiokawa et al. have estimated that the streaming force can typically be 10stronger for SAW streaming compared to a bulk wave at the same operating frequency in water. Thus streaming flow and therefore mixing can be generated with a relatively small SAW power. Indeed at higher power levels fluidic samples can be vaporized enabling gas phase detection of for example biological agents.

The microfluidic channel can be fabricated on the top surface of the substrate. The microchannel structure can comprise a rigid material such as plastic glass or a silicon based material to minimize acoustic loss. The microchannel can be bonded to the surface of the substrate . Alternatively a thin gasket of a soft acoustic material can be used to fluidically seal the microchannel to the surface and minimize acoustic attenuation at the interface. Alternatively the microfluidic channel can be recessed beneath a thin piezoelectric crystal surface layer or be otherwise acoustically coupled to the surface of the substrate . The width of the microchannel can preferably be less than ten acoustic wavelengths and more preferably on the order of the SAW wavelength. The height of the microchannel is preferably comparable to the acoustic attenuation length in the fluid and depends on the excited wavelength for optimal propagation distance. For example the height can preferably be less than ten acoustic wavelengths in the fluid and more preferably less than a few acoustic wavelengths. Efficient mixing can be obtained by aligning the microfluidic channel perpendicular to the SAW propagation direction. Alternatively the microfluidic channel can be aligned at various angles with the SAW propagation direction including along or opposed to the direction of fluid flow.

Two SAW based active micromixers where fabricated and their performances were evaluated. The first had bidirectional double split finger IDTs of the type shown in and the second had bidirectional double split finger IDTs with acoustic horns of the type shown in . Each acoustic horn compressed the Rayleigh SAW by a factor of four to facilitate localized mixing within the microfluidic channels. Grating reflectors were used to minimize loss from the bidirectional IDTs. The IDTs were fabricated by a photolithographic process on the surface of a 128 YX LiNbOpiezoelectric substrate. The active mixing region was centered between the opposed IDTs. Microchannels were fabricated with dimensions required to produce Reynolds numbers less than two for highly laminar flow conditions. Fluorescence microscopy was used to actively monitor two separate flow streams as each passed through the active mixing region to assess mixing efficacy. Micro particle velicometry PIV was used to map the fluid velocity within this region. Fluid velocity was measured as a function of the power delivered to the micromixer to determine optimal operating conditions.

The SAW transducers were fabricated using single side polished 128 YX LiNbO Crystal Technology Inc. Palo Alto Calif. wafers as the piezoelectric substrate. A lift off procedure was used to pattern the IDTs and reflectors. A 100 titanium Ti adhesive layer was first deposited on the LiNbOwafers using an e beam evaporator. A 900 gold layer was then deposited on the Ti film by resistive evaporation. Each IDT consisted of 56 finger pairs with an acoustic aperture of 38 and a metallization ratio of 0.5. The center to center separation of the opposed IDTs was 120. The IDTs supported Rayleigh waves with a center frequency of 90 MHz having an insertion loss ranging from 7 to 10 dB. At this frequency the acoustic wavelength was about 44 m.

The acoustic horns were designed to provide a four fold increase the acoustic power density at the operating frequency of 90 MHz. Each acoustic horn had an input aperture of about 500 m and tapered at less than the confinement angle to a 125 m wide stripline that propagated the SAW beam to the active mixing region. Each acoustic horn and stripline were of the overlay waveguide type and comprised a 900 gold layer deposited an adhesion layer on top of the central waveguiding region of the LiNbOsubstrate.

In is shown a schematic illustration of an RF voltage source that was used to simultaneously drive the SAW transducers of the active micromixer . The RF voltage source comprised an RF signal generator HP 8656 Agilent Technologies Palo Alto Calif. . The signal was amplified with a 20W RF power amplifier ENI 420LA Bell Electronics Kent Wash. and split using a 50 power divider . The amplified signal provided power to both IDTs simultaneously during the mixing experiments. Output power was controlled by varying the input signal level of the RF signal generator through software control. To account for transmission losses in the experimental setup the overall system gain was measured using a vector voltmeter HP 8508 Agilent Technologies Palo Alto Calif. . The actual acoustic power delivered to the SAW transducers was determined by measuring the return electrical loss of each transducer. Therefore the electric to acoustic power transfer function or insertion loss could be determined.

Two different Y junction microfluidic channels comprising either PDMS or polycarbonate were fabricated. The PDMS microchannel was used for rapid prototyping and to measure mixing efficacy using fluorescence microscopy. The polycarbonate microchannel was used for detailed particle velocity mapping using PIV. Both channels provided low Reynolds numbers Re

In is shown a photograph of a PDMS microchannel bonded to a 128 XY LiNbOsubstrate. A silicon mold was etched with a width height and length of 50 m 110 m and 4 mm respectively. PDMS was poured into the silicon mold to create the Y junction microchannel. The PDMS microchannel was cast using a 1 10 wt wt mixture of Sylgard silicone and silicone elastomer 184 Dow Corning Corporation . Fluidic connections were cast directly into the PDMS using silicone rubber tubing and a fixture to hold the tubing in place. The PDMS microfluidic channel was attached to the LiNbOsubstrate by heating the substrate to 90 C. followed by immediate contact. The PDMS microchannel was aligned with the IDTs to mate with the center of the active mixing region.

The mixing efficacy of two fluid streams was measured using an active micromixer of the type shown in . The active micromixer comprised bidirectional double split finger IDTs of the type shown in and a Y junction microchannel fabricated in PDMS. The SAW transducer had an acoustic aperture of 1.7 mm. The volumetric flow rate was 10 l min providing a Reynolds number of 2.0 in the PDMS microchannel. The average flow velocity was about 3.1 cm sec. Therefore the residence time in the active mixing region was about 0.13 sec.

The mixing efficacy was evaluated using the fluorescent dye Alexa 488. This dye is insensitive to pH between pH 4 and 10 and has superior quantum yield to fluorescein dyes. Since inks and dyes do not show any chemical reaction when mixed proportional mixing can be observed within the microchannel. The micromixer was mounted in a fixture containing test probes AlphaTest HELIX AlphaTest Corporation Mesa Ariz. . The fixture was positioned on the stage of an optical microscope Olympus IX 70 Olympus America Melville N.Y. . The emission at 535 nm was selected using an Alexa 488 filter Chroma Scientific Rockingham Vt. . One input fluid stream contained a 100 mM PBS buffer pH 7.4 and the second had 250 g mlprotein A Sigma St. Louis Mo. conjugated with Alexa 488 dye Molecular Probes Inc. Eugene Oreg. dissolved in 100 mM PBS buffer pH 7.4. The two streams were introduced from syringes connected by PMMA tubing attached to the silicone rubber tubing connectors on the PDMS microchannels. A syringe pump PHD 2000 Harvard Apparatus Inc. Holliston Mass. was used to control the volumetric flow rate.

The mixing efficacy was quantified by measuring the fluorescence intensity of the protein A labeled with Alexa 488 across the cross section of the active mixing region of the PDMS microchannel. Video images captured with a 12 bit CCD camera Retiga 1300 Qlmaging Burnaby B.C. Canada were converted into sequential 640 480 TIFF formatted images. The fluorescent images were converted into a three slice RGB stack using the green slice to build a monotone spectrum. Color index ranged from 255 for black to 0 for green. The spatial temporal variation of color in the PDMS microchannel was analyzed using an image processing toolbox. The 12 bit images were processed by determining the color index for sets of pixels in the captured images. All microchannels were imaged at the midpoint i.e. h 2 55 m depth of field.

To determine the mixing efficacy the mixing index was computed 1 mm downstream from the active mixing region in the microchannel. The fluorescence variation in a region of uniform fluid flow in was used to estimate the noise floor . Using the estimated noise floor the normalized fluorescent background variation was calculated to be about 0.10. Therefore complete mixing is indicated when a 0.10.

In are shown plots of the mixing index sampled along the length of the microchannel in the presence and absence of acoustic excitation for laminar flow conditions. In the absence of active mixing the mixing index remained well above 0.50 throughout the entire cross section of the microchannel. With acoustic excitation the mixing index decreased to about 0.05 and was equal or below the noise floor throughout the entire microchannel. Therefore a high degree of homogenization can be achieved in less than 1 second with the active micromixer of the present invention.

The mixing index was also determined using bidirectional double split finger IDTs with acoustic horns of the type shown in . Each acoustic horn had an aperture of 500 m and compressed the SAW beam width to 125 m giving a four fold increase in power density. When using the acoustic horns only 20 mW of RF power was required to achieve similar mixing results as those without the horn. Although the active mixing region was only 125 m in width with the horns homogeneous mixing i.e. 

The acoustic loss to a microchannel fabricated entirely from PDMS can result in significant attenuation of the incident Rayleigh SAW before it can couple to the fluid. Therefore a polycarbonate microfluidic channel was fabricated to minimize the contact area of the PDMS gasket with the LiNbOsubstrate. In is shown a photograph of a polycarbonate microchannel sealed to a 128 XY LiNbOsubstrate using a PDMS gasket. The polycarbonate microchannel also enabled improved optical access to the fluid in the active mixing region. The polycarbonate microchannel had a width height and length of 750 m 510 m and 7.6 mm respectively. Micro particle velicometry was used to characterize flow in the polycarbonate microchannel during active mixing using the bidirectional double split finger IDTs without acoustic horns. PIV is a velocity measurement technique that extracts instantaneous two dimensional fluid velocity information from within microfluidic devices by tracking the motion of small fluorescent tracer particles. The particle velocity data was used to estimate the local acoustic streaming force. The technique is capable of 1 micron resolution in plane and 2 3 micron resolution out of plane.

In is shown a schematic illustration of the PIV image capturing system . The active micromixer of the type shown in was placed above the objective of an epi fluorescent microscope . Short wavelength 532 nm excitation light from an Nd YAG laser was expanded by a beam expander reflected off a dichroic epi fluorescent filter cube and entered the microscope through an aperture. This illumination technique required that only one side of the active micromixer to be optically accessible. The excitation light was focused onto a portion of the active mixing region by the imaging objective illuminating the entire height of the fluid in the channel. Small micrometer sized fluorescent microspheres were used as tracer particles in the PIV experiments. These microspheres had a small particle size to avoid perturbing the flow and enabling rapid assessment of particle trajectory. The fluorescent microspheres d 1 m Duke Scientific Palo Alto Calif. had an excitation peak at 532 nm and an emission peak from 550 570 nm. The longer wavelength emitted light from the particles as well as scattered and reflected laser light was filtered through the filter cube reflected off a mirror and imaged onto a CCD camera . The 12 bit 1300 1300 CCD camera was capable of capturing two frames within 200 ns. Images were processed using a single pass cross correlation technique having non overlapping 32 32 pixel windows to obtain the velocity field and acoustic streaming force data.

The particle velocities due to active mixing alone were obtained at two dimensional slices in the z plane of the microchannel in the absence of external fluid flow. The active mixing region i.e. the acoustic excitation region was 1.7 mm in length and centered at 1 mm downstream from the Y junction. In are shown local velocity slices for two different heights and three different power levels in the microchannel. Slices were imaged in a plane parallel to the surface of the LiNbOsubstrate. Zero length corresponds to the Y junction where the fluid streams join. The left hand slices C and E were captured at 170 m above the substrate surface. The right hand slices D and F were captured at 340 m above the substrate surface. The total excitation power i.e. the combined power delivered to the SAWs from both IDTs was 4.5 dBm 2.8 mW for the slices in . The total excitation power was 3.5 dBm 0.47 mW for the slices in . The total excitation power was 15.5 dBm 28 W for the slices in .

SAW streaming produces strong radiation forces acting on fluids and particles suspended in the fluids. Assuming Stokes drag a reasonable assumption when Re

Local particle velocities in excess of 3 cm secwere measured nearest the substrate surface for 4.5 dBm 3.2 mW of total excitation power for the opposing IDTs. This particle velocity indicates an acoustic radiation force of 45 pN m. The fluid velocity tended to decrease further from the piezoelectric substrate surface aside from recirculation effects. The fluid velocities were highly non uniform across the microchannel cross section as evidenced by the presence of fluidic sources and sinks. Slices imaged at 170 m above the surface exhibited more uniform flow patterns whereas the fluid motion at 340 m above the surface was non uniform. The largest velocity gradients were observed near the center of the excitation. These results indicate that the active micromixer is able to fold and stretch laminar streams to produce excellent mixing.

By varying the total excitation power applied to the SAW transducers the dependence of the mean fluid velocity on the input acoustic power accounting for return losses was determined. The mean fluid velocity was computed from PIV data by sampling along the width of the active mixing region using the active micromixer without the acoustic horn i.e. an acoustic aperture of 38 . As shown in even at very low power levels 28 W mean fluid velocities in excess of 0.1 cm secwere observed within the microchannel. A mean fluid velocity of 2 cm secwas measured for 4.5 dBm of input power. No acoustic cavitation was observed in the fluid at this power. This dependence permits selection of appropriate power requirements to achieve a desired fluid velocities and mixing strength. For the acoustic horn i.e. an acoustic aperture of 9.5 the same mean fluid velocities could be obtained with a four fold decrease in power. Therefore geometrical modifications can dramatically reduce power requirements while maintaining mixing efficacy.

The present invention has been described as an active micromixer using SAW streaming. It will be understood that the above description is merely illustrative of the applications of the principles of the present invention the scope of which is to be determined by the claims viewed in light of the specification. Other variants and modifications of the invention will be apparent to those of skill in the art.

