---

title: Engine with liquid piston
abstract: An engine comprises a liquid piston disposed within a chamber of an engine body. The chamber is defined by at least one wall. The liquid piston has one or more free surfaces that are not in contact with the chamber wall. A laser directly heats the free surface of the liquid piston. A gas spring is disposed within the chamber adjacent the free surface of the liquid piston and within the propagation path of the laser energy. The engine also includes a spring mechanism. The spring mechanism is positioned within the housing to exert pressure on another surface of the liquid piston.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07615048&OS=07615048&RS=07615048
owner: 
number: 07615048
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050823
---
The present application is a divisional application of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 328 380 filed Dec. 19 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 949 094 entitled MINIATAURE REFRIGERATION SYSTEM FOR CRYOTHERMAL ABLATION CATHETER which is based upon and claims priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 e to U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 341 952 filed Dec. 19 2001 entitled LASER REFRIGERATOR which are hereby incorporated by reference.

The present application relates to cryothermal ablation catheters as well as to miniature refrigerators and miniature engines for producing mechanical force or effecting mechanical work.

Ablation catheters are commonly used to treat arrhythmias by destroying or disrupting cardiac tissue associated with the source of the arrhythmias or their conductive pathways. At present most ablation procedures are performed using an ablation catheter in which radio frequency RF current is passed through tissue contacting the catheter tip to create lesions by means of hyperthermia. Use of such RF current involves risk of char and coagulum formation particularly if the lesions created are more extensive than focal lesions such as may be required for circumferential lesions in the pulmonary veins. Formation of char and coagulum is ordinarily caused by poor tissue contact with the catheter tip and creates an undesirable risk of thromboembolic stroke. Other risks of RF ablation include possible unroofing of the endothelium or producing pulmonary vein contraction.

Cryothermal ablation solves many of the problems associated with RF ablation. Destruction of tissue by freezing leaves the connective tissue matrix intact. Lesions are created by rupturing cell membranes and damaged cells are replaced by fibrotic tissue. There is no formation of char or coagulum and thus the risk of thromboembolic stroke is low. Additionally as the tissue is cooled the catheter tip adheres to the tissue which provides improved stability.

Although cryothermal ablation provides many advantages over RF ablation it has proven difficult to implement. Cryocatheters today typically comprise a cooling system that provides cooling power by pumping a vaporized refrigerant through a lumen in the catheter to a Joule Thomson expander located at the catheter distal end. The length of the catheter often 1 meter or longer and the small diameter of the lumen within the catheter often less than 1 mm in diameter limit the flow rate through the Joule Thomson expander. Additionally the pressure of the vapor returning through the catheter must be held under 1 atmosphere to meet FDA requirements which further limits the flow rate through the Joule Thomson expander. The cooling power of the system consequently is limited to about 2 Watts which limits the depth of tissue ablation to about 4 mm.

Accordingly there is a need in the art for a cryocatheter that does not require transport of refrigerant along the length of the catheter so as to permit increased refrigerant flow rates. At a more fundamental level there is a need for a miniature engine that can be adapted to among other things drive a miniature refrigeration system in the tip of a cryocatheter.

The preferred embodiment of the present invention overcomes disadvantages of conventional cryocatheters by housing a miniature refrigerator in the tip of a cryocatheter and powering the refrigerator using electromagnetic radiation delivered through a waveguide. A summary of a preferred embodiment is provided followed by a summary of inventive aspects.

The preferred miniature refrigerator avoids the need to transport refrigerant through the length of the cryocatheter by housing the refrigerant circulation system entirely in the tip of the catheter. It utilizes a unique engine that is a revolutionary breakthrough in miniaturization. The preferred engine harnesses the power of a laser by converting electromagnetic energy into mechanical work. It provides an enormous gain in delivered power per unit volume compared to other power sources such as electric motors. Conversion of optical energy to mechanical energy is accomplished by directing laser energy through a gas spring onto a free surface of a liquid mass to non uniformity heat the liquid mass. The heating is very rapid e.g. 

Inventive aspects associated with the embodiments described herein are abundant. In one such inventive aspect a cryo medical apparatus comprises an elongated body defined between a proximal end and a distal end. A closed cycle miniature refrigeration unit which includes a compressor and at least a first heat exchanger is disposed at the distal end. A waveguide for conducting electromagnetic energy extends from the proximal end of the elongated body to the distal end. The waveguide provides electromagnetic radiation to drive the compressor.

In another aspect of the invention a cryo medical system comprises a cryo apparatus which includes an elongated body defined between a proximal end and a distal end. A closed cycle miniature refrigeration unit which includes a compressor in at least a first heat exchanger is disposed at the distal end. A waveguide extending from the proximal end of the catheter body to the distal end conducts electromagnetic energy to drive the compressor. A coupler coupled the source of electromagnetic radiation to the waveguide.

A further aspect of the invention is a closed cycle miniature refrigeration system comprising a compressor having a housing defining at least one chamber. A liquid piston is positioned to reciprocate within the chamber. A source of electromagnetic radiation energizes the liquid piston by exposing a portion of the liquid piston to electromagnetic radiation. The source of electromagnetic radiation drives the liquid piston to reciprocate within the chamber such that the liquid piston compresses a working fluid. A heat exchanger is in communication with the compressor.

Yet another aspect of the invention is a medical apparatus having an elongated body defined between a proximal end and a distal end. An engine is disposed within the elongated body and preferably at the distal end of the elongated body. The engine includes a housing defining a chamber and a liquid mass position within the chamber. A waveguide extends from the proximal end of the elongated body to the distal end and conducts electromagnetic radiation such that the liquid mass is heated non uniformly.

An additional aspect of the invention is an engine comprising a housing defining a chamber. A liquid mass is positioned to oscillate within the chamber at a frequency. A source of electromagnetic radiation energizes the liquid mass by exposing a portion of a liquid mass to the radiation. The radiation causes the liquid mass to be driven at the frequency of oscillation. Preferably the frequency of oscillation is a natural frequency of the liquid mass in the housing.

In yet another aspect of the invention an engine comprises a housing defining a chamber. A liquid mass is disposed within the chamber. The source of electromagnetic radiation energizes the liquid mass by exposing a portion of the liquid mass to the electromagnetic radiation. A gas spring is disposed within the chamber and within a propagation path of the electromagnetic radiation.

A further aspect of the invention is an engine which comprises a housing defining a chamber which includes first and second end sections and an intermediate section. A liquid mass is disposed within the chamber. Each of the first and second end sections of the chamber is formed of a material having a low affinity for the liquid of the liquid mass and the intermediate section is formed of the material having a higher affinity for the liquid of the liquid mass. A source of electromagnetic radiation heats a portion of the liquid mass.

In an additional aspect of the invention a method of oscillating a liquid mass within a housing comprises converting a portion of the liquid mass to a gas phase to propel the remainder of the liquid mass within the housing. A substantial portion of the gas phase portion is reconverted back to the liquid phase and the converting and reconverting are repeated to cause the liquid mass to oscillate.

A further aspect of the invention is a method comprising oscillating a liquid mass within a housing by converting electromagnetic energy into mechanical work and heat. The oscillations are stabilized by removing heat such that the oscillations reach steady state.

Another aspect of the present invention involves an engine comprising a housing having chamber wall that defines a chamber within the housing. A liquid piston is disposed within the chamber and has at least one free surface not in contact with the chamber wall. A source of laser energy is positioned to directly heat the free surface of the liquid piston. The engine also includes a gas spring and a spring mechanism. The gas spring is disposed within the chamber adjacent the free surface of the liquid piston and within the propagation path of the laser energy. The spring mechanism is also positioned within the housing and is arranged to exert pressure on another surface of the liquid piston. Preferably the gas spring and spring mechanism are symmetrically disposed relative to the liquid piston.

A miniature engine is particularly well suited to function as a compressor in conjunction with a miniature refrigeration system and in particular in conjunction with a miniature refrigeration system employed with a cryoablation catheter. The illustrated preferred embodiments are thus of a cryoablation system. The miniature engine however can be used in a variety of other applications including for example but without limitation micro actuators e.g. linear actuators micro pumps e.g. for drug delivery micro acoustical generator e.g. an ultrasound transducer micro injectors e.g. for inkjet and fuel injection applications and optical switches. Additionally the described miniature refrigeration system can be used in other applications as well such as for example but without limitation in the cooling of high power density electronics solid state lasers IR sensors and similar devices. The following description of the preferred embodiments thus represents only one possible application of the engine described herein in a biomedical application relating to cryoablation of cardiac tissues for the treatment of arrhythmias.

As seen in the cryothermal ablation system includes a source of electromagnetic radiation a cryocatheter and a source of fluid coolant . The cryocatheter has a proximal end and a distal end and includes a miniature closed loop refrigeration system disposed within the catheter . In the illustrated embodiment the refrigeration system is disposed at a distal end of the catheter . A waveguide within the catheter couples the source of electromagnetic radiation to the refrigeration system so as to power the refrigeration system . The coolant source provides coolant to the refrigeration system to remove heat build up from components of the system and from the refrigerant circulating just at the distal end of the catheter .

In the illustrated embodiment a laser provides laser light to power the refrigeration system . Other sources of electromagnetic radiation however can be used in other embodiments and applications. For example electric discharge microwave or X ray radiation can be used to power the refrigeration system.

The source of coolant preferably provides a cooled or chilled liquid coolant e.g. saline which flows through at least the distal end of the catheter when the catheter is connected to the coolant source . The coolant source can either forms a closed loop cooling system with the cryocatheter or an open loop cooling system with the cryocatheter . In the illustrated embodiment a closed loop system is formed with the coolant circulating between the catheter and the coolant source . For this purpose the coolant source preferably comprises a heat exchanger in order to control the temperature of the coolant entering the catheter . The coolant however need not be chilled to temperatures required for cryoablation. The coolant rather functions to remove heat from components of the miniature refrigeration system as will be described in greater detail.

The ablation system can also include a controller that controls the operation of the laser and the coolant supply in response to manual control as well as possibly in response to one or more feedback signals from various sensors and monitors used in combination with or integrated into the cryoablation system . For example various thermocouples and mapping electrodes can be incorporated onto the distal end of the cryocatheter as known in the art in order to provide temperature information to assess ablation efficacy and to locate foci of arrhythmia prior to ablation.

As seen in the cryocatheter includes a handle having a proximal end and a distal end and is configured to be comfortably held by a practitioner during a treatment procedure involving cryoablation. A plurality of conduits conductors and wires extend from the proximal end of the handle for connection to the laser the coolant supply and the controller . In the illustrated embodiment a plurality of conduits connect the coolant supply to the catheter handle a wiring harness connects the handle to the controller and an optical coupler couples the waveguide to the laser . These conduits conductors waveguide and wires extend through the handle to the handle s distal end .

An elongated flexible catheter body or shaft extends from the distal end of the handle . The catheter preferably has a sufficient length to be introduced into the heart e.g. into the left atrium or right ventricle through a percutaneous translumenal procedure. Moreover for certain applications the cryocatheter can be designed to access the left atrium in a transeptal procedure. Accordingly the distal portion of the catheter body is preferably flexible however the proximal portion of the catheter body can be more rigid as known in the art.

In the illustrated embodiment the catheter includes a deflectable distal segment in order to steer the catheter and to position the cryoablation element s of the catheter . For this purpose the catheter includes one or more pull wires that extends through the catheter body from the handle and that are affixed to one or more locations at the distal segment . The pull wire or wires are connected at their proximal ends to a manual controller such as a thumb lever. The thumb lever when moved tightens the pull wires to deflect the distal segment of the catheter body as well known in the art. In this manner the practitioner can steer the catheter through the vascular structure and introduce the catheter into one of the heart chambers e.g. into the left atrium with the aid of a transeptal sheath .

Other positioning mechanism however can be used with the catheter either as an alternative to or in addition to the pull wire steering mechanism. For example the catheter can be slidably coupled with a guidewire and for this purpose can include a guidewire lumen that extends at least a substantial length of the catheter. The catheter can be slidably coupled to the guidewire externally of the patient s body in a back loading technique after the distal end of the guidewire is first positioned at the target site. Other guidewire tracking designs may also be suitable substitutes such as for example catheter devices known as rapid exchange or monorail variations wherein the guidewire is only housed within a lumen of the catheter in a distal region of the catheter. Additionally the catheter or guidewire can be guided to and positioned at the target site by the use of sub selective sheaths for advancing the guidewire and or catheter into the desired location and position within the heart.

The waveguide extends through the catheter body from its proximal end to the distal segment of the catheter and cooperates with the refrigeration system . The waveguide in the illustrated embodiment comprises an optical fiber that has a core and a cladding however other types of waveguides both solid and hollow can be used in other applications. Advantageously the optical fiber carries optical energy the length of the catheter with minimal attenuation.

The catheter body houses the waveguide and includes a plurality of lumens. Each lumen extends from a proximal port at the proximal end of the catheter body to a distal port located at or near the distal end of the catheter. Some or all of the lumens can be arranged in a side by side relationship in a coaxial relationship or in any of a wide variety of configurations that will be readily apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art.

With reference to a first lumen in the illustrated embodiment delivers coolant to the distal end and a second lumen returns the coolant to the coolant source . Neither of these lumens need to be significantly insulated because the coolant supplied and returned through these lumens has a temperature well above that capable of damaging tissue or blood cells. A third lumen houses the pull wire.

Additional lumens can be provided for additional purposes. For example an additional lumen can be arranged adjacent to or coaxially about the waveguide and connected to a supply of cooling fluid such as gas in order to cool the waveguide. In addition to or in the alternative to such cooling fluid the first and second lumens which carry the liquid coolant can be used to cool the waveguide. Further lumens can carry electrical wires or other conductors that are connected to sensors e.g. thermocouples thermisters mapping electrodes ultrasound imaging transducers etc. disposed at the distal end of the catheter . A lumen s can also be provided to provide an inflation medium in variations of the cryocatheter that include one or more inflatable balloons. Aspiration irrigation and perfusion lumens can similarly be incorporated into the catheter body. Accordingly in addition to the illustrated lumens one or more additional lumens or conduits can be provided for additional connections to the distal end of the catheter .

The catheter body accordingly includes a number of internal components housed within the internal structure of the body and can also include various layers over the internal structure. Any of a variety of different polymeric materials which are known by those of skill in the art to be suitable for catheter body manufacture can be used to form the catheter body . For example the body may be formed out of polymers such as polyethylene PEBAX Atochem France polyimide polyether etherketone and the like. Additionally the catheter body can also includes a biocompatible leak proof outer jacket formed of any of a variety of materials such as for example but without limitation nylon PEBAX Teflon or other suitable plastic or polymer materials as well known to those skilled in the art. The catheter preferably is made in accordance with known manufacturing techniques.

The catheter body also preferably has sufficient structural integrity or stiffness to permit the catheter to be pushed through the vasculature to target site without buckling or undesirable bending of the body . It is also desirable however for the body to be fairly flexible near its distal end so that the distal segment of the catheter can be navigated through tortuous blood vessel networks. Thus in one preferred embodiment the body of the catheter is formed from a polymer such as polyethylene or PEBAX made to have variable stiffness along its length with the proximal portion of the body being less flexible than the distal portion of the body. Advantageously a body of this construction enables a user to more easily insert the tubular body into vascular networks. Additionally the catheter body or at least certain sections thereof can be include reinforcing braid or coil incorporated into its wall structure. The reinforcing can be formed of metal or of various polymers.

As seen in the distal end of the illustrated catheter has a heat transfer element with a blunt contact tip. The distal end however can have other configurations. For example the distal end can have a shaped tip design such as for example a loop design that can be expanded or manipulated as known by those of ordinary skill in the art. A shaped stylet can also be used with the catheter to vary the shape of the distal end of the catheter in order to hold a particular shape during an ablation procedure to ablate a desired pattern e.g. arcuate or circular or for steering or positioning purposes. Additionally the distal end can include a plurality of heat transfer elements that the refrigeration system cools.

With reference to the closed cycle refrigeration system includes at least a compressor engine and a heat exchanger to cool the heat transfer element s at the distal end of the catheter . In the illustrated embodiment the refrigeration system also comprises a second heat exchanger an expander and preferably a third heat exchanger. One of the heat exchangers functions as a condenser another heat exchanger functions as an evaporator or boiler and the third heat exchanger functions as a counter flow heat exchanger . A refrigerant circulates through the closed cycle system.

The compressor engine draws in saturated refrigerant into the compressor from an inlet side of the compressor engine . The compressor engine compresses the vapor isentropically to a superheated vapor which then flows to the condenser on an outlet side of the compressor engine . The refrigerant vapor then enters a condenser where heat is removed at constant pressure until the fluid becomes a saturated liquid. The liquid then passes through the high temperature side of the counter flow heat exchanger and into the expander . The liquid expands adiabatically in order to bring the fluid to a lower pressure. The liquid refrigerant thence passes through the evaporator at a constant pressure. Heat flows into the evaporator from the heat transfer element s and vaporizes the fluid to the saturated vapor state for reentry into the compressor . In particular the liquid absorbs heat from an inner surface of the heat transfer element thereby cooling the outer surface and vaporizing the liquid refrigerant within the evaporator . The fluid enters the low temperature side of the counter flow heat exchanger before it enters the compressor . The counter flow heat exchanger is used to cool further the liquid refrigerant before it enters the expander and to heat the vapor before it returns to the compressor .

The condenser receives coolant from the catheter coolant delivery lumen and discharges it to the compressor for cooling purposes or returns it to the coolant return lumen . Alternatively the condenser can receive coolant from the compressor .

The expander can include one or more valves orifices capillary tubes or similar types of flow restrictions. In one preferred mode the expander is a Joule Thomson expansion device.

Each of the heat exchangers the condenser the evaporator the counter flow heat exchanger can be manufactured as miniature structures with high surface area using photoetching technology as taught by U.S. Pat. No. 5 935 424 the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference. An example of a suitable heat exchanger structure for the counter flow heat exchanger is illustrated in while in an example of the condenser is illustrated. The size shape and relative scale of the illustrated heat exchangers are only by way of examples and the heat exchangers can be configured and constructed to meet specific design requirements e.g. to fit within a distal end of a catheter having an overall outer diameter of 3 mm. Additionally either of the illustrated heat exchanger structures can be used to form the condenser the evaporator or the counter flow heat exchanger . The illustrated heat exchanger structures also allow for the integration of two or more of the refrigerator s heat exchangers into a single structural unit e.g. the stacked disk structure described below can be configured so as to form both the condenser and the counter flow heat exchanger .

With reference to the counter flow heat exchanger is formed by at least two foil sheets . A discharge from the condenser is schematically illustrated as connecting to an inlet of a microchannel that is etched onto the first sheet . The second sheet has a similar microchannel etched onto it with an inlet and an outlet . The inlet communicates with the evaporator and the outlet communicates with the inlet side of the compressor engine . The microchannels preferably are etched only halfway through the respective foil sheets . The foil sheets can be joined e.g. diffusion bonded together in the orientation shown. The assembly then can be rolled as shown in to construct a cylindrical heat exchanger.

When this heat exchanger structure is used as the condenser the inner channel preferably carries incoming coolant from the coolant lumen and the adjacent channel delivers high pressure refrigerant from the compressor . The next channel carries the returning coolant which is delivered either to the compressor for cooling purposes or to the coolant return lumen . The outermost channel returns low pressure vapor to the compressor . Of course where this heat exchanger structure is used for other purposes for example as the counter flow heat exchanger the disk stack can define fewer channels e.g. two channels .

While the structure of the evaporator can take the form of either of the heat exchanger embodiments just described its structure preferably corresponds to the configuration of the heat transfer element s that contacts the targeted tissue during a cryoablation procedure. The evaporator thus is preferably configured to maximize contact between the microchannels that form the evaporator and through which refrigerant passes and the inner surface or surfaces of the heat transfer element s .

With reference to the compressor engine of the system includes a housing that defines a chamber and a liquid piston that reciprocates within the chamber . In the illustrated embodiment the chamber has a cylindrical shape however other shapes are practicable. While the engine can be employed on larger scales the inside diameter of the cylindrical chamber for its application in a catheter is preferably between about 50 m and 5 mm more preferably less than about 2 mm and most preferably generally not greater than 1 mm. The small diameter cylinder also provides a capillary action to help maintain the integrity of the liquid piston during operation.

The cylinder chamber has sufficient length to accommodate the piston and to provide for its reciprocation in the chamber . The cylinder chamber length preferably provides the piston with a sufficient stroke for the compressor engine to compress and pump an amount of refrigerant necessary to cool the heat transfer element s to a desired temperature e.g. to 100 C. and to actuate the valves of the compressor. For the present application in a cryocatheter the length of the engine chamber is preferably less than 10 mm and more preferably less than about 5 mm.

The housing preferably is constructed to cause the liquid piston to migrate toward a generally central position within the chamber when the engine is not operating. Accordingly different parts of the housing walls preferably exhibit different affinities for the liquid of the liquid piston . In the illustrated embodiment the housing comprises at least three parts that define the cylinder chamber a central part formed by a tube having high affinity for the liquid of the liquid piston a proximal part formed by a tube having low affinity for the liquid and a distal part formed by a tube also having a low affinity for the liquid. Either the material of the tubes or coatings on the tubes can have the desired affinities for the liquid.

The proximal part and the distal part are preferably made of thermally insulating material with an inner surface having a low affinity for the liquid resulting in close to adiabatic compression and expansion of the vapor in those chambers. One suitable material is polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE available commercially as Teflon from E.I. du Pont and Nemours and Company. The central part in addition to having a high affinity for the liquid preferably is made of a thermally conductive material such as for example copper.

The ends of the cylinder also preferably have low affinities for the liquid of the liquid piston . The proximal end of the cylinder preferably is closed by the distal end of the optical fiber or by a lens e.g. a collimating lens or an intermediate transmitter that directs the laser light into the chamber through the proximal end. In the illustrated embodiment the distal end of the optical fiber seals against the housing at the proximal end thereof. The housing can additionally comprise a window element. In this variation of the housing construction the window element would be in communication with the optical fiber and would seal the proximal end of the chamber.

In the illustrated embodiment a distal disk or plate closes the distal end of the chamber . The distal plate includes a valve mechanism that selectively permits the refrigerant to flow into and out of the chamber . illustrates a compressor engine in which one way check valves serve as the inlet and outlet to the chamber . A suction valve permits refrigerant to flow from the evaporator into the distal space of the chamber and a discharge valve permits refrigerant to flow from the distal space toward the condenser . Neither valve however permits flow in an opposite direction. The valve plate preferably is formed of a superelastic shape memory material such as Ni Ti alloy available commercially as Nitinol . The valves are etched in the desired configurations. The surface of the distal plate that faces into the chamber preferably is coated with a material that has a low affinity for the liquid of the liquid piston .

As best seen in which illustrates the engine in isolation the resulting affinity of the liquid piston to central part of the cylinder creates spaces on the proximal and distal sides of the liquid piston respectively. One or more gases occupy the proximal space. The gas can be substantially pure vapor of the fluid used for the piston or can be a different fluid. By selecting the type of gas present in the proximal space the gas spring can have a linear or close thereto spring constant or a non linear spring constant. In the illustrated embodiment such gas or gases preferably include air and or a vapor form of the liquid that forms the liquid piston. The laser light passes from the fiber optic through gas and into the liquid rather than directly from the fiber optic into the liquid. Consequently it is preferable that the gas or vapor be substantially transparent to the laser radiation.

The volume of the proximal space is on the same order of magnitude as the volume of the liquid piston . In the illustrated embodiment the proximal space has a diameter of about 1 mm and a length of about 1 mm.

In the illustrated embodiment the distal space functions as a variable volume compression chamber that increases and decreases in volume as the piston reciprocates within the chamber . The valve mechanism regulates refrigerant flow into and out of the distal space .

The gas filled proximal space functions as a gas spring. A gas spring is also formed by the combination of the distal space and the condenser and the evaporator that communicate with the distal space . The inertia of the liquid piston and the compression of the gas springs constitute the typical components of an oscillator the system posses a well defined natural frequency and is therefore capable of operating at resonance if excited at the right frequency. Consequently in the present application the liquid piston can be conceptually modeled as a mass disposed between a pair of springs. This system thus will have a natural frequency f which can be approximated by equation 1 

While in the illustrated embodiment the distal gas spring is disposed on the distal side of the piston other types of spring mechanism can also be used. For example as illustrated an elastic diaphragm see and associated description provided below can replace the distal gas spring of the present embodiment.

As seen in the housing also includes a cooling jacket to cool at least the central part of the housing . In the illustrated embodiment the cooling jacket includes a one or more microchannels cut into the central part preferably using an etching technique. The cooling jacket receives coolant e.g. saline either from the catheter coolant delivery lumen or from the condenser and returns it to the coolant return lumen . To further facilitate removal of heat from the engine the central part of the housing preferably is formed of a material having a relatively high heat transfer coefficient.

Laser light energy pulses are delivered via the optical fiber to the free surface at the proximal end of the liquid piston . For this purpose the waveguide can either include 1 a focusing lens that focuses the light beam to a diameter substantially matching the diameter of the chamber at a location near but distal of the proximal end of the chamber or 2 a collimating lens that aligns the beam emitted from the distal end of the optical fiber which has a core diameter substantially equal to the diameter of the chamber . In this manner the laser energy is directed to heat generally the entire area of the free surface that faces the optical fiber .

The liquid absorbs sufficient laser energy to superheat instantly vaporize the liquid to a depth of at least 0.1 of the wavelength of the laser light. The absorption characteristics of the liquid material and the high energy density of the laser are such that the absorption results in rapid formation of a superheated layer which converts liquid into gas. As the liquid is vaporized the liquid beneath is exposed to the laser light and the superheated layer effectively migrated further into the liquid piston like the sparks of a burning fuse migrating along the length of the fuse . The migration of the superheated layer is extremely fast such that the vaporized portion of the piston rapidly increases the pressure within the proximal space in a manner akin to an explosion. While vaporization is rapid the duration of vaporization is limited by the duration of the laser pulse. Accordingly only a small fraction of the liquid piston is vaporized by any given laser pulse. The vaporized portion preferably represents between about 0.05 and 5 of the liquid piston by volume and more preferably between about 0.1 and 1 by volume. The remaining portion of the piston still in liquid phase is sufficiently long to serve as a piston and to perform mechanical work e.g. compress the fluid in the distal space . Typically the length of the vaporized portion of the liquid piston may be greater than 50 m more preferably between 0.5 and 5 mm and most preferably about 1 mm.

Similarly the liquid piston should have a diameter sufficient to perform its function. In general the greater the diameter of the liquid piston the more power can be produced by the engine. At some point however increasing the diameter of the liquid piston will lead to loss of capillary action depending upon the surface tension of the liquid and the affinity of the central part therefor leading to loss of the liquid piston s integrity during operation. The liquid piston preferably behaves generally as a plug flow with a defined boundary layer around its periphery. The thickness of the boundary layer will depend upon the liquid s density and viscosity and upon the system s frequency as understood from the following equation 

The boundary layer in the illustrated embodiment has a thickness on the order of fractions of microns. Consequently the piston oscillates generally as a mass plug.

In the illustrated embodiment where the distal space directly communicates with the heat exchangers of the refrigeration system the liquid of the liquid piston preferably is the same refrigerant used in the refrigeration system. In one preferred mode the refrigerant liquid comprises R 134a having the chemical formula CHF a critical temperature of 101.2 C. and an estimated practicable superheat limit of about 64 C. based upon 90 of the critical temperature in Kelvin as compared to its normal boiling point of 26.5 C. under standard conditions. In another preferred mode the refrigerant liquid comprises R 12 having the chemical formula CClF a critical temperature of 112 C. and an estimated practicable superheat limit of about 74 C. based upon 90 of the critical temperature in Kelvin as compared to its normal boiling point of 30 C. under standard conditions. Additionally the refrigerant can comprise a mixture of fluids such as R 134a R 23 R1 4 and cryogenenic fluids such as helium hydrogen neon nitrogen and argon. The refrigerant mixture allow the refrigerator to reach temperature as low as 70 K as taught in U.S. Pat. No. 5 579 654 entitled CRYOSTAT REFRIGERATION SYSTEM USING MIXED REFRIGERANTS IN A CLOSED VAPOR COMPRESSOR CYCLE HAVING A FIXED FLOW RESTRICTION which disclosure is hereby incorporated by reference.

A dye preferably is added to the liquid to increase absorption of the input optical energy. To facilitate high absorption at 1.064 m for use with a Nd YAG laser one of the following near infrared NIR dyes can be added to the liquid SDA8080 and DSB6592 both available commercially from H.W. Sands Corp. of Jupiter Fla. The concentration of the dye in the refrigerant can be tailored to match the required optical density e.g. 50 m optical density .

The laser which supplies the energy to drive the compressor engine produces short pulses having a duration of less than 100 nanoseconds and preferably about 50 nanoseconds to ensure rapid formation of the superheated layer and resulting gas bubble. The frequency of the laser pulses substantially matches the natural frequency of the liquid piston which is in turn a product of the speed of explosive vaporization and the size and mass of the liquid piston and gas springs as described above. Heat introduced into the oscillating system by the laser is removed by the cooling jacket described above.

In the illustrated embodiment the laser is a Q switched solid state Nd YAG laser that outputs 35 Watts of optical power at a wavelength of 1.064 m. Although the preferred embodiment utilizes a solid state Nd YAG laser other types of lasers can be used including laser diodes and gas lasers. The Nd YAG laser provides pulses at a repetition rate of about 20 kHz to oscillate the liquid piston at its natural frequency. The energy provided per pulse preferably is about 1.75 millijoules. The energy density preferably is sufficient to vaporize during a single pulse substantially the entire area of proximal liquid surface approximately 0.8 mm to a depth 50 m starting from a liquid temperature around ambient e.g. body temperature 37 C. . When using a Nd YAG laser the vaporized layer is preferably between 10 nm and 100 m and more preferably between 1 m and 50 m.

The explosion pushes the liquid piston distally. The liquid piston rebounds moves proximally rebounds again and then is driven distally again by re firing the laser . With correct dimensional design and operational conditions laser pulses synchronized with piston oscillation undesired losses due to vapor liquid heat and mass transfer through the liquid vapor surfaces can be minimized and engine efficiency maximize.

If the laser pulses are all at the same energy the oscillations amplitude will start small and within few oscillations about 5 to 10 will reach steady state level. The exact number of oscillations to full amplitude is also influenced by heat removal characteristics and other thermophysical characteristics of the system. In the preferred embodiment the first pulse has higher from 2 to 5 times greater energy then the following pulses which helps the system reach full scale oscillations quicker.

The operation cycle of the engine running at steady state can be further understood by examining four sequential snapshots during the operation cycle. With reference to the liquid piston is disposed at a generally central location within the chamber and is moving proximally at this point in the cycle for reasons that will be soon apparent. The suction valve in the distal plate opens as the piston moves proximally. This movement of the piston also draws refrigerant vapor into the distal space from the evaporator .

As seen in the laser is fired when the liquid piston reaches it maximal displacement in the proximal direction. The laser light which is delivered by the optical fiber passes through the proximal vapor space and is absorbed in the proximal free surface of the liquid piston which heats the liquid non uniformly i.e. the electromagnetic radiation superheats a layer of the liquid without significantly heating the adjacent portion of the liquid mass . The heating of the liquid is too fast to allow normal boiling and about 50 m on the surface is vaporized by heating to the liquid superheat limit. In the illustrated embodiment the vaporized layer preferably represents about 1 the liquid piston volume. Within one microsecond the superheated layer causes vaporization to create a large pressure rise in the proximal space. The explosive bubble following superheating thus provides a propulsive force to move the unvaporized remainder of the liquid piston .

Under the action of the high pressure in the proximal space the liquid piston starts moving distally as seen in . During the piston s distal travel as well as during its proximal travel the liquid mass exhibits a plug flow profile with a defined boundary layer around the perimeter as noted above. Cohesive forces e.g. viscosity as well as its cooled temperature tend to keep the liquid piston as one continuous unit that generally moves as a monolith thereby acting similar to a solid piston.

Distal movement of the piston compresses the refrigerant vapor in the distal space adiabatically similar to a conventional positive displacement vapor compressor . The increased pressure in the distal chamber closes the suction valve and opens the discharge valve . At least part of the kinetic energy of the moving piston is returned to the piston by elastic expansion of the distal gas spring causing the liquid piston to move in the proximal direction. The resultant restoring force helps to push the liquid piston toward its original position.

Additionally once the piston has reached the point of its maximum displacement distally as shown in the piston moves proximally. The work of expansion of the proximal chamber and the condensation of refrigerant vapor on the wall of the cooled central part of the housing causes a pressure decrease which also has the consequence of imparting velocity to i.e. draws the liquid piston in the proximal direction. Due to the inertia of the liquid piston however the original position of the piston is overshot and the piston moves toward its maximum displacement in the proximal direction. The laser once again is fired and the cycle repeats.

In the preferred embodiment heat is actively removed from the engine to maintain the body of the liquid piston below its boiling point and to allow the explosively vaporized portion of the fluid to return to the liquid state serving as a reusable fuel for continued operation. As noted above the central part of the housing is preferably formed from a material that is a good conductor of heat so as to provide a heat sink. The heat sink is constructed to have a large surface area and is preferably further cooled by a coolant e.g. saline that flows in or about the central part . The coolant readily removes heat from the heat sink by forced convection. With water microchannels forced convection can remove heat at 800 W cm permitting continual operation at high power. The cooling system removes both the heat generated by the laser beam and the heat carried by the refrigerant pumped through the refrigeration system. According to The Second Law of Thermodynamics the refrigerator rejected heat is at least its refrigeration power multiplied by the Carnot ratio of its operating temperatures. Stable pressure oscillations are achieved when the total heat from the laser beam and from the refrigerator heat pump section is balanced by the heat drawn out of the engine by the coolant flow. The coolant flow of the illustrated embodiment is capable of removing over 100 Watts of heat. The heat transfer element at the catheter distal end can consequently reach 100 C. and can produce cardiac tissue necrosis to a depth of greater than 10 mm.

The combined duration of the laser pulse and the explosive boiling is less than 2 of each cycle and more preferably between 0.01 and 1 of each cycle. With the solid state Nd YAG laser in the illustrated embodiment the period of the cycle is on the order of 50 microseconds while the combined duration of the laser pulse and the explosive boiling which occurs during the laser pulse is in the order of 200 nanoseconds. The relatively long time period of the cycle in comparison to the pulse duration permits the system to react and recover before the next laser pulse is delivered.

Accordingly in the present engine non uniform heating is by radiation onto a free surface of the liquid. Vapor spaces on each side of the liquid mass function as gas springs to provide a restoring force which enables the liquid mass to enter a regime of steady state oscillations. The engine can power a compressor enormously faster and much smaller e.g. 2 3 orders of magnitude faster and smaller than a conventional compressor and has significantly more e.g. ten times more refrigeration power of a comparable Joule Thomson expander that is commonly used in cryocatheter today. The compressor engine thus gives the present cryocatheter a greater cryoablation capacity killing depth than that of conventional cardiac ablation catheters.

While the illustrated embodiment is a cryocatheter it is understood that the present refrigeration system or engine thereof can be incorporated into other types of medical apparatus as well. For example the present cryocooler i.e. refrigeration system can be incorporated into a handheld surgical ablation probe that is substantially rigid and can be used to directly ablate cardiac tissue during trans thoracic or minimally invasive surgery. The probe can include a deflectable tip for enhanced maneuverability and precise placement of the heat transfer element. The engine can also be used as a miniature ultrasound source for medical imaging and treatment. The laser bubble technology enables an ultrasound actuator that is significantly smaller than conventional piezoelectric ultrasound transducers. As a result imaging catheters with the present engine can be used to provide deeper views of tissue through blood vessels.

In the refrigeration cycle the piston requires significant displacement in order to actuate the valves and to move refrigerant through the system. The piston can have a significantly smaller displacement when the engine is used as an ultrasound transducer and can be oscillated at a frequency within the ultrasound range for example at 10 MHz to 40 MHz . Importantly the amplitude of oscillation of the piston roughly matches the size of the cylinder and accordingly the engine can be made much smaller than a conventional piezoelectric transducer where the amplitude of oscillation represents only a 0.2 volume change of the total transducer volume. For example the engine may be 100 times smaller than the piezoelectric transducer used for similar imaging purposes.

Another embodiment of the engine compressor is illustrated in . Where appropriate like reference numbers with a suffix a have been used to indicate like parts of the two embodiments for ease of understanding. The foregoing description thus should be understood to apply equally to like parts of the present embodiment.

A diaphragm distal of the liquid piston separates the liquid piston from the refrigerant. This diaphragm can be made of a composite of silicon rubber and NiTi flexure. A similar microdiaphragm is FDA approved and is currently used in other implantable devices.

Movement of the piston causes the diaphragm to flex proximally and distally to increase and decrease respectively the volume in a compressor chamber that is located on the distal side of the diaphragm . Distal movement of the diaphragm adiabatically compresses the refrigerant within the compressor chamber which is discharged from the compressor chamber through the discharge valve . Proximal movement of the diaphragm draws refrigerant vapor into the pump chamber through the suction valve .

Water based liquids can absorb and remove about five times more heat than a comparable amount of refrigerant such as R 134a. Therefore a variation of the embodiment illustrated in can utilize dyed saline as the liquid piston of the engine.

Although this invention has been disclosed in the context of certain preferred embodiments and examples it will be understood by those skilled in the art that the present invention extends beyond the specifically disclosed embodiments to other alternative embodiments and or uses of the invention and obvious modifications and equivalents thereof. In particular while the present engine has been described in the context of particularly preferred embodiments the skilled artisan will appreciate in view of the present disclosure that certain advantages features and aspects of the engine may be realized in a variety of other applications many of which have been noted above. For example while particularly useful for small scale applications e.g. chamber volumes of less than 2 cm such as the illustrated medical application the skilled artisan can readily adopt the principles and advantages described herein to a variety of other applications including larger scale devices. Additionally it is contemplated that various aspects and features of the invention described can be practiced separately combined together or substituted for one another and that a variety of combination and subcombinations of the features and aspects can be made and still fall within the scope of the invention. Thus it is intended that the scope of the present invention herein disclosed should not be limited by the particular disclosed embodiments described above but should be determined only by a fair reading of the claims that follow.

