---

title: Programmable virtual book system
abstract: An electronic information browsing system that provides a book-like interface—a virtual book—for presenting electronic contents. Specifically, an electronic information browsing system that allows users to configure its behavior via data and program specification encapsulated in a dynamic file format. Configurable behavior includes but not limited to the kind of contents to be displayed in the virtual book, the sources of the contents to be displayed, the static aspects of the virtual book such as the book dimensions and the dynamic aspects of the virtual book such as when a page is to be flipped, how the flipping of pages is contingent upon the execution of certain pre-specified events, etc.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07304635&OS=07304635&RS=07304635
owner: E-Book Systems Pte Ltd
number: 07304635
owner_city: Singapore
owner_country: SG
publication_date: 20051229
---
This application is related to the following co pending patent applications all of which are incorporated herein by reference Application Ser. No. 60 365 186 filed on Mar. 19 2002 Application Ser. No. 60 367 765 filed on Mar. 28 2002 Application Ser. No. 60 410 278 filed on Sep. 13 2002 application Ser. No. 10 142 996 filed on May 13 2002 application Ser. No. 10 142 858 filed on May 13 2002 application Ser. No. 10 143 005 filed on May 13 2002 application Ser. No. 09 686 965 filed on Oct. 12 2000 application Ser. No. 10 283 084 filed on Oct. 30 2002 application Ser. No. 09 686 902 filed on Oct. 12 2000 application Ser. No. 09 617 043 filed on Jul. 14 2000 application Ser. No. 10 052 387 filed on Jan. 23 2002 and application Ser. No. 10 029 868 filed on Dec. 13 2001. This application is also related to the following patents all of which are incorporated by reference U.S. Pat. No. 5 909 207 issued Jun. 1 1999 U.S. Pat. No. 6 064 384 issued May 16 2000 U.S. Pat. No. 6 340 980 issued Jan. 22 2002 and U.S. Pat. No. 6 407 757 issued Jun. 18 2002.

The present invention relates to a software system that provides for the rapid access and viewing of electronic contents on the Internet as well as on standalone devices. Specifically the present invention provides for a virtual book like interface for the ease of navigation through electronic contents. This facilitates the browsing of the electronic contents in such a way that it allows a rapid view of what contents are present and the organization of the contents as well as rapid access to the items in the contents involved. The virtual book system is programmable through an application programming interface. The setting of the mode of display of the virtual book interface the control of the changes to the virtual book display the interaction of the contents in the virtual book interface with program and data from outside the virtual book system and other desired static and dynamic effects to be applied to the interface and other parts of the virtual book system can all be flexibly effected by the programmable system.

Currently the method for viewing documents stored in a computer is through a computer monitor screen. For documents that are longer larger than can be contained within one screen a means is provided to scroll the document up and down or to jump to a particular point in the document through the use of for example a mouse coupled with scroll bars at the edges of the document displayed on the screen or through the use of hypertext links .

However most people do not find this a particularly convenient way to view a document as compared with a book. That this is true is evidenced in the fact that despite the fact that the computer has been in increasing use there is not only no corresponding reduction in paper use but an increase in paper quantity is required to print what is conveniently stored in a computer that can be seemingly easily and flexibly manipulated for viewing. Sometimes the printed version of the information involved is necessary like in the case of printing a picture on a sheet of paper to be pasted on some surface e.g. a wall or in the case of the convenience of having a relatively light hardy paperback book for reading in almost any possible situation and location but there are times when a reader is quite happy to sit at a desk in front of a desktop computer or handle a notebook computer away from the desk and yet the reader would still prefer a printed version of the document in a hand held format. This is especially true in the case of looking through manuals including software manuals to understand how to operate a device or software application. The irony is that computer software packages usually come with thick and heavy manuals containing information which can easily be stored on a light weight CD ROM and even if the manuals are sometimes dispensed in the form of a CD ROM more often than not people would print them out into a hard copy format in order to facilitate reading.

What is involved when one interacts with the printed material in a book is a subtle and complicated process. To start with material in a book is presented in a sequential order with a continuity of material from page to page and there is also a hierarchical structure in the material presented as the material is organized into chapters sections subsections etc. because ideas in the material are related to each other in some kind of conceptual hierarchy. The human perceptual system inputs data in a sequential manner. Thus after a book is read from the beginning to the end in a sequential fashion the brain then recreates the conceptual hierarchy after viewing the material involved. However very often one does not read a book or input the material involved from the beginning to the end because a one wants to have an overview of the material present b one is searching for something of interest to him her or c one is interested in reading only portions of the book in the case of say reading the manual to understand how to operate something . In these cases one browses through the subject book to find the material of unique interest to that reader.

Two basic things are achieved in the browsing process. First the browser has a glimpse of what are the contents of the book document. Second the browser has an idea of approximately where the items of interest are so that the browser can a return to look for them later when needed and b have an understanding of the relationships between the material currently being viewed and other material i.e. an understanding of the hierarchical structure involved . When browsing a book document many finger operations are required of the browser in order to flip through the pages and together with the inherent sequential order imposed by the pages very quickly allow the browser to have an understanding of the nature location and organization of the material involved.

All these operations are performed very rapidly with the fingers interacting with the flipping pages and with minimal unnecessary movements of the fingers and hands. Interestingly a book magazine with soft and flexible pages is harder to handle because more finger and hand movements are needed to browse through it while books with stiff pages can be browsed with almost no movement of the hand.

In currently available methods of browsing through documents stored in a computer e.g. the use of a mouse combined with scroll bars and buttons on the computer screen more movements of the hands are necessary to effect the various operations described above. Also fine control of the hand or fingers depending on whether the mouse uses hand movement to move the cursor on the screen or finger movement like in the case of a track ball is necessary to position the cursor on the screen at the required places. The process is both lengthy and clumsy. The lengthiness of the process taxes the human short term memory s ability to remember items encountered in the recent past for the purpose of establishing the relationships between items and the clumsiness of the process creates distraction and interferes with the short term memory process a well known effect in perceptual psychology.

Because material in a book is organized into pages it also enhances the ability of the reader to better remember the location of various portions of the material involved. Also unlike the process of scrolling through a document on a screen like what is normally done in a word processor wherein the contents become a blur and reading is impossible when one moves through the material in a book through flipping one is still able to read at least the approximate contents if not the details. It is due to these features that a person browsing through a book can acquire a good understanding of its contents the location of specific items and organization of the material.

It is because of the reasons set forth above people still prefer to read a book in their hands rather than a document image displayed on a computer screen using currently available methods.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 467 102 Kuno et al. discloses a device for document viewing that consists of two display screens. One of the purposes of using two display screens is to allow the user to display two different pages from the document so that they can be read side by side e.g. a diagram and its textual explanation . Another purpose is to allow a large picture to be displayed simultaneously on both pages. The Kuno et al. device allows users to change the speed of movement through the document through a pressure sensor the more pressure applied the faster the pages in the document are moved through. The Kuno et al. device also allows the document to be viewed in the forward or backward direction by pressing on a forward sensor area or a reverse sensor area respectively. One can also select a page to jump to by pressing on an icon displayed on the screen. However the Kuno et al. device still does not provide the same convenience as browsing through a book primarily because when switching between the operations for different controls the speed of movement through the document the change of direction of viewing and the jumping to different parts of the document there are a lot more hand and finger movements than is the case in manipulating a physical book.

In U.S. Pat. No. 5 417 575 1995 McTaggart discloses an electronic book that comprises laminated sheets bound together in the form of a book. On each of these sheets printed material is arranged on the top layer and below that layer is an electronic backdrop containing thin light emitting diodes LED s and pressure sensitive switches affixed onto a backing sheet. The LED s generate visual signals that can be seen through the top layer for the purpose of highlighting parts of the printed material. The pressure switches positioned under certain items in the printed material are for the purpose of sensing the user s selection of those items. A speaker is also provided on the book to generate audio signals for explaining the text or giving the user audio feedback. Contact or photo sensitive switches are also embedded in the pages to allow the electronic circuits to know which pages are currently being viewed so that the appropriate audio and visual signals can be generated. Even though this apparatus is in a form that allows a person to handle it like handling a typical book with visual and audio enhancements of the printed material as well as facilities that accept the user s feedback it is basically a hard wired device that is not reprogrammable and different hardware has to be configured for books with different contents. No provision is available for downloading document files from a computer for display on the electronic book nor is the electronic book able to display any arbitrary document file. This device is hence not suitable for browsing through documents stored in a computer.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 909 207 Ho discloses a computer based system that allows users to view and manipulate documents in the form of an electronic virtual book that addresses the above problems in browsing information in the electronic medium. This virtual book system simulates the paper book very closely and has two major components. One is the representation of the paper book on the computer screen complete with realistic flipping pages and thickness representation. The other is the use of a browsing device that allows 1 rapid change of direction of flipping 2 rapid change of speed of flipping 3 selection and jumping to any desired page and 4 bookmarking of the pages. The browsing device allows one to use the fingers to manipulate the pages in the book much in the same way as in the case of the paper book. Therefore the virtual manipulation of the pages together with the book image on the screen constitutes a virtual book system. This virtual book system improves on the methods used in current electronic means of information browsing in a very significant way such that the ease of browsing information can approach that obtainable with a paper book. This allows users to be able to quickly browse through a large number of pages perhaps thousands of pages of information and obtain the idea of the structure and contents involved and hence a good overview of the entire collection of material in the virtual book . Other than being able to have a good idea of the structure and contents of the material involved the process of browsing through the material presented in the form of a virtual book much like in the case of the paper book also facilitates subsequent searches for items in the material.

In U.S. Pat. No. 5 909 207 Ho the virtual book system depends on a software module that provides for the generation of the virtual book interface and the display of the contents on the pages of the virtual book. The virtual book system reads data from the hard disk or other sources such as the Internet and sets certain basic parameters for the virtual book display such as the dimensions of the virtual book . However the virtual book system does not provide a programmable interface that allows an external program to interact with control and instruct the basic virtual book display software module to achieve more complex static and dynamic effects in the virtual book system. To achieve more complex behavior or to modify the existing behavior of the virtual book system the basic virtual book display software module has to be reprogrammed. This requires additional effort cost and time.

Therefore the inventor has identified there exists a need for a programmable virtual book system for the rapid reconfiguration of the desired behavior of the entire virtual book system including its ability to interact with and receive commands and data from external programs and applications.

In view of the aforementioned short comings of presently available schemes for providing for a virtual book system for the display and browsing of electronic contents one objective of the present invention is to provide a programmable virtual book system for the purpose of rapid configuration of the desired behavior of the virtual book system.

Another objective of the present invention is to provide a virtual book behavior specification method system and computer program product that includes the specification of the static as well as dynamic aspects of the behavior of the virtual book system.

A further objective of the present invention is to provide the specification for the structure of the book behavior specification method system and computer program product in a form of a data and program file containing the static and dynamic sections.

Still a further objective of the invention is to provide a specification of how the dynamic specification part of the book behavior specification interacts with external programs and data.

Another objective of the present invention is to provide a specification of how the dynamic specification part of the book behavior specification interacts with the basic virtual book software through an application program interface.

Yet another objective of the present invention is to provide a specification of how the dynamic specification part of the book behavior specification generates control signals to control certain aspects of the virtual book interface.

Another objective of the present invention is to provide the algorithm for the programmable virtual book system.

A further objective of the present invention is to provide a method system and computer program product for certain event to trigger certain desired action in the virtual book system.

Yet another objective of the present invention is to provide a method system and computer program product for activating a flipping to a desired page in the virtual book displayed in the virtual book system on the completion of certain event such as the completion of the playing of a video or audio file on one of the pages in the virtual book or elsewhere on the display screen.

Another objective of the present invention is to provide a general algorithm for the execution of certain action as a result of the execution of certain event in the virtual book system.

A further objective of the present invention is to provide a method system and computer program product for enlarging the virtual book displayed on the display screen.

Yet another objective of the present invention is to provide a method system and computer program product for making some collected data persistent when the virtual book is flipped from one page to another that is the data entered into the system while viewing a certain page is still available in later pages so that all the data involved can be collected and integrated.

Another objective of the present invention is to provide a method system and computer program product for extracting information in a program or application outside the virtual book system and display it in the virtual book within the virtual book system.

A further objective of the present invention is to provide a method system and computer program product to extract e mail information from a program or application outside the virtual book system and display it in the virtual book within the virtual book system.

Yet another objective of the present invention is to provide a method system and computer program product to display the search results generated from a program or application outside the virtual book system in the virtual book within the virtual book system.

Referring now to the drawings wherein like reference numerals designate identical or corresponding parts throughout the several views and more particularly to thereof which depicts the virtual book interface according to the present invention that can be used in conjunction with existing computer or other electronic system for the purpose of browsing through documents or any information stored in the computer or other electronic system.

The virtual book interface displayed on a display screen consists of two sides a left side and a right side . There is a left side thickness and a right side thickness associated with the left side and the right side respectively. There is also a bottom left thickness and a bottom right thickness . Any number of bookmarks e.g. and can be positioned on the left thickness or and any number of right bookmarks e.g. and can be positioned on the right thickness or . Jump cursors and on the left thickness and the right thickness respectively can be used to select the desired page to jump to. The jump cursors and can move up and down on the thickness and in a direction perpendicular to the vertical edge of the page and . Directions and for the left jump cursor and directions and for the right jump cursor . The up and down movement on the thickness allows the jump cursor to select the desired page in the document virtual book to jump to.

When a desired page to jump to is being selected by using say either the jump cursors and or bookmarks and the jump activated the pages will flip to the destination page and at the same time a thickness representing the amount of material number of pages in between the currently viewed page and the page s to jump to is shown to flip across the book accordingly as depicted in . In the desired page to jump to is on the right side of the book and the flipping thickness is shown to flip from the right side of the book to the left side and the thickness on the right side is shown to decrease as the flipping thickness leaves the right side to move over to the left side . When the flipping thickness lands on the left side the left thickness will increase in width. Vice versa for flipping thickness going from the left side to the right side .

The Book Format Specification basically instructs the Book Viewer Software how to create a virtual book on a display screen complete with its contents. After the virtual book has been displayed on a display screen it can be manipulated i.e. the pages can be flipped the contents can be searched etc. The Control Signal Generator can be a mouse or other input devices. This can generate commands to manipulate the virtual book such as flipping commands that generate the flipping actions depicted in jump cursor control commands depicted in jump commands depicted in bookmarking commands depicted in complex page manipulation commands depicted in etc.

The Book Format Specification depicted in is relatively static. Its contents are static data that are read by the Book Viewer Software and used to create a relatively static virtual book . Some of the contents on the virtual book thus created can be dynamic such as when some video data are being displayed but most of the basic properties of the book such as its dimensions etc. are not changed by the data in the Book Format Specification since the data is static. Some of the basic properties of the virtual book can still be changed by the Book Viewing Software in conjunction with commands from the Control Signal Generator such as using the mouse to drag on the corners of the frame to change the dimensions of the frame hence the dimensions of the virtual book but this signal does not come from the Book Format Specification . 

The Programs etc. when interpreted and executed may instruct certain dynamic behavior to be effected on the virtual book through an Application Program Interface that sends instructions to the Book Viewer Software . This is affected through pathways etc.

To allow even more flexible control of the virtual book the Programs etc. can also modify the Static Specification Section within the Book Behavior Specification . This is shown in pathways etc. If one of the Book Attributes is the dimensions of the virtual book say then one or more of the Programs etc. can effect the change of the dimensions of the virtual book during run time i.e. during the process of creating and browsing the virtual book by changing the value of the dimensions in the Book Attributes through pathways etc. Modifications of the Programs etc. by the Programs etc. themselves are also possible through the pathways etc.

Another source of control and data sent through the Programs etc. in the Dynamic Specification Section of the Book Behavior Specification can be Other Programs and Data outside the virtual book system. This is depicted in the pathways etc. in . This is one way data embedded in other programs and applications can be brought into the virtual book and the behavior of the virtual book can be contingent on the behavior of other programs and data outside the basic Book Viewer Software system.

With the Application Program Interface the control signals for manipulating the virtual book instead of originating in some external devices such as a mouse or other input devices i.e. the External Control Signals can now originate in the Programs etc. and effected through the Application Program Interface .

The Dynamic and Static Specifications and of the Book Behavior Specification need not be encapsulated together as shown in . They can be separate entities linked to the Book Viewer Software .

One embodiment of the Programs etc. in the Dynamic Specification Section of the Book Behavior Specification can be Java Scripts. One method to interpret the Java Scripts etc. can be using Microsoft s Internet Explorer . Four examples of Java Scripts per the present invention are attached as Appendix A.

The concatenation of many repeated segments of the process depicted in can have many applications such as one in which a story is told and as it unfolds the pages are flipped to the respective places in the virtual book in which different video audio textual or other information continues the story. This delivers an auto flipping and auto narrated story.

To implement the zooming function as described above one way is to hard wire in the functionality into the Book Viewer Software . However a better approach is to build in a set of standard basic functions in the Book Viewer Software which may not include a zooming function and then write programs such as Programs embedded in the Dynamic Specification Section of the Book Behavior Specification or write other external programs to call these basic functions through the Application Program Interface in some manners and combinations to achieve certain complex functions such as zooming. This is because each time new and specific functions are desired of the virtual book system depicted in say a certain behavior is desired of the virtual book in response to various situations and each time these functions are hard coded hard wired into the Book Viewer Software it entails an entire cycle of coding debugging and quality control process which means substantial amount of time and costs are involved. On the other hand if a certain number of basic functions are first encoded into the Book Viewer Software and the Book Viewer Software can thus be re programmed by the Programs etc. or other external programs a lot of time effort and costs can be saved.

To implement data persistence in a situation depicted in a Temporary Data Storage can be created by the programmable virtual book system depicted in . A Program one of etc. in the Book Behavior Specification can extract data on each page as they become available and then store them in the temporary data storage data pathways etc. . This Temporary Data Storage module corresponds to the Other Program and Data module in . The bottom half of depicts another state of the virtual book in which pages and are being displayed and there are more text boxes etc. that can be used to collect more data to store in the temporary storage data pathway . On page there is a SUBMIT button which when clicked will transfer the data in the temporary data storage to some pre determined location for further processing data pathway . Therefore using this method data over many pages can be made persistent and all the desired data can be collected and submitted all at once when desired.

To implement the mechanism of a Program one of etc. is embedded in the Book Behavior Specification of the virtual book in the Dynamic Specification Section . This Program one of etc. interacts with the search engine through pathways etc. depicted in . The seach engine corresponds to the Other Programs and Data block and collects the search results and lays them out on a number of pages in the virtual book and these pages have to be generated and added to the virtual book as shown in the virtual book . This is a good example of the Programs etc. in the Dynamic Specification Section of the Book Behavior Specification interacting with and instructing the Book Viewer Software through the Application Program Interface to effect changes on some basic properties of the virtual book such as increasing its number of pages and loading these pages with some contents. The programmable virtual book systems as depicted in thus provides a lot of flexibility in generating virtual books that provide convenience to the user in the browsing searching and reading of electronic contents.

All the functionalities described in can also be implemented by hard coding the Book Viewer Software to generate the desired behavior and functionalities. Hence as a result no programs embedded in the Dynamic Specification Section of the Book Behavior Specification are needed. However as mentioned above this will in general lead to more time and costs spent in software development.

In addition to the methods described herein a corresponding computing system e.g. desktop laptop notebook mobile phone personal digital assistant PDA television etc and computer program product software firmware network downloadable products and products available over portable media e.g. CD DVD diskette are envisioned.

While particular embodiments of the present invention have been illustrated and described it will be appreciated that numerous changes and modifications will occur to those skilled in the art and it is intended that the appended claims cover all those changes and modifications which fall within the spirit and scope of the present invention.

Obviously numerous modifications and variations of the present invention are possible in light of the above teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced otherwise than specifically described herein.

