---

title: Helicobacter system and uses thereof
abstract: based preparations comprising a pharmacologically active molecule of interest are disclosed, as well as methods of preparing and using said preparations. In particular, vectors, vector plasmids and recombinant cells that include a sequence encoding a pharmacologically active molecule of interest useful in therapeutic treatments and/or vaccination against disease are provided. Delivery of the pharmacologically active molecules is provided at the mucosal surface, such as the gastric mucosa or nasal membranes, to provide effective and continuous delivery of a pharmacologically active agent. Vectors and shuttle vector constructs are also provided.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07968324&OS=07968324&RS=07968324
owner: 
number: 07968324
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050812
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 602 859 filed Aug. 20 2004 and to Australian Patent Application No. 2004 904564 filed Aug. 13 2004 the text of both applications being specifically incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention relates generally to the field of based vector plasmid vector and shuttle vector systems as novel constructs that include a non pharmacologically active molecule of interest are provided. The invention also relates to the field of drug delivery vaccines and treatment methods as compositions that provide for the administration and or delivery of non molecules at the mucosa in vivo are disclosed.

The development of mucosal vaccines has also been hindered by the poor immunogenicity of antigens delivered by conventional approaches because of natural barrier functions of the host that prevent access to the mucosal compartment. Hence a need continues to exist in the medical arts for improved delivery mechanisms for pharmacologically active molecules at the mucosal surface sufficient to elicit a useful and beneficial immunogenic response. Such would provide an effective in vivo delivery system for pharmacological active agents as well as an effective method for immunization i.e. antigen exposure at a mucosal surface sufficient to elicit a general humoral and mucosal immune response.

The present invention is directed to overcoming the above mentioned challenges and others related to the use of and in the treatment of disease. The present invention is exemplified in a number of implementations and applications some of which are summarized below.

In accordance with some aspects compositions methods and systems are provided for preparing and using a based construct comprising a sequence having a promoter region and a non sequence encoding a non pharmacologically active molecule. This construct in some embodiments is described as a vector or a plasmid vector wherein the promoter sequence is capable of controlling the expression of the non pharmacologically active molecule of interest.

In another aspect a composition comprising a based vaccine is provided. In some embodiments the based vaccine comprises cells transformed with a based construct such as a plasmid vector as described herein. By way of example the cells transformed with the based plasmid vector may comprise cells or cells. In some embodiments the vaccine may be further defined as a live attenuated vaccine.

In some embodiments the transformed cells are capable of expressing the non pharmacologically active molecule of interest at a mucosal surface.

In other aspects a recombinant cell is provided comprising cells transformed with the plasmid vectors and or vectors. In some embodiments the recombinant cell is capable of secreting the non pharmacologically active molecule of interest at a mucosal surface in an animal. These recombinant cells further comprise in some embodiments a secretory sequence and or a reporter gene sequence. In particular embodiments the recombinant cell that is transformed is further defined as a recombinant or cell.

In some aspects the based vector and vector plasmid constructs comprise a pharmacologically active molecule of interest defined as an antigen organic or inorganic molecule or substance a pharmacological agent e.g. a therapeutic agent or prophylactic agent such as a gene product or gene sequence isolated nucleic acid . By way of example such pharmacologically active molecules of interest may comprise an immunoregulatory agent hormone ligand an enzyme or an antisense RNA a catalytic RNA a protein peptide or any other molecule. In some embodiments the isolated nucleic acid molecule may be further described as comprising cDNA genomic DNA RNA or a hybrid molecule thereof. In particular embodiments the nucleic acid is cDNA

By way of example a protein and or peptide of interest may comprise ghrelin amylin insulin motilin glucosidase a chemical chaperone or other molecule useful in the treatment of Gauchers disease cell wasting human immunodeficiency disease AIDS appetite suppression preparations useful in the treatment of diabetes etc

The present invention provides a variety of pharmaceutically acceptable preparations formulated for delivery to a patient such as for example delivery gastrically orally or intranasaly. In particular embodiments the compositions are suitable for delivery at a mucosal surface. In particular embodiments the composition is suitable for delivery to the mucosal surface of the gut.

By way of example the mucosa may be that of the gastric vaginal nasal oral or ocular surface or any other surface of the body characterized by the presence of a penetrable mucosal surface or lining. In some embodiments the mucosal surface is the gastric mucosal surface.

The various delivery forms of the compositions are readily prepared for use in the practice of the present invention given the specific types and ratios of specific constructs and other delivery vehicles described herein and those formulation techniques known to those in the formulary arts such as are described in 20edition Mack Publishing Company which text is specifically incorporated herein by reference.

It is envisioned that the delivery system may be employed in animals particularly primates including humans equines bovines ovines and rodents fish and birds. It is also anticipated that the preparations may be used on both infants and adults as well as parentally or for administration to pregnant or lactating animals. The preparations and methods may be further described as suitable for both male and female animals.

In yet another aspect a method is provided for vaccinating an animal. In some embodiments the method comprises administering a composition comprising a vaccine comprising cells transformed with the based vector and or plasmid vectors as described herein. In other embodiments the method provides for the delivery of an effective amount of the pharmacologically active molecule of interest sufficient to eliminate or inhibit a disease or physiological condition in the animal or sufficient to elicit an immune response specific for the pharmacologically active molecule of interest.

By way of example the non pharmacologically active molecule of interest useful in the vaccine may comprise a mammalian protein peptide enzyme hormone or any combination of these. In particular embodiments the pharmacologically active molecule of interest is further defined as a human pharmacologically active molecule of interest. In some embodiments the pharmacologically active molecule of interest is a human pathogen molecule antigen human protein antigen such as amylin or an analog or derivative thereof or ghrelin or an analog or derivative thereof.

In particular embodiments the vaccine conveys immunity against the human pathogen Ebola virus HIV virus Marburg virus influenza virus and the like. Replication competent vaccines based on attenuated recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus vectors have been described by Jones et al. 2005 that include Ebola glycoprotein and Marburg glycoprotein. Hence it is envisioned that constructs using the based vector systems and plasmid vector systems with these and other glycoproteins associated with human pathogens may also be provided according to the present invention together with the disclosure provided herein.

The following nucleic acid and amino acid sequences are referenced throughout the description of the present invention 

SEQ ID NO 5 Nucleotide sequence 135 bp 45 amino acids immunogenic coding sequence from the Hepatitis C virus HCV core antigen.

SEQ ID NO 6 Nucleotide sequence 1108 nucleotides of the surface exposed loop of the HopE gene at nt504 aa position 168 of

The present invention is believed to be applicable to a variety of different types of bacterial and vaccine constructs that include a or based vector system of delivery. It is advantageous to define several terms before describing the invention.

While the present invention is not necessarily limited to such applications various aspects of the invention may be appreciated through a discussion of various examples using this context.

Before describing the present invention in detail it is to be understood that this invention is not limited to particularly exemplified methods and may of course vary. It is also to be understood that the terminology used herein is for the purpose of describing particular embodiments of the invention only and is not intended to be limiting which will be limited only by the appended claims.

All publications patents and patent applications cited herein whether supra or infra are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety. However publications mentioned herein are cited for the purpose of describing and disclosing the protocols reagents and vectors which are reported in the publications and which might be used in connection with the invention. Nothing herein is to be construed as an admission that the invention is not entitled to antedate such disclosure by virtue of prior invention.

Furthermore the practice of the present invention employs unless otherwise indicated conventional immunological and molecular biological techniques and pharmacology within the skill of the art. Such techniques are well known to the skilled worker and are explained fully in the literature. See e.g. Coligan et al. 1999 Volume I and II John Wiley Sons Inc. Sambrook et al. 2nd 3rd Editions. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory press 1989 2001 and Bailey S F. and Ollis D. F. . McGraw Hill Book Company NY 1986.

It must be noted that as used herein and in the appended claims the singular forms a an and the include plural reference unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. Thus for example a reference to a nucleic acid includes a plurality of such nucleic acids and a reference to an isolated peptide is a reference to one or more peptides and so forth.

Unless defined otherwise all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meanings as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which this invention belongs. Although any materials and methods similar or equivalent to those described herein can be used to practice the present invention the preferred materials and methods are now described.

Delivery of therapeutic compositions and nucleic acids to specific target sites within the animal body is an ongoing challenge faced by the drug development industry. The present inventor has developed a based bacterial delivery system capable of carrying vectors encoding biologically active agents wherein these agents are expressed on the surface of the bacterium or secreted there from. In one embodiment the bacterium is a species of . In some embodiments the strain of can be any strain known in the field. In some embodiments the strain is a non pathogenic strain such as genomic strain 26695.

In another embodiment a bacterium other than is utilized wherein the bacterium has been genetically altered such that it has or features including the ability to chronically colonize the gastric mucosa or other areas of gastrointestinal tract urinary tract bronchial epithelium or other mucosal surface without significant toxicity to the host.

In one embodiment the have been manipulated so that some of the pathogenic features have been removed and or attenuated. For example the vacuolating cytotoxin and the cag pathogenicity island genes can be removed so that the are less pathogenic. Attenuating mutations can be introduced into using non specific mutagenesis either chemically using N methyl N nitro N nitrosoquanidine or using recombinant DNA technologies.

The skilled person will appreciate that the methods of the present invention could be used to deliver biologically active agents. Examples of suitable agents include ones which are capable of functioning locally or systemically e.g. an agent capable of exerting endocrine activities affecting local or whole body metabolism and or an agent which is capable of regulating the activities of cells belonging to the immuno hematopoeitic system and or an agent which is capable of affecting the viability growth and differentiation of a variety of normal or neoplastic cells in the body or affecting the immune regulation or induction of acute phase inflammatory responses to injury and infection and or an agent which is capable of enhancing or inducing resistance to infection of cells and tissues mediated by chemokines acting on their target cell receptors or the proliferation of epithelial cells or the promotion of wound healing and or an agent which modulates the expression or production of substances by cells in the body.

Specific examples of such biologically active agents include insulin growth hormone prolactin calcitonin luteinizing hormone parathyroid hormone somatostatin thyroid stimulating hormone vasoactive intestinal polypeptide a structural group I cytokine adopting an antiparallel 4 helical bundle structure such as IL 2 IL 3 IL 4 IL 5 IL 6 IL 7 IL 9 IL 10 IL 11 IL 12 IL 13 CM CSF M CSF SCF IFN EPO G CSF LIF OSM CNTF GH PRL or IFN a structural group 2 cytokine which are often cell surface associated form symmetric homotrimers and the subunits take up the conformation of jelly roll described for certain viral coat proteins such as the tumor necrosis factor TNF family of cytokines e.g. TNF TNF CD40 CD27 or FAS ligands the IL 1 family of cytokines the fibroblast growth factor family the platelet derived growth factors transforming growth factor and nerve growth factors a structural group 3 cytokine comprising short chain molecules which are produced as large transmembrane pre cursor molecules which each contain at least one EGF domain in the extracellular region e.g. the epidermal growth factor family of cytokines the chemokines characterized by their possession of amino acid sequences grouped around conserved cysteine residues the C C or C X C chemokine subgroups or the insulin related cytokines a structural group 4 cytokine which exhibit mosaic structures such as the heregulins or neuregulins composed of different domains e.g. EGF immunoglobulin like and kringle domains.

Alternatively the biologically active agent can be a receptor or antagonist for biologically active agent as defined above.

In some embodiments the based vector and or vector plasmid construct is employed to create a transformed cell such as an cell or cell that permits the expression and secretion of a non pharmacologically active molecule of interest at the mucosal membrane of a host to which the transformed cell preparation is administered. The isolated nucleic acid molecule contained within the transformed cell or vector may comprise one or more nucleic acid constructs in which nucleic acid encoding the pharmacologically active molecule of interest is under control of regulatory sequences.

Suitable vectors and shuttle vector sequences can be chosen or constructed to contain appropriate regulatory sequences including promoter sequences terminator fragments enhancer sequences marker genes and other sequences as appropriate. Vectors may be plasmids viral e.g. phage or phagemid as appropriate. For further details for example see Sambrook et al. supra. Many techniques and protocols are known for the manipulation of nucleic acid for example in preparation of nucleic acid constructs mutagenesis sequencing introduction of DNA into cells and gene expression and analysis of proteins as described in detail in Second Edition Ausubel et al. eds. John Wiley Sons 1992. The disclosures of Sambrook et al. supra and Ausubel et al. are incorporated specifically herein by reference.

In some embodiments the coding sequence s for the pharmacologically active molecules of interest is contained in an operon i.e. a nucleic acid construct for multi cistronic expression. In an operon transcription from the promoter results in a mRNA which comprises more than one coding sequence each with its own suitably positioned ribosome binding site upstream. Thus more than one agent pharmacologically active molecule of interest can be translated from a single mRNA. Use of an operon enables expression of the pharmacologically active molecule of interest to be coordinated.

A nucleic acid construct or vector comprising a coding sequence for a pharmacologically active molecule of interest is preferably under the control of a promoter for expression in

In one embodiment the promoter employed in accordance with the present invention is expressed constitutively in . Use of a constitutive promoter avoids the need to supply an inducer or other regulatory signal for expression to take place. Preferably the promoter directs expression at a level at which the host cell remains viable i.e. retains some metabolic activity even if growth may be reduced. Advantageously then such expression may be at a low level. For example where the expression product accumulates intracellularly the level of expression may lead to accumulation of the expression product at less than about 10 of cellular protein preferably about or less than about 5 for example about 1 3 .

The promoter may be homologous to the strain employed i.e. one found in that strain of in nature. In some embodiments the promoter is an arabinose inducible promoter. Other promoters include FlaB sigma 54 promoter Josenhans et at. 1998161 2 263 73 T7 promoter and nir B promoter of Chatfield et al. 199210 8 888 92 .

In another embodiment the promoter is inducible. Inducible promoters that may be used with clinical grade vectors include but are not limited to an inducible promoter as described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 242 194 issued to Kullen et at. a lactose inducible promoter such as that used in plasmids e.g. pBluescript from Stratagene or the endogenous lactose promoter in and promoters induced during anaerobic growth such as the promoter for alcohol dehydrogenase adhE as described in Aristarkhov et at. 1999 178 14 4327 4332 .

In one embodiment the constructs of the present invention also include a toxic gene. These toxic genes are preferably under the control of an inducible promoter so that on completion of treatment the can be readily eliminated by inducing the expression of the toxic gene. Non limiting examples of toxic genes include bacterial autolysins under the control of an inducible promoter. The autolysing gene may then be triggered at the appropriate time and place in the gastrointestinal tract through the use of one or more of the inducible promoters as described herein.

In some embodiments the engineered vector and plasmid vector constructs are sensitive to oxygen. This oxygen sensitivity is another method for limiting dissemination of the clinical grade vectors of the present invention. The environment of the human gut is very low in oxygen suitable for growth of anaerobic and microacrophulic microorganisms including . Thus an efficient means of eliminating once they have exited the human body upon discharge of intestinal waste into the oxygen rich outside environment is to engineer genes into the transformed microorganisms that confer oxygen sensitivity.

The nucleic acid construct or constructs of the present invention may also comprise a secretory signal sequence. Thus in some embodiments the nucleic acid encoding the pharmacologically active molecule of interest for example a non polypeptide may provide for secretion of the molecule at a cell membrane by appropriately coupling a nucleic acid sequence encoding a secretory signal sequence to the nucleic acid sequence encoding the molecule polypeptide . The ability of harboring the nucleic acid to secrete the polypeptide may be tested in vitro in culture conditions which maintain viability of the

Suitable secretory signal sequences include any of those with activity in Gram negative organisms such as and . Secretory signal sequences include the enzyme secreted by some strains of which is known to function in both Gram positive and Gram negative hosts see Gene Expression Using Rapoport 1990 1 21 27 .

Other secretory signal sequences that can be used include for example the lactamase gene Talmadge et at. 198077 3369 3373 or the enteroinvasive hemolysin A hlyA Su et at. 199213 465 476 . An illustrative list of secretory signal sequences is presented in Pugsley 1988 Protein secretion across the outer membrane of gram negative bacteria. In and R. C. Dand and P. W. Robbins eds . Academic Press Inc. San Diego pp 607 652.

Selectable markers provide researchers and technicians a convenient means for distinguishing transformed microorganisms from non transformed ones in a mixed population. One means of identifying transformed organism is to incorporate a selectable marker nucleic acid sequence into the plasmid containing the gene of interest. The selectable marker sequence is generally inserted downstream of the gene of interest and is driven off the same promoter. As a result cells successfully transformed with the gene of interest will also be transformed with the selectable marker nucleic acid sequence. When antibiotic resistance is used as the selectable marker only transformed cells will survive and or grow in media containing the antibiotic.

Thus antibiotic resistance is a convenient and much used phenotype when developing transformants. However vectors having antibiotic resistant genes as selective markers are capable of horizontal gene transfer that can endow other organisms with antibiotic resistant phenotypes. This risk is especially acute when is used as part of a therapeutic vector.

In order to use as a gene delivery system to animals the present disclosure presents in some embodiments a clinical grade vector system that does not use an antibiotic selection marker. One of the alternatives to using antibiotic resistance genes provided by the present delivery systems includes clinical grade vectors having chromosomal deletions or lethal mutations in a house keeping gene. Next a functional analogous house keeping gene is inserted into a plasmid encoding for the pharmacologically active molecule of interest. Consequently the house keeping gene becomes the selectable marker allowing for the rapid isolation and identification of transformants.

Examples of house keeping genes include genes that encode for any number of metabolic regulators and or enzymes including but not limited to kinases proteases synthetases dehydrogenases and others. Another alternative to antibiotic resistance genes provided by the present invention includes clinical grade vectors having reporter genes incorporated into the plasmid containing the gene encoding for the pharmacologically active molecule of interest. Other examples of reporter genes used in accordance with the teachings of the present invention include Green Fluorescent Protein GFP galactosidase and amylase.

In one embodiment the pharmacologically active molecule of interest has cytokine activity. Cytokines are discussed in Callard and Gearing 1994 Academic Press. Preferred molecules such as polypeptides with cytokine activity are interleukins including Interleukin 2 IL 2 and Interleukin 6 IL 6 .

In some embodiments the vector and plasmid vector systems comprise a nucleic acid construct as described above that is introduced into a or other suitable host cell to provide transformed cells. Thus a further aspect provides a method comprising introducing nucleic acid as disclosed into a non pathogenic . Transformation of a culture of host cells such as may employ any available technique. For cells suitable techniques may include calcium chloride transformation electroporation and transfection using bacteriophage.

The introduction of the plasmid vector into a cell may be followed by causing or allowing expression from the nucleic acid e.g. by culturing under conditions suitable for expression of the gene. Growing the in culture under conditions for expression of the pharmacologically active molecule of interest may be employed to verify that the contain the encoding nucleic acid and is able to produce the encoded molecule.

In a further aspect the present invention provides a method of delivering a therapeutic or prophylactic dose of a biologically active agent in vivo the method comprising administering to a subject an effective amount of the non pathogenic preparation of the compositions and vaccines of the present invention.

It will be appreciated that the methods of the present invention and the use of a non invasive or non pathogenic as described herein provide a wide range of therapeutic methods which would enable the skilled person to manipulate for instance the immune response of a subject. Thus in one aspect a method of regulating the survival growth differentiation effector functions or susceptibility to infection of cells or tissues is provided which comprises administering to a subject a non invasive or non pathogenic as defined herein.

In another aspect a method of boosting an immune response against tumor cells or an infection colonizing a mucosal surface or adjacent or distant tissue is provided which comprises administering to a subject a non invasive or non pathogenic as defined herein.

In yet another aspect a method of modulating the type of immune response antibody versus cell mediated against a pathogenic infectious agent is provided which comprises administering to a subject a non invasive or non pathogenic as defined herein.

In another aspect a method of modulating the infiltration of normal tissues with inflammatory or tumor cells is provided which comprises administering to a subject a non invasive or non pathogenic as defined herein.

In some aspects a method of controlling the rate of growth rate of invasion or survival of tumor cells is provided which comprises administering to a subject a non invasive or non pathogenic as defined herein.

In yet another aspect a method of inducing apoptosis in tumor cells is provided which comprises administering to a subject a non invasive or non pathogenic as defined herein.

Other aspects provide for a method of down regulating an immune response which comprises administering to a subject a non invasive or non pathogenic bacterium which expresses a pharmacologically active molecule of interest as defined herein.

In another aspect a method of treating an allergic autoimmune or other immune dysregulative disease state is provided which comprises administering to a subject a non invasive or non pathogenic which expresses a pharmacologically active molecule of interest.

The subject can be any primate equine bovine porcine ovine rodent fish or bird. In one embodiment the subject is human. Administration may conveniently be nasal or oral.

In a therapeutic context i.e. where the pharmacologically active molecule of interest is a biologically active agent that provides a beneficial effect to the subject the amount of the agent and or treatment regimen will preferably be provided in a therapeutically effective amount this being sufficient to show benefit to a subject. Such benefit may be at least amelioration or a reduction in the severity or occurrence of at least one symptom. In a prophylactic context the amount may be sufficient to reduce the deleterious effect on the subject of a subsequent pathogenic challenge for instance by enhancing the immune response. The actual amount administered and rate and time course of administration will depend on the aim of the administration e.g. the biological effect sought in view of the nature and severity of the challenge and is the subject of routine optimization. Prescription of treatment including prophylactic vaccination for example decisions on dosage etc is within the responsibility of general practitioners and other medical doctors.

A composition comprising may be administered in accordance with the present invention alone or in combination with other treatments either simultaneously or sequentially.

The present invention also provides a pharmaceutical composition comprising a as disclosed. Such a pharmaceutical composition is in one embodiment preferably suitable for application to a mucosal membrane.

Pharmaceutical compositions according to the present invention and for use may comprise in addition to the a pharmaceutically acceptable excipient carrier buffer stabilizer or other materials well known to those skilled in the art. Such materials should be non toxic and should not interfere with the efficacy of the pharmacologically active molecule of interest. The nature of the carrier or other material may depend on the route of administration. For oral administration a parenterally acceptable aqueous solution may be employed which is pyrogen free and has suitable pH isotonicity and stability. Those of relevant skill in the art are well able to prepare suitable solutions. Preservatives stabilizers buffers antioxidants and or other additives may be included as required. As discussed a pharmaceutical comprising a for administration in accordance with the present invention may comprise one or more nutrient substances e.g. an energy source such as glucose amino acids and so on.

In another aspect a method of manufacture of a pharmaceutical formulations provided comprising formulating as disclosed with a suitable carrier medium suitable for administration to an individual. In one embodiment the pharmaceutical is suitable for application to a mucosal membrane of an individual.

In yet another aspect a non pathogenic expressing a heterologous pharmacologically active molecule of interest for pharmaceutical use is provided e.g. for use in a method of treatment of the human or animal body by surgery or therapy including prophylaxis vaccination .

In one embodiment the method can be used to treat prevent or palliate a disease such as cancer. The methods and delivery system can also be used to treat or prevent a disease or condition of the immune hematopoietic system a disease or condition of the reproductive system a disease or condition of the musculoskeletal system a disease or condition of the cardiovascular system a disease or condition described as mixed fetal a disease or condition of the excretory system a disease or condition of the neural sensory system a disease or condition of the endocrine system a disease or condition of the respiratory system a disease or condition of the digestive system and a disease or condition associated with connective epithelial tissue or disease or condition caused by bacterial viral or parasitic infection.

In another embodiment the delivery system described herein is capable of concomitant or sequential delivery of a number of different nucleic acid molecules which encode products capable of treating a number of conditions or diseases described herein. Moreover preferred delivery systems would also deliver compositions capable of producing additional desirable physiological effects such as appetite suppression or enhancement.

An example of suicide system in has been described by Panthel et al. 2003 71 109 116 . This system introduces a plasmid into which contains the PhiX174 lysis gene E. To eradicate the strain incubation at 42 C. for 5 hours was used. In vivo this would mean that the animal would consume a drink at 45 50 C. to raise the temperature of the gastric environment above 42 C.

A second example is the L Dap selection system commonly used to allow survival of bacterial mutants on supplemented plates see for example Kirata et al. 1997 Infection Immunity 65 4158 4164 . In this system the animal subject must supplement their diet with a missing substrate i.e. diamino pimelic acid DAP in order for the DapE deficient mutant to survive. In order to eradicate the mutants DAP consumption is ceased.

A third possible system relates to metronidazole sensitivity of because of its rdxA gene. Excessive replication of the rdxA gene is harmful to mammalian cells and . However duplication may be tolerated by the bacterium. Therefore a species of the present invention can be engineered to contain two copies of rdxA which prevents the normal mutation dependant rdxA loss. The introduction of at least two functional rdxA genes into the genome will result in a strain that is permanently sensitive to metronidazole. Jeong et al. 2000 182 5082 5090 showed that the nitroreductase produced by a functional rdxA gene converts metronidazole from a prodrug to a bactericidal compound. The mode of action of the active compound is to cause DNA breaks of the genome.

Throughout the specification unless the context requires otherwise the word comprise or variations such as comprises or comprising will be understood to imply the inclusion of a stated integer or group of integers but not the exclusion of any other integer or group of integers.

Prior to setting forth the invention it may be helpful to an understanding thereof to set forth definitions of certain terms that will be used hereinafter.

An antibiotic resistance gene as defined herein includes heterologous nucleic acid sequences purposely provided to a vector and used as a selection system. The term antibiotic resistance gene does not include other mechanisms or genes that impart antibiotic resistance to naturally occurring micro flora organisms.

The term attenuated as used herein for example to describe a bacterial strain particularly an or a strain such as is defined as a strain that is less virulent and or toxic invasive that a native wild type bacterial strain.

The term biologically active as used herein refers to ability to perform a biological function and with reference to a polypeptide implies that the polypeptide adopts a stable conformation folded form which is the same or closely analogous to its native conformation. When folded correctly or substantially correctly for example with formation of proper folded units helices sheets domains disulphide bridges etc. a polypeptide should have the ability to perform its natural function. Generally the unit of function in a polypeptide is a domain.

A pharmacologically active molecule of interest as used in the description of the present invention is defined as a molecule such as a peptide protein nucleic acid or other organic or inorganic substance that is capable of eliciting a pharmacologically detectable activity or response in a cell such as in a cell culture or in a chemical or biochemical reaction media or assay. These pharmacologically active molecules of interest may thus include biologically active molecules as described herein.

 Clinical grade vector as used herein means a plasmid or other expression vector that is capable of being expressed in or a non pathogenic bacterium engineered to have features of . The clinical grade vectors of the present invention do not use antibiotic resistance markers for selection and or have been modified to prevent replication outside the host e.g. such as a suicide vector.

 Detectable immune response as used herein is either an antibody humoral or cytotoxic cellular response formed in an animal in response to an antigen that can be measured using routine laboratory methods including but not limited to enzyme linked immunosorbent assays ELISA radio immune assays RIA Enzyme linked ImmunoSPOT ELISPOT immunofluorescence assays IFA complement fixation assays CF Western Blot WB or an equivalent thereto.

 Gene of interest as used herein refers to any nucleic acid sequence encoding for a pharmacologically active molecule of interest such as polypeptide or protein whose expression is desired. The nucleic acid sequence may or may not include the promoter or other regulatory components. The vectors and plasmid vectors also include constructs capable of producing anti sense RNA.

 Gene therapy as used herein is defined as the delivery of a gene of interest to an animal in need thereof using a recombinant vector. The gene of interest can be a transgene encoding for a therapeutic or prophylactic protein or polypeptide including but not limited to cytokines anti inflammatories anti proliferatives antibiotics metabolic inhibitors activators and immunologically active antigens and fragments thereof. Furthermore gene therapy as used herein also includes gene replacement technologies directed at both inherited and non inherited disorders.

The term includes all bacteria of the genus including and . The term also includes bacteria that have similar biology to in that they are capable of residing on the gastric mucosa of primates and or capable of establishing a chronic but isolated infection of the mucosa. The term also encompasses bacteria that have been modified so that the bacterium has features such as the ability to reside on the gastric mucosa.

A heterologous polypeptide is a peptide that is not native or that has been mutated from the native form as it existed in i.e. not expressed by in nature or prior to introduction into or an ancestor thereof.

 Host as used herein defines the intended recipient of a therapeutic composition of the present invention. Host includes all animals. Specifically hosts include but are not limited to primates including man bovine equine canine feline porcine ovine rabbits rodents birds and fish.

 Immunologically inert as used herein shall mean any substance including microorganisms such as microflora that does not provoke a significant immune response in its host. Examples of immunologically inert materials as used herein include stainless steel biocompatible polymers such as poly L lactide medical grade plastics and the microflora organisms of the present invention.

A significant immune response is any immune response that would provide immunity i.e. invoke the production of specific antibody in an animal against a given antigenic molecule or immunogen.

An isolated nucleic acid is a nucleic acid sequence that is not identical to any naturally occurring nucleic acid or any fragment of a naturally occurring genomic nucleic acid sequence spanning more than three separate genes. The term therefore covers for example a a DNA molecule which has the sequence of part of a naturally occurring genomic DNA molecule but is not flanked by both of the coding sequences that flank that part of the molecule in the genome of the organism in which it naturally occurs b a nucleic acid incorporated into a vector or into the genomic DNA of a prokaryote or eukaryote in a manner such that the resulting molecule is not identical to any naturally occurring vector or genomic DNA c a separate molecule such as a cDNA a genomic fragment a fragment produced by polymerase chain reaction PCR or a restriction fragment and d a recombinant nucleotide sequence that is part of a hybrid gene i.e. a gene encoding a fusion protein.

 Percent identity homology of two amino acid sequences or of two nucleic acids is determined using the algorithm of Karlin and Altschul 199087 2264 2268 1990 modified as in Karlin and Altschul 90 5873 5877 1993 . Such an algorithm is incorporated into the NBLAST and XBLAST programs of Altschul et al. 215 403 410 1990 . BLAST nucleotide searches are performed with the NBLAST program score 100 wordlength 12 to obtain nucleotide sequences homologous to a nucleic acid molecule of the invention. BLAST protein searches are performed with the XBLAST program score 50 wordlength 3 to obtain amino acid sequences homologous to a reference polypeptide e.g. SEQ ID NO 2 . To obtain gapped alignments for comparison purposes Gapped BLAST is utilized as described in Altschul et al. 25 3389 3402 1997 . When utilizing BLAST and Gapped BLAST programs the default parameters of the respective programs e.g. XBLAST and NBLAST are used.

The term reporter gene as used herein is a nucleic acid sequence incorporated into or adjacent to the heterologous nucleic acid encoding the pharmacologically active molecule of interest that provides the transformed vector expressing the molecule of interest an identifiable phenotype. Non limiting examples of reporter genes include GFP galactosidase amylase and CAT.

 Screening marker as used herein refers to an identifying characteristic phenotype provided to a transformed vector made in accordance with the teachings of the present invention. In one embodiment of the present invention the screening marker is a reporter gene.

 Selectable marker selectable gene reporter gene and reporter marker referred to hereinafter as a selectable marker as used herein refer to nucleic acid sequences encoding for phenotypic traits that permit the rapid identification and isolation of a transformed bacterial vector. Generally bacterial vectors deemed clinical grade and made in accordance with the teachings of the present invention are those vectors having selectable markers that do not encode for antibiotic resistance.

 Transgene as used herein refers to a gene that is inserted using cDNA technology into a cell in a manner that ensures its function replication and transmission as a normal gene.

 Transforming nucleic acid sequence as used herein means a plasmid or other expression cassette containing a nucleic acid sequence encoding a pharmacologically active molecule of interest. In some embodiments of the present invention the nucleic acid sequence can encode for one or more therapeutic agents. Transforming nucleic acid sequence can also be used to mean a transgene in accordance with certain embodiments of the present invention. In another embodiment of the present invention the transforming nucleic acid sequence includes nucleic acid sequence encoding for a promoter and or other regulatory elements.

The term cancer as used herein refers to neoplastic diseases eg. leukemia cancers and hyperproliferative disorders . The neoplasm may be located in a tissue selected from the group consisting of colon abdomen bone breast digestive system liver pancreas prostate peritoneum lung blood e.g. leukemia endocrine glands adrenal parathyroid pituitary testicles ovary thymus thyroid uterus eye head and neck nervous central and peripheral lymphatic system pelvic skin soft tissue spleen thoracic and urogenital.

In one embodiment the term cancer also encompasses pre neoplastic conditions selected from the group consisting of hyperplasia e.g. endometrial hyperplasia metaplasia eg connective tissue metaplasia and or dysplasia e.g. cervical dysplasia and bronchopulmonary dysplasia .

In another embodiment the term cancer also encompasses benign dysproliferative disorder selected from the group consisting of benign tumors fibrocystic conditions and tissue hypertrophy.

The term a disease or condition of the immune hematopoietic system as used herein refers to a disease or condition selected from the group consisting of anemia pancytopenia leukopenia thrombocytopenia leukemia Hodgkin s disease non Hodgkin s lymphoma acute lymphocytic anemia ALL plasmacytomas multiple myeloma Burkitt s lymphoma arthritis asthma AIDS autoimmune disease rheumatoid arthritis granulomatous disease immune deficiency inflammatory bowel disease sepsis neutropenia neutrophilia psoriasis immune reactions to transplanted organs and tissues systemic lupus erythematosus hemophilia hypercoagulation diabetes mellitus endocarditis meningitis Lyme Disease Celiac disease gluten sensitivity and allergies.

The term a disease or condition of the reproductive system as used herein refers to a disease or condition selected from the group consisting of cryptorchism prostatitis inguinal hernia varicocele leydig cell tumors verrucous carcinoma prostatitis malacoplakia Peyronie s disease penile carcinoma squamous cell hyperplasia dysmenorrhea ovarian adenocareinoma Turner s syndrome mucopurulent cervicitis Sertoli Leydig tumors ovarian cancer uterine cancer pelvic inflammatory disease testicular cancer prostate cancer Klinefelter s syndrome Young s syndrome premature ejaculation diabetes mellitus cystic fibrosis Kartagener s syndrome testicular atrophy testicular feminization anorchia ectopic testis epididymitis orchitis gonorrhea syphilis testicular torsion vasitis nodosa germ cell tumors stromal tumors dysmenorrhea retroverted uterus endometriosis fibroids adenomyosis anovulatory bleeding amenorrhea Cushing s syndrome hydatidiform moles Asherman s syndrome premature menopause precocious puberty uterine polyps dysfunctional uterine bleeding cervicitis chronic cervicitis mucopurulent cervicitis cervical dysplasia cervical polyps Nabothian cysts cervical erosion cervical incompetence cervical neoplasms pseudohermaphroditism and premenstrual syndrome.

The term a disease or condition of the musculoskeletal system as used herein refers to a disease or condition selected from the group consisting of bone cancers e.g. osteochondromas benign chondromas chondroblastoma chondromyxoid fibromas osteoid osteomas giant cell tumors multiple myeloma osteosarcomas Paget s Disease rheumatoid arthritis systemic lupus erythematosus osteomyelitis Lyme Disease gout bursitis tendonitis osteoporosis osteoarthritis muscular dystrophy mitochondrial myopathy cachexia and multiple sclerosis.

The term a disease or condition of the cardiovascular system as used herein refers to a disease or condition selected from the group consisting of myxomas fibromas rhabdomyomas cardiovascular abnormalities e.g. congenital heart defects cerebral arteriovenous malformatiens septal defects heart disease e.g. heart failure congestive heart disease arrhythmia tachycardia fibrillation pericardial Disease endocarditis cardiac arrest heart valve disease e.g. stenosis regurgitation prolapse vascular disease e.g. hypertension coronary artery disease angina aneurism arteriosclerosis peripheral vascular disease hyponatremia hypernatremia hypokalemia and hyperkalemia.

The term a disease or condition described as mixed fetal as used herein refers to a disease or condition selected from the group consisting of spina bifida hydranencephaly neurofibromatosis fetal alcohol syndrome diabetes mellitus PKU Down s syndrome Patau syndrome Edwards syndrome Turner syndrome Apert syndrome Carpenter syndrome Conradi syndrome Crouzon syndrome cutis laxa Cornelia de Lange syndrome Ellis van Creveld syndrome Holt Oram syndrome Kartagener syndrome Meckel Gruber syndrome Noonan syndrome Pallister Hall syndrome Rubinstein Taybi syndrome Scimitar syndrome Smith Lemli Opitz syndrome thrombocytopenia absent radius TAR syndrome Treacher Collins syndrome Williams syndrome Hirschsprung s disease Meckel s diverticulum polycystic kidney disease Turner s syndrome and gonadal dysgenesis Klippel Feil syndrome Ostogenesis imperfecta muscular dystrophy Tay Sachs disease Wilm s tumour neuroblastoma and retinoblastoma 

The term a disease or condition of the excretory system as used herein refers to a disease or condition selected from the group consisting of bladder cancer prostate cancer benign prostatic hyperplasia bladder disorders e.g. urinary incontinence urinary retention urinary obstruction urinary tract infections interstitial cystitis prostatitis neurogenic bladder hematuria renal disorders e.g. hydronephrosis proteinuria renal failure pyelonephritis urolithiasis reflux nephropathy and unilateral obstructive uropathy .

The term a disease or condition of the neural sensory system as used herein refers to a disease or condition selected from the group consisting of brain cancer e.g. brain stem glioma brain tumors central nervous system Primary lymphoma central nervous system lymphoma cerebellar astrocyroma and cerebral astrocytoma neurodegenerative disorders e.g. Alzheimer s Disease. Creutzfeldt Jakob Disease Parkinson s Disease and Idiopathic Presenile Dementia encephalomyelitis cerebral malaria meningitis metabolic brain diseases e.g. phenylketonuria and pyruvate carboxylase deficiency cerebellar ataxia ataxia telangiectasia and AIDS Dementia Complex schizophrenia attention deficit disorder hyperactive attention deficit disorder autism and obsessive compulsive disorders.

The term a disease or condition of the respiratory system as used herein refers to a disease or disorder selected from the group consisting of cancers of the respiratory system such as larynx cancer pharynx cancer trachea cancer epiglottis cancer lung cancer squamous cell carcinomas small cell oat cell carcinomas large cell carcinomas adenocarcinomas allergic reactions cystic fibrosis sarcoidosis histiocytosis X infiltrative lung diseases e.g. pulmonary fibrosis and lymphoid interstitial pneumonia obstructive airway diseases e.g. asthma emphysema chronic or acute bronchitis occupational lung diseases e.g. silicosis and asbestosis pneumonia and pleurisy.

The term a disease or condition of the endocrine system as used herein refers to a disease or condition selected from the group consisting of cancers of endocrine tissues and organs e.g. cancers of the hypothalamus pituitary gland thyroid gland parathyroid glands pancreas adrenal glands ovaries and testes diabetes e.g. diabetes insipidus type I and type II diabetes mellitus obesity disorders related to pituitary glands e.g. hyperpituitarism hypopituitarism and pituitary dwarfism hypothyroidism hyperthyroidism goiter reproductive disorders e.g. male and female infertility disorders related to adrenal glands e.g. Addison s Disease corticosteroid deficiency and Cushing s Syndrome kidney cancer e.g. hypermephroma transitional cell cancer and Wilm s tumour diabetic nephropathy interstitial nephritis polycystic kidney disease glomerulonephritis e.g. IgM mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis and glomerulonephritis caused by autoimmune disorders such as Goodpasture s syndrome and nephrocalcinosis.

The term a disease or condition of the digestive system as used herein refers to a disease or condition selected from the group consisting of ulcerative colitis appendicitis Crohn s disease hepatitis hepatic encephalopathy portal hypertension cholelithiasis cancer of the digestive system e.g. biliary tract cancer stomach cancer colon cancer gastric cancer pancreatic cancer cancer of the bile duct tumors of the colon e.g. polyps or cancers and cirrhosis pancreatitis ulcerative disease pyloric stenosis gastroenteritis gastritis gastric atrophy benign tumors of the duodenum distension irritable bowel syndrome malabsorption congenital disorders of the small intestine bacterial and parasitic infection megacolon Hirschsprung s disease aganglionic megacolon acquired megacolon colitis anorectal disorders e.g. anal fistulas hemorrhoids congenital disorders of the liver e.g. Wilson s disease hemochromatosis cystic fibrosis biliary atresia and alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency portal hypertension cholelithiasis and jaundice.

The term a disease or condition of the connective epithelial as used herein refers to a disease or condition selected from the group consisting of connective tissue metaplasia mixed connective tissue disease focal epithelial hyperplasia epithelial metaplasia mucoepithelial dysplasia graft v. host disease polymyositis cystic hyperplasia cerebral dysplasia tissue hypertrophy Alzheimer s disease lymphoproliferative disorder Waldenstron s macroglobulinemia Crohn s disease pernicious anemia idiopathic Addison s disease glomerulonephritis bullous pemphigoid Sjogren s syndrome diabetes mellitus cystic fibrosis osteoblastoma osteoclastoma osteosarcoma chondrosarcoma osteoporosis osteocarthritis periodontal disease wound healing relapsing polychondritis vasculitis polyarteritis nodosa Wegener s granulomatosis cellulitis rheumatoid arthritis psoriatic arthritis discoid lupus erythematosus systemic lupus erythematosus scleroderma. CREST syndrome polymyositis dermatomyositis mixed connective tissue disease relapsing polychondritis vasculitis Henoch Schonlein syndrome erythema nodosum polyarteritis nodosa temporal giant cell arteritis Takayasu s arteritis Wegener s granulomatosis Reiter s syndrome Behcet s syndrome ankylosing spondylitis cellulitis keloids Ehler Danlos syndrome Marfan syndrome pseudoxanthoma elasticum osteogenesis imperfecta chondrodysplasias epidermolysis bullosa. Alport syndrome and cutis laxa.

The term a and the as used in the present descriptive is intended to include both one the singular and more than one plural .

A therapeutically effective amount of a pharmacologically active molecule of interest or combination of said molecules as described herein is understood to comprise an amount effective to elicit the desired response but insufficient to cause a toxic reaction. A desired response for example may constitute the formation of a sufficient and or acceptable detectable antibody titer level in a blood sample. The dosage and duration of treatment of the preparation to be administered to a subject will be determined by the health professional attending the subject in need of treatment and will consider the age sex weight extent of existing diseased state and or tissue damage of the subject and specific formulation of and the gene of interest product being used as the treatment for the subject.

The phrase effective level refers to the level of the desired activity of the pharmacologically active molecule of interest and not necessarily limited to the number of molecules. For example the effective level of amylin as an exemplary pharmacologically active molecule of interest may be decreased to stimulate ghrelin secretion by using amylin antagonists without a necessary concomitant decrease in the amount of free amylin present in a subject.

The phrase ghrelin associated diseases and disorders refers to any condition that can be treated prevented or ameliorated through the modulation of ghrelin activity. These include conditions that are enhanced exacerbated or stimulated by ghrelin for example growth hormone release or drive to eat. The physiological actions of ghrelin are considered to include by way of example the stimulation of growth hormone release the stimulation of hormone secretion from lactotrophs and corticotropes orexigenic and cardiovascular actions anti proliferative effects on thyroid and breast tumors and regulation of gastric motility and acid secretion through vagal mediation. See WO 2005021026 .

Where the definition of terms departs from the commonly used meaning of the term applicant intends to utilize the definitions provided herein unless specifically indicated.

The invention will now be further described by reference only to the following non limiting examples. It should be understood however that the examples following are illustrative and should not be taken in any way as a restriction on the generality of the invention described herein. In particular while the invention is described in detail in relation to the use of a specific strain it will be clearly understood that the findings herein are not limited to this strain.

The genetic manipulation of is uncommon. The present example demonstrates the utility of the invention for providing a genetically transformed particularly transformed . The transformed bacterium are prepared using plasmids and plasmid vectors derived from which have had been subject to prior manipulation in a non organism such as

Several plasmids described in the literature can be successfully converted to shuttle vectors. Many strains of have been reported to be naturally competent for DNA uptake. Resistance markers for streptomycin rifampin and metronidazole have also been successfully transformed into most strains of . However while plasmid DNA from and other organisms can be introduced into these plasmids cannot be stably maintained. Moreover plasmids cannot be transformed into or species. Accordingly shuttle vectors must be constructed.

Two plasmids from are illustrated in the schematics shown in . Vectors pHPAI 2.8 kb and pHP3 3.4 kb have been sequenced and it has been revealed that pHPAI replicated via the theta mode of plasmid replication. In contrast to rolling circle replicating plasmids theta plasmids do not generate single stranded DNA intermediates during replication and are thus more stable vector candidates because they are less prone to illegitimate recombination. Furthermore the pHPAI origin of replication ori contains a series of direct repeat sequences termed iterons that are involved in replication control and maintaining stable copy number. Vector pHP3 shares many of these features. The nucleotide sequences for these two vectors are shown below.

Plasmid pHP1 shown in double stranded form top strand is strand SEQ ID 1 bottom strand is strand SEQ ID NO 2 

An additional nucleotide sequence that was cloned is provided at SEQ ID NO 4 which includes a 135 bp segment that encodes a peptide of 45 amino acids SEQ ID NO 5 . This smaller 45 amino acid peptide is an immunogenic polypeptide of the Hepatitis C virus HCV core antigen. The nucleic acid sequence encoding the 45 amino acid peptide is shown below with the indicated 135 nucleotides underscored. SEQ ID NO 5 

The nucleic acid of SEQ ID NO 4 was cloned into the hopE gene SEQ ID NO 6 shown below of 26695 at nt504 of SEQ ID NO 4 noted in bold underscore corresponding to amino acid residue 168 of the protein product so that the expressed product would be located as part of the surface exposed loop of the HopE gene product. This construct designated as vector pTMI03 8 was expressed on the surface of .

Briefly one method of accomplishing the isolation of hopE gene is amplification from 22695 by using Taq DNA polymerase. The upstream primer 5 AAGGATCCGATAGGAATGTAAAGGAATGG 3 SEQ ID NO 7 containing a BamHI site and the downstream primer 5 CCGAATTCTAAAGGCATGAACGCTTGCA 3 SEQ ID NO 8 containing an EcoRI site can be constructed by using a DNA synthesizer such as the Perkin Elmer Applied Biosystems Inc. model 332 ABI Mississauga Ontario Canada . The resulting PCR fragment can be blunt end cloned into the EcoRV site in pBluescript II KS in the same orientation as the lac promoter.

PCR primers can then be designed to insert two unique restriction enzyme sites into the hopE gene for insertion of the 135 bp immunogenic coding sequence from the Hepatitis C virus HCV core antigen. The PCR amplification using Taq DNA polymerase can be performed using a touchdown amplification procedure as follows. The PCR Thermocycler is programmed for an initial denaturation step of 96 C. for 4 min followed by 18 cycles at an initial annealing temperature of 65 C. for 90 s which is decreased by 0.5 C. for each successive cycle an extension step at 72 C. for 6 min. and denaturation at 96 C. for 1 min. Subsequent to completion of the first 18 cycles an additional 14 amplification cycles can be performed by using 72 C. extension and 96 C. denaturation steps with a constant 55 C. annealing temperature. The resulting amplicon is then purified by column precipitated with ethanol and made blunt by digestion with the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase. The PCR products can be digested with restriction enzyme to remove the template DNA and religated into an appropriate vector such as pTMI03.8 under the control of the arabinose inducible promoter and transformed into JM105.

Recombinant clones can be identified by using oligonucleotide primer 5 AGATCTAAGGACGTC 3 SEQ ID NO 9 plus the reverse sequencing primer in PCR amplification reactions. Identified clones can be sequenced to verify that the inserted restriction endonuclease sites are in frame and that no errors had been introduced into the hopE gene. The 135 bp immunogenic coding sequence from the Hepatitis C virus HCV core antigen can then be inserted using standard techniques.

Once vector pTMI03 8 had been created it was transformed into which was grown at 37 C. cells were then harvested and the expression of the DCV insert was continued by Western Blot.

Briefly a procedure for this is as follows. Cells are harvested from about 20 plates and resuspended in 20 sucrose with 50 mg of DNase I Boehringer Mannheim in 10 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 . The cells are then disrupted with a French press at 15 000 lb in. Broken cells are overlaid on a sucrose step gradient of 1 ml of 70 and 6 ml of 70 sucrose in 10 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 . The outer membrane fraction is collected and pelleted at 150 000 g and the pellet is resuspended in 100 ml of distilled water.

Alternatively outer membranes from 500 ml of log phase culture can be solubilized in 10 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 3 n octyl polyoxyethylene incubated at 23 C. for 1 hour and centrifuged for 30 mm at 173 000 g. The pellet is resuspended in 10 mM Tris HCl 3 n octyl polyoxyethylene 5 mM EDTA pH 8.0 incubated at 23 C. for 1 hour and centrifuged for 30 min at 173 000 g and the supernatant collected. A Western immunoblot indicated the presence of HCV hopE in the supernatant of the second solubilization step. The supernatant containing HCV hopE is mixed with an equal volume of 0.125 M Tris HCl pH 6.8 4 wt vol sodium dodecyl sulfate SDS and 20 vol vol glycerol and subjected to SDS 12 polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis PAGE . If required the HCV hopE band can be excised from an unstained portion of the gel and eluted overnight at 4 C. into 10 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0 and 100 mM NaCl. The elution supernatant can then be run on an SDS PAGE gel to check for purity and a Western immunoblot using standard techniques undertaken. For example isolated outer membranes can be loaded at a concentration of 15 g lane. Electrophoresis is then carried out by SDS PAGE on a discontinuous 12 polyacrylamide gel. Proteins are then stained with Coomassie brilliant blue. For Western immunoblotting unstained gels can be electroblotted onto immobilon P membranes Millipore Bedford Mass. . After blocking for 2 h at 2 C. with 3 bovine serum albumin BSA Boehringer Mannheim 0.1 Tween 20 Sigma in phosphate buffered saline PBS the membranes are then incubated with a 1 10 000 dilution of anti HCV rabbit antiserum in 1 BSA 0.05 Tween 20 in PBS for 1 h at 37 C. The membranes are then washed with PBS and incubated with a 1 5 000 dilution of an alkaline phosphatase conjugated secondary antibody Bio Rad Richmond Calif. for 1 h at 37 C. The bound antibodies are detected with 5 bromo 4 chloro 3 indolylphosphate BCIP Calbiochem. La Jolla Calif. and nitroblue tetrazolium NBT Sigma .

Because HopE is a native protein of it is tolerated by this organism and can thus form a construct useful for expressing foreign antigens or other heterologous gene products in . Other shuttle vectors that can be readily developed as described above include for example vectors comprising two plasmid ori sites and markers which are suitable for each host. Markers might include genes for chloramphenicol kanamycin resistance as well as promoters that can be recognized by both the and transcriptional systems.

The requirements for replication can be achieved by using any of a number of known plasmids e.g. pBR322 .

Constructed shuttle vectors can be tested for replication in both and in vitro and compared to existing shuttle plasmids described in the literature.

The choice of antigen or other heterologous gene product to be expressed would ideally be one that is not toxic to and and that is highly immunogenic or possesses another desirable property when delivered to a selected site in a mammal. In the case of an expressed antigen for immunization of the mammal such as site may be a mucosal site.

As described in Example 1 hopE HCV core antigen fusion protein can be expressed at the surface. The product of pTMI03 S is preferably targeted to the outer membrane so that it would display the HCV core antigen in a mucosal environment.

Tetanus toxoid TT has been studied extensively as an antigen in humans and immune responses to it are well characterized. TT elicits good mucosal immune responses when administered orally or intranasal when displayed on the surface of bacterial spores Duc Cutting 20033 8 1263 70 . The tetanus toxin C fragment can be fused to the hopE gene product as described above or engineered to contain a membrane anchor and cell surface target sequence. The advantage of this system is the existence of well characterized murine models for assessment of the effectiveness of the vaccination procedure whereas in the case of HCV where the known murine models typically rely on immune deficient mice. The gB protein of cytomegalovirus CMV has been shown to immunize mice against a lethal dose of an engineered vaccine virus expressing the gB antigen. Accordingly shuttle vectors such as those described herein comprising gB antigen in place of an HCV antigen can be constructed using the protocol described in Example 1.

A number of promoters can be used in the shuttle vectors. Ideally the promoter used is inducible either by a natural in vivo colonization mechanism of or by induction with an innocuous foodstuff or chemical that can be consumed. For example the promoter from the histidine kinase HP 165 may be used. The promoter from the histidine kinase HP 165 is reported to be induced by acidic pH and may be a virulence factor related to gastric mucosa colonization. The benefit of this promoter is that a construct can be made in vitro. The foreign antigen will only be expressed when exposed to the acidic environment of the gastric mucosa.

Other promoters include the arabinose inducible promoter used in pTMI03.S and FlaB sigma 54 promoters Josenhans et al. 199816 1 2 263 73 the T7 promoter used in constitutive and inducible systems and the nir promoter of which is induced in anaerobic environments Chatfield et al. 199210 8 888 92 . The ability of any of these promoters to function in can be tested using the system developed by Angelini et al. 2004 51 101 107 that uses CAT and GFP reporters as readout of promoter activity in a plasmid vector.

The target sites of expression will depend on the antigen or other gene product used. Initial studies focused on HopE proteins and fusion polypeptides which target the expressed polypeptide e.g. antigen to the cell surface of

Plasmid stability is also very important and while the use of antibiotic resistance genes as selective determinants for plasmid maintenance is useful in vitro is less practical in vivo. An alternative is a balanced lethal system for example the asd gene that is used inactivated in . The asd gene which exists natively in encodes aspartate semialdehyde dehydrogenase an enzyme in biosynthetic pathway for diaminopimelic acid DAP an essential component of the cell wall peptidoglycan of gram negative bacteria. In the absence of DAP asd mutants undergo lysis. Since DAP is not present in mammalian tissues this balanced lethal system imposes a requirement that all living carry the recombinant asd gene containing plasmid.

In order use the asd gene system the genomic copy of the asd gene is inactivated using standard gene knockout protocols. This strain of will then only grow with the supply of DAP or with a plasmid that contains the asd gene.

Other systems that can be used for similar purposes include enterotoxin or cholera toxin CT as mucosal adjuvants. Adjuvants can also be used to boost the mucosal immune response. Two such adjuvants are CT and enterotoxin LT wherein expressed antigens are fused to the LTB and CTB mutants that maintain their strong mucosal adjuvant properties but have reduced toxicity.

As described in Examples 1 and 2 based vectors such as pHP3 and pHP623 are capable of providing protection against infection in a mammal such as a mouse or human. In the present example a murine model is used to demonstrate the utility of using the based systems to provide delivery of a pharmacologically active molecule of interest to a mammal including a human. The murine model is employed to demonstrate the activity of a transgenic strain of to elicit a serological response to an expressed surface antigen in vivo.

Mice are infected with wild type while other mice are inoculated by gavage with temperature sensitive as described in Example 2. Sera from both control and test animals are assayed for antibody and gastric histology are performed on sacrificed animals in accordance with the schedule shown in Table 1. A mouse urea breath test can also be used.

A 50 decrease in virulence from 75 to 40 was observed. Specific antibody titer increased 4 fold above baseline indicating a serological response. Serum samples were taken at baseline 12 24 and 48 weeks. At these times 10 10 and 20 animals were sacrificed and gastric histology performed.

In order detect change in virulence related to expression modification of an outer membrane protein mice were inoculated with temperature sensitive as described in Example 3. An equal size control group of mice were infected with a wild type strain. Noninvasive means were used to determine presence or absence of . Mice were bled at 3 and 6 months for antibody determination. At sacrifice histology was performed to assay gastritis and confirm colonization.

In order to demonstrate the based vaccine protection effect from a standard pathogen mice were inoculated with temperature sensitive by gavage. An equal sized control group was infected with the wild type strain. Non invasive means were used to determine presence or absence of as described in Example 4. At 6 months post infection all mice were given intraperitoneal challenge with 10 times the LDof live virulent pneumococci type 4 20 CFU mouse as per the method of Aaberge et al. 199518 141 152 

Allowing for 75 lethality in the controls the study has a power of 0.8 to detect a 50 decrease in mortality 75 vs 50 .

Ten mice were fed a diet devoid of urease uncooked soy . Mice were then administered 3.7 kBq C urea in 200 l flavored citrate by gavage and placed in air filled 2 L plastic Ziploc bags for 20 minutes. Mice were then removed without exchanging the air within the bag. Hyamine 0.1 mmol in ethanol was then introduced and scintillant was added to the hyamine solution and counted for 10 min or up to a count of 1 000 dpm.

To confirm virulence and antibody response in humans a strain of like the Baylor Strain will be employed and the following criteria will be adopted 

1. The infected individuals have no symptoms no more than mild histological damage and no evidence of infection with hepatitis viruses or HIV.

2. The isolate is a single strain cagA negative and sensitive to metronidazole clarithromycin tetracycline and amoxicillin 

3. Volunteers to receive a challenge are healthy with normal gastric histology no history of peptic ulcer no young children at home no regular contact with young children and no allergies to the antibiotics that might be required to treat the infection.

Challenge will consist of 40 mg famotidine at bedtime followed by administration of in beef broth orally in the morning. Subjects are contacted daily for 14 days. A 13c UBT is performed after 7 and 14 days and endoscopy with quantitative culture and histology after 2 weeks and 3 months. Antibiotics are used to eradicate the infection.

An example of a chemical marker that may be used for the detection of wild type or TSHP in vivo is sulfasalazine SSN the structure of which is shown in . Studies in germ free mice and conventional rats have shown that intestinal bacteria are solely responsible for the diazo bond reduction resulting in the reductive catabolism of SSN and the release of sulfapyridine and 5 aminosalicylate. The enzyme s which catalyses this reaction is referred to as diazoreductase s synonym azoreductase s . Conventional rats given SSN excrete 5 aminosalicylate and sulfapyridine and their respective conjugates in urine and feces whereas germ free rats show no evidence of SSN degradation.

Several bacterial species have been shown to have diazoreductases AZR s . Preliminary bioinformatic studies have indicated that may not contain the AZR gene. The presence of similar analogous sequences has also produced a negative result. Under these circumstances a transgenic strain of TSHP that has a viable and functional azoreductase azr TSHP can be used to assess the use of these markers.

Plasmid pTM103 02 is digested by EcoRI and HindIII and ligated with the Azoreductase AZR gene from treated with EcoRI and HindIII to generate a vector containing both HopE 168aa and AZR named pTMI03 azr. This plasmid is transformed into to assess whether expression of HopE and the AZR occurs. pTMI02 when similarly treated with full length hepatitis C core antigen HCCA demonstrated transport of HopE HCCA to outer membrane employing western blots and anti HopE Abs.

Mice n 30 are infected with the azr TSHP by gavage and once AZR expression in vivo to produce 5 aminosalicylate and sulfapyridine and their respective conjugates in urine and feces is established human trials can begin.

The diagnostic agent diagnex blue consists of an ion exchange resin Amberlite XE 96 conjugated with a dye Azure A . This test relies on the fact that the resin dye combination disassociates at pH less than 2.5 after which the dye is absorbed and appears in the urine. Persons without dye in the urine are achlorhydric. This principle is shown in .

The same principle can be used to test for . For example a dye resin combination that disassociates at pH 7.0 could detect urease if the resin was given with urea. This would produce a pH 7.0 in the mucosal layer where resides thus releasing the dye.

Mice n 30 are inoculated with a wild type strain while germ free mice n 30 are used as controls Pilot study . After an optimal period allowing for the to establish an active infection the test group and the controls are introduced with a predetermined quantity of the resin dye complex by gavage. This will be followed by a urea solution. Range 0.01M to 0.5M . The mice are kept in metabolic cages and the excretion of the azure dye are monitored and quantified. Different ratios of the resin and urea concentrations are tested to verify the optimal combinations to be used.

For administration by aerosol the present invention can be delivered in the form of aerosol spray presentation from pressurized packs or a nebulizer with the use of a suitable propellant. In the case of a pressurized aerosol the dosage unit can be determined by providing a valve to deliver a metered amount. The formulation would be prepared as a powder for administration by inhalation. Administration by inhalation can also be carried out by atomizing solutions or suspensions which contain the compositions according to the invention.

The compositions according to the invention may also be formulated in a liquid for oral digestion for administration to a subject as an intravenous preparation.

All of the various preparations of the invention may be prepared by procedures familiar to those skilled in the art if appropriate using further suitable pharmaceutical auxiliaries. Compositions according to the invention advantageously contain the species of alone or in combination with other desired ingredients.

Any of the above individual or combination of formulations may be included in a pharmaceutical composition comprising the pharmaceutically acceptable composition according to the present invention. The pharmaceutical compositions as described herein may be in solid e.g. powder particles granules sachets tablets capsules etc. semi solid gels pastes etc. or liquid solutions dispersions suspensions emulsions mixtures etc form and adapted for administration via e.g. the gastrointestinal tract and gastric mucosa. The pharmaceutical compositions may thus be in powder or particulate form adapted to be dispersed in an aqueous medium before use.

A pharmaceutical composition in liquid form may be in the form of a dispersion comprising the composition and an electrolyte solution such as e.g. a composition that is adapted to physiological conditions e.g. a physiologically acceptable solution.

A pharmaceutical composition according to the invention may further comprise another therapeutically prophylactically and or diagnostically active substance.

In another aspect the invention relates to a pharmaceutical kit comprising a first and a second container the first container comprising a recombinant composition comprising the plasmid and or plasmid vector according to the invention and the second container comprising a dispersion medium for the composition accompanied by instructions for administering and or dosing the composition in the dispersion medium before use.

The composition according to the present invention contained in the kit may be in powder or particulate form.

A pharmaceutical kit according to the present invention may include instructions with recommendations for the time period during which the composition should be administered after dispersion in the dispersion medium.

The TH1 response T helper cell type 1 is a cell mediated response. Over activity of this is a presumed cause of diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis RA and Lupus. In contrast TH 2 is an antibody type serological response characteristic of vaccines. The present example provides a technique to obtain a TH 2 type response in an animal when treated with a based vaccine treatment preparation according to the present invention.

Use of the vectors and vector plasmid systems as described herein may be used to invoke antibody response in an animal. By way of example a system employing a gene expression cassette in a construct that provided for the transformation of the bacterium and the subsequent secretion of a protein S layer protein from the surface of the transformed this resulting in initiation of mucosal vaccination is described in WO 0194599 which disclosure is hereby incorporated herein in its entirety. These constructs may also include a secretory leader sequence selected from ORF1 ORF3 ORF5 7 ORF7 or ORF11.

In accordance with some embodiments of the vaccine the based vectors and vector plasmids may comprise a sequence encoding a bacterial surface layer protein. A surface layer protein is defined herein as any molecule of proteinaceous nature including e.g. protein glycol protein or lipoprotein occurring in the outer membrane of a bacterium and capable of being exposed on the surface of the bacterium. S layer proteins may be continuously and spontaneously produced in larger amounts than any other class of protein in the cell.

A process for preparation of a recombinant cell preparation comprising a gram negative host cell having the S layer protein is also provided in WO 97 28263. The process may be modified and followed in accord with the procedures described herein to incorporate an S protein as part of the constructs of the present invention.

Accordingly in some of the vector and vector plasmid constructs a fusion protein is provided that comprises a sequence and a non pharmacologically active molecule of interest. In order to enhance the immunogenicity of a vaccine employing the constructs of the present invention the sequence of the fusion protein may comprise a sequence encoding an S layer protein. constructs that include the S layer protein as part of a fusion protein have been reported to express the S layer protein at the surface. See WO 95 19371 describing thus enhancing the immunogenicity of the preparation.

Mucosal immunization is already provided against some diseases including an oral polio vaccine and an oral drinkable vaccine against cholera and diarrhea due to an inactivated vaccine . In some embodiments it is contemplated that the vaccines of the invention may thus comprise an inactivated vaccine.

The present invention contemplates a live vaccine as such will provide a single dose long lasting vaccination because the carrier organism will continue to produce the antigen i.e. non pharmacologically active molecule of interest and boost immunity in vivo. In addition the vaccines will be administered in combination with an adjuvant. These adjuvants comprise molecules such as aluminum hydroxide or lipid vesicles that increase the exposure time for the vaccine by slowing its removal forte site of administration. Adjuvants also act by evoking production of immunomodulatory peptides called cytokines and chemokines Brewer et al. 19974 223 246 . Thus the present vaccines may comprise cytokine adjuvant to enhance immune response.

The transformed or bacterium when administered orally or gastrically to a mammal such as a human or animal will provide for the gastro intestinal colonization production and presentation of the desired polypeptide through the gastric wall which is the natural site of colonization. The gastro intestinal tract is surrounded by an immense immune apparatus specialized in mounting immune response of various types. Gastro intestinal colonization by recombinant vaccine or peptide producer strain thus enables a much longer immune stimulus than traditional vaccination. Additionally antigen can be presented preferentially to the gut wall or the lumen.

The present example is provided to demonstrate the utility of the present invention as a method for employing in preparations and treatment regimens that provide for appetite suppression. In particular delivery to the gut mucosa of a construct that comprises attenuated together with a non pharmacologically active molecule of interest that regulates the level of ghrelin or an agonist of ghrelin is expected to provide an effective means for providing suppression of the gut brain axis that regulates appetite and sanity.

Studies have suggested that ghrelin is an appetite stimulant i.e. ghrelin increases food intake in mice Asakawa et al. 200352 7 947 52 . Ghrelin has also been reported to reduce fat utilization in adipose tissue in rodents Tschop et al. 2000407 708 13 as well as to be involved in rat adipogenesis Choi et al. 2003 144 3 751 9 . Ghrelin has also been reported to be a hunger signal prompting the subject to eat when nutrition availability is low.

Ghrelin an endogenous ligand for the growth hormone secretagogue receptor GHS R stimulates growth hormone GH release from cultured pituitary cells in a dose dependent manner and is produced and secreted from the A like cells found mainly in the oxyntic glands of the gastric fundus. Ghrelin is now known to play a role in not only GH release but also in controlling the appetite and body weight.

Both parenterally and intracerebro ventricularly administered ghrelin have been shown to stimulate food intake and increase the body weight of mice and rats with free access to food even those animals with GH deficiency. The control of appetite and body weight may be independent of GH release.

Ghrelin a 28 amino acid peptide is activated when its third serine residue is acylated by n octanoic acid and GHS R is responsive to the first four or five residues including the octanylated serine residue of the whole ghrelin peptide. GHS R has been shown to be present in the pituitary hypothalamus adrenal glands thyroid pancreas myocardium spleen and testes. Ghrelin stimulates the expression of both NPY and AGRP mRNA in the hypothalamus. The central orexigenic effect of ghrelin is mediated by the NPY AGRP expressing neurons in the hypothalamus. Ghrelin has also been reported to suppress vagal afferent activity. The peripheral orexigenic effect of ghrelin may be mediated at least in part by its suppressive effect on the vagal afferent activity. IL 1 is a pro inflammatory cytokine that mediates the cachectic process by stimulating the expression and release of leptin and or by mimicking the effect on the hypothalamus of excessive negative feedback signaling from leptin.

It is proposed that antagonists to ghrelin if provided to the animal at the gut mucosa will reduce food intake by an animal and reduce body weight gain.

The present example demonstrates the utility of the present invention for use as a preparation that will prevent or inhibit cell wasting particularly cell wasting associated with diseased states of AIDS and cancer.

Cachexia is a condition characterized by wasting emaciation feebleness and inanition. It was recently reported that the levels of both ghrelin peptide and ghrelin mRNA in the stomach were up regulated in a mouse model of cancer cachexia. In cachectic mice with increased plasma levels of IL 1 the plasma concentrations of ghrelin also increased with the progression of cachexia. This result suggests that a close relationship might exist between the ghrelin dynamics and the cachectic process mediated by IL 1. IL 1 is an anorexigenic substance just like CCK leptin gastrin related protein and bombesin and antagonizes the actions of ghrelin.

Asakawa et al. reported that parenterally administered IL 1 decreased NPY mRNA expression in the hypothalamus and preproghrelin mRNA expression in the stomach and that intraperitoneally administered ghrelin inhibited the severity of IL 1 induced anorexia. infection is known to be a major pathogenetic factor in the development of gastritis peptic ulcer disease and gastric malignancy. Attachment of to the gastric mucosa induces inflammation which is associated with the release of various cytokines including IL 1 .

It has been observed clinically that eradication is often followed by improvement of some nutritional parameters such as the body weight and the serum levels of total cholesterol total protein and albumin. infection has been reported to be capable of modifying the plasma and gastric ghrelin dynamics in Mongolian gerbils. In humans however infection has been reported not to be associated with any changes of the plasma ghrelin levels although eradication of has been shown by some to be associated with increases of the plasma ghrelin levels.

It is proposed that may be used as a carrier to provide amylin to a patient in need thereof by for example acting as a carrier vehicle to the gastric mucosa. In some embodiments the carrier will be constructed so as to include amylin amylin agonist analogs and derivatives and amylin agonists including calcitonins calcitonin gene related peptides and analogs therefore to decrease ghrelin levels.

Amylin antagonists can increase ghrelin levels. Modulation of the effective levels of amylin with amylin amylin agonists amylin antagonists or other compounds that decrease the effective level of amylin such as antibodies may inhibit or stimulate in the case of antagonists and antibodies ghrelin secretion. Hence some embodiments of the method are directed to modulating endogenous levels of ghrelin by increasing the effective level of amylin or amylin agonists in the body by direct or indirect means or by decreasing the effective level of amylin using amylin antagonists or inhibiting amylin production.

The present example demonstrates the utility of the invention for use as a treatment for a disease resulting from an enzyme deficiency such as Gaucher s disease. Gaucher s disease is the most common lysosomal storage disorder in humans and results from a deficiency of the enzyme glucocerebrosidae GC . Nolta et al. 1992 90 2 342 348 .

Enzyme replacement therapy is provided with a vaccine construct that comprises a sequence encoding chemical chaperones. Sawker et al. 2002 USA 99 24 15428 15433 . An enhanced level of functional glycosidase Glu glucocerebrosidase may thus be obtained. In particular the chemical chaperone deoxynojirimycin NN DNJ is to be used in the construct and administered to the patient orally or intragastrically.

As part of yet another embodiment of the methods a based construct as described herein comprising a vector having a non pharmacologically active molecule of interest in this case encoding glucocerebrosidase GC . Retroviral mediated transfer of glucocerebrosidase cultured Gaucher bone marrow is described as one approach for treating Gauchers disease in Nolta et al. 1992 . However this approach is extremely invasive. Alternative enzyme replacement therapy employing the based constructs of the invention that include a sequence encoding for the deficient enzyme glucocerebrosidase provides a much more attractive and less expensive alternative to such a therapy.

The present example is presented to demonstrate the utility of the present invention to provide a useful preparation that is suitable for treating and or inhibiting a bacterial induced malignancy such as lymphoma particularly MALT lymphoma using a vaccination preparation comprising the vector and or plasmid vectors as described herein.

Sutton et al. 2004 22 20 2541 6 report protection against a bacteria induced malignancy specifically primary gastric MALT lymphoma as a result of vaccination immunization of an animal against

Therefore the constructs of the present disclosure that include a vector and or plasmid vector suitable for providing an immunizing preparation that includes an immunogene antigen of interest other than may also be used to provide vaccination protection against a bacterial induced malignancy and in particular against primary gastric MALT lymphoma. By way of example some embodiments of the plasmid vector would include a fusion protein comprising a encoding sequence and a non encoding sequence that is for example other than a antigen species.

All documents patents journal articles and other materials cited in the present application are hereby incorporated by reference.

Although the present invention has been fully described in conjunction with several embodiments thereof with reference to the accompanying drawings it is to be understood that various changes and modifications may be apparent to those skilled in the art. Such changes and modifications are to be understood as included within the scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims unless they depart therefrom.

