---

title: Hand scanner with moveable platen
abstract: A hand scanner according to the invention may obtain an image of the hand and fingers including the bracelet crease/carpel delta area and palm surface regions up to the tips of the fingers using ultrasound measurement techniques. A hand scanner according to the invention may include a movable arcuate platen and an energy transducer. In a method according to the invention, the transducer may be moved back and forth while moving a platen surface in order to advance the hand and thereby produce a raster type scan image. In this manner, the image of the hand print may be collected as a raster image representative of the scanned surface of the friction ridge skin.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08162831&OS=08162831&RS=08162831
owner: Ultra-Scan Corporation
number: 08162831
owner_city: Amherst
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051017
---
This application claims the benefit of priority to U.S. provisional patent application Ser. No. 60 637 314 filed on Dec. 17 2004.

The United States government provided funding related to this invention via U.S. Department of Justice contract no. DEA 01 C0028 and the United States government may have certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to capturing an image representing the friction ridge surface of the hand which may include the palm region and fingers from the area of the bracelet crease carpel delta region of the hand to the finger tips.

Since the 1800 s fingerprint information has been collected from human fingers and hands by means of ink and paper. For purposes of this document the term fingerprint is used to mean the skin surface friction ridge detail of a portion of a hand such as a single fingerprint or the entire hand. In recent years various electronic fingerprint scanning systems have been developed utilizing optical capacitance direct pressure thermal and ultrasonic methods. Methods based on ultrasound have proven to be highly accurate since they are insulated from the effects of grease dirt paint ink and other image contaminants.

In an ultrasonic system a piezoelectric transducer may be used to send an ultrasonic wave through an ultrasound transmitting media such as mineral oil. In ultrasonic fingerprint scanners the ultrasound wave is started and stopped to produce a pulse. At each material interface encountered by the pulse a portion of the pulse reflects. For example the interface between a platen and skin or the interface between air and skin may each reflect a portion of the pulse. The fraction of ultrasound reflected is a function of differences in impedance between the two materials comprising the interface. The fraction of ultrasound reflected can be calculated by the equation R Z Z Z Z where R is the fraction of sound reflected Zis the acoustic impedance of the first material and Zis the acoustic impedance of the second material. Acoustic impedance is a measure of a material s resistance to the propagation of ultrasound. Acoustic impedance Z is defined as Z r c where r is the material density and c is the longitudinal propagation velocity of ultrasound in the material. The larger the change in acoustic impedance the larger the fraction reflected.

The reflected wave pulses may be detected by the transducer. The elapsed time during which the pulse traveled from the transducer to the interface and back may be determined. The elapsed time may be used to determine the distances traveled by the pulse and its reflected wave pulses. By knowing the distance traveled the position of an interface may be determined.

There may be many interfaces encountered by the emitted pulse and so there may be many reflected wave pulses. Since it is the interfaces associated with a finger that are of interest in generating an image of a fingerprint it may be necessary to identify those reflected wave pulses that are associated with the finger. The approximate position of a finger being scanned may be known and therefore the pulse reflected from the finger may be expected during a particular time interval. In a technique commonly referred to as range gating a detector may be configured to ignore reflected pulses that are not received during that time interval. Signals within the expected range may be interpreted to be reflected either from a ridge or a valley of the fingerprint. For example those signals reflected from a ridge will be received before those signals reflected from a valley. The reflected signals associated with the finger may be processed and converted to a digital value representing the signal strength. The digital value may be used to produce a graphical display of the signal strength for example by converting the digital values to a gray scale bitmap image thereby producing a contour map of the finger surface which is representative of the depth of the ridge structure detail.

Collecting information using an ultrasound transducer is usually accomplished by moving the ultrasound transducer side to side while advancing the transducer in a direction that is different from the side to side motion. Such an arrangement is commonly referred to as a raster scanning process. As the raster scanning process proceeds the ultrasound raster scanning mechanism collects each pixel of image information individually and records those pixels for use in generating an image of the fingerprint.

The prior art scanners are not able to scan more than a small portion of a hand. Since unique identifying features may be found in many areas of the hand a scanner is needed which can provide information about larger areas of the hand.

A hand scanner according to the invention may obtain an image of the hand and fingers including the bracelet crease carpel delta area and palm surface regions up to the tips of the fingers using ultrasound measurement techniques. A hand scanner according to the invention may include a movable arcuate platen and an energy transducer. The transducer may be moved back and forth while moving a platen surface in order to advance the hand and thereby produce a raster type scan image. In this manner the image of the hand print may be collected as a raster image representative of the scanned surface of the friction ridge skin.

The invention may be embodied as a method. In one such method a movable arcuate platen is provided. The platen may be movable in a first direction which is substantially about an axis of rotation. An energy transducer may be provided. The transducer may be movable in a second direction the second direction being different from the first direction. A hand may be placed on the platen and the platen may be moved in a first direction so as to move the platen and the hand about the axis of rotation. The energy transducer may be moved in the second direction and energy from the transducer may be sent toward the hand. At least some of the energy may be reflected from the hand and received by the transducer. The reflected energy received by the transducer may be used to produce an image of the hand.

The invention may be embodied as a hand scanner . The scanner may be used to measure and image the friction ridge surface detail of the hand. A scanner according to the invention is depicted in B and C and a portion of that scanner is depicted in . The scanner may include a smooth synthetic resin imaging surface or platen that contacts the friction ridge skin surface of the hand. The platen may be movable about an axis of rotation . In moving the platen a hand on the platen may be similarly moved by the platen . The platen may also be arcuately shaped. For example the platen may have a cylindrical shape.

The invention may include one or more transducers . The use of more than one transducer may allow for gathering of information quicker. Further for a given housing size the use of more than one transducer may allow for a scanned image that is wider than that produced by a single transducer .

The platen may be made from a material that permits energy from the transducer to pass through the platen . For example if the energy transducer is an ultrasonic transducer the platen may be made from polycarbonate.

In an embodiment of the invention a support platform may be included. The support platform may be in contact with the energy transducer . For example the support platform may contact the platen via one or more rollers . The energy transducer may be supported so as to keep the transducer at a desired distance from the platen . The distance from the transducer to the platen may be important in order to obtain an accurate image. The support platform may be maintained in contact with the platen by the use of a spring that forces the rollers against the platen . In this manner the distance between the transducer and the platen may be kept to a relatively constant value.

Small adjustments to the transducer to platen distance may be accomplished by changing the length of the support platform . Once the transducer to platen distance is optimized for focus and image clarity the length of the platform may be locked and further adjustment prevented.

In the embodiment depicted in two rollers are shown one at each end of the support platform . By keeping the rollers in contact with the platen the platen is allowed to move relative to the support platform and the transducer while the distance between the transducer and the platen remains substantially constant. To reduce the distance between the transducer and the platen the rollers may be moved closer to each other. To increase the distance between the transducer and the platen the rollers may be moved further from each other. Consequently the length of the support platform may be altered in order to adjust the distance between the platen and the transducer .

The energy transducer may be movable relative to the platen . A motion control system may be provided for oscillating one or more transducers along a substantially linear path near the surface of the platen . The linear path may be substantially parallel to the axis of rotation . In such an embodiment if a hand is placed on the platen so that the fingers are oriented perpendicular to the axis of rotation then as the hand is moved by the rotating platen the transducer may move from left to right and from right to left as part of an effort to gather information about the hand.

Precise movement and measurement of the instantaneous position of the transducer may be accomplished by the use of an optical encoder and linear code strip a linkage and an oscillating rotary solenoid . The precise measurement and monitoring of the platen s position may be accomplished by the use of another optical encoder and code wheel and a motor and gear system that create and track rotation of the platen .

The inner chamber created by the housing and platen may be filled with an ultrasound transmission media which may be mineral oil. A rotary seal may be placed between the housing and the platen . A piston type seal may be used for this purpose. The seal may provide a leak resistant mechanism that may allow rotary relative motion between the housing and the platen .

There may be a need to allow for expansion and contraction of the system components. An elastomeric bellows may be included in order to compensate for the mismatch in coefficients of thermal expansion between the system components for example the housing the housed components and the ultrasound transmission media .

In one method according to the invention a movable arcuate platen is provided . The platen may be movable in a first direction which may be substantially about an axis of rotation. A transducer may be provided and the transducer may be moveable in a second direction that is different from the first direction . A hand may be placed on the platen.

In one embodiment of a method according to the invention when it is desired to gather information about the hand the platen may be moved about the axis of rotation. In this manner the hand may also be moved about the axis of rotation. The transducer may be moved relative to the platen while sending energy toward the hand. For example the transducer may be moved in a second direction that is substantially parallel to the axis of rotation. The energy may be reflected from the hand and the reflected energy may be received by the transducer.

The energy may be in the form of ultrasonic energy pulses. Each pulse of energy may be sent and received from a different location thereby providing a series of data corresponding to different locations of the hand. If enough data is taken an image of the hand may be produced and that image may depict the friction ridge surface details of the hand.

The energy transducer may be moved in the second direction until it reaches a desired end location . In one of the end locations A for the transducer A is identified and one of the end locations B for the transducer B is identified. Once the end location is reached the transducer may be moved in a third direction which may be opposite to the second direction . In this manner the transducer may be moved back and forth in order to gather information about the hand which may be used to produce an image of the hand.

In one embodiment of a method according to the invention data about the hand may be gathered for use in producing an image while the transducer is moving in the second direction only. Any information that may be available for use while the transducer is moving in the third direction may be ignored. depicts scan lines indicating the locations from which data may be gathered by two transducers. It will be noticed from the scan lines that as the transducers move in the second direction the platen may also be moving in the first direction hence the lines appear slanted. depicts scan lines that may result if the platen remains stationary while the transducer moves in the second direction . In the lines are not slanted. If the platen remains stationary while the transducer moves in the second direction then the platen may move in the first direction after the transducer reaches a desired end location for example the platen may be moved in the first direction while the transducer moves in the third direction . In each of and in one of the end locations A corresponding to transducer A is identified and one of the end locations B corresponding to transducer B is identified.

In another embodiment of the invention information about the hand may be gathered while the transducer is moving in both the second direction and the third direction . If the platen remains stationary while the transducer is gathering information the scan lines from which data may be gathered by the transducer may look like those shown in . The scan lines of are those that would be traced by using two transducers. It will be recognized from that when the transducer approaches an end of desired travel the speed of the transducer may be slowed and the platen may be moved . If the transducer is still moving while the platen is moved the scan line may angle forward as shown by the portion indicated by feature number . If desired information about the hand may be ignored during the time that the scan line angles forward. Once the platen moves into position to allow scanning along the next scan line the platen movement may be stopped and the transducer s direction of travel may be reversed. Then the transducer may send energy toward the hand and receive reflected energy from the hand and that received energy may be used to produce an image of the hand corresponding to the scan line. If enough data is gathered for each scan line and enough scan lines are used the image of the hand may be precise enough to present the friction ridge detail of the hand to a viewer.

During a scanning operation a microprocessor may synchronize and control the interaction of the scanning motion and signal processing of the transducer. For example if the desired scanning resolution is 500 lines per inch then to gather the information about the hand a motor working through a set of gears may rotate the platen forward then stop at a distance equal to the desired resolution 0.002 inches. At this time the rotary solenoid may move the probe arm having the transducers mounted thereon along a linear path for example beneath the surface of the platen. During this time the microprocessor may receive information about the position of the probe arm from the interaction of the code strip and the optical encoder. When the probe arm reaches an area at each end of the reciprocating probe arm desired sweep the platen may be advanced so as to rotate the platen by a predetermined amount. While the probe arm is in these end areas the transducer signal may be ignored and the motor may move the platen a circumferential distance sufficient to provide the scanning resolution in this example 0.002 inches so that the next scan line may be parallel to the last scan line. As the probe arm returns through the active scanning sector of its sweep the microprocessor may trigger the transducer to send out an ultrasound pulse and listen for its return.

Each ultrasonic pulse from a transducer may be triggered by a signal from an optical encoder indicating that the probe arm is at its next positional information point. The code strip may be constructed such that the distance between code marks is equal to or an integral multiple of the desired resolution.

The event triggering a request to the microprocessor to initiate a scanning operation can be indicated in several ways. Examples include 1 a contact switch may be pressed by the operator or 2 a proximity detector indicating that a finger or hand is on the platen may be used or 3 a listening operation by the ultrasound transducer may be used whereby several times per second the transducer sends and receives a test pulse to check for the presence of a finger hand or other object on the platen surface.

It will be recognized that embodiments of the invention may allow for an image of the hand to be any desired length. By rotating the platen a person s hand may be gently pulled along while the transducers sweep substantially perpendicular to the hand movement thereby allowing for a raster scan of a desired length. For example image information may be collected from the tips of the fingers through the palm continuing on to the carpel delta region the bracelet crease where the hand joins the arm at the wrist and could continue on to reach the elbow of the arm if desired.

U.S. provisional patent application No. 60 637 314 discloses additional details about the invention and additional embodiments of the invention. The disclosure of that patent application is incorporated by this reference.

Although the present invention has been described with respect to one or more particular embodiments it will be understood that other embodiments of the present invention may be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. Hence the present invention is deemed limited only by the appended claims and the reasonable interpretation thereof.

