---

title: Apparatus, methods, and systems for viewing and manipulating a virtual environment
abstract: Components for generating, reviewing, processing, storing, retrieving, analyzing, and optimizing information input to or output from a virtual environment. The components may be a video camera component, a stand-alone or device mountable on a tripod to permit a camera person to select from one or more views within a virtual environment, such as a video game being executed, and to provide alternative views within the confines of the virtual environment. The component permits selection from multiple views and manipulation of the same, including a rotation leftward or rightward, a tilt upward or downward, a zooming inward or outward, a translation (for example, a track movement) leftward, rightward, forward, or backward, a rolling movement, and a camera position adjustment (for example, crane movement) upward or downward.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07403220&OS=07403220&RS=07403220
owner: Gamecaster, Inc.
number: 07403220
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050709
---
The present Application for Patent claims priority to Provisional Application No. 60 603 708 entitled Apparatus Methods and Systems for Viewing a Virtual Environment filed Aug. 23 2004 and assigned to the assignee hereof and hereby expressly incorporated by reference herein.

Portions of the disclosure of this patent document may contain material that is subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office file or records but otherwise reserves all copyright rights whatsoever.

The present invention relates generally to the field of virtual systems and more particularly to a system wherein a virtual video game producer director camera person or other individual manipulates a virtual interface device within the virtual game space.

It is economically unwise to underestimate the global growth of virtual systems which includes the prolific video game industry. In each of years 2003 and 2004 annual United States retail sales of video games including portable and console hardware software and accessories reached approximately 10 billion dollars which is the same amount as released movies earned at the box office in those years. One conservative forecast estimates that the global video game industry will more than double its estimated 2004 revenues to 24.5 billion by 2008.

Given the sheer size and expectation of growth for this market sector few advances have occurred with respect to broadcasting and viewing of virtual systems in general and video games in particular. For example a number of virtual video game controllers for playing various types of video games are commercially available and many of these controllers allow a player to move within the virtual environment of the game being played using a variety of buttons video game controllers triggers and similar command means. However while there has been a trend to produce more effective and user friendly video game controllers further improvements for ease of play and effectiveness of these controllers for third party viewers are highly desirable.

In particular although the aforementioned video controllers allow players to move within the virtual environment of the videogame they are inefficient and difficult to use in allowing a third party viewer of the game to move within the virtual environment of the video game as an observer of the play action. Moreover little in the way of a professionally operated and edited viewing environment has been made available to virtual system fans and aficionados. What is needed are apparatus methods and systems permitting fans and aficionados of virtual systems including video games to view action packed real time or delayed time professionally edited and viewable video images. More generally what is needed are apparatus methods and systems permitting any person or machine to more accurately and professionally generate review process store retrieve analyze and optimize information input to or output from a virtual environment.

To address one or more of the drawbacks of the prior art the disclosed embodiments provide apparatus methods and systems for viewing and otherwise manipulating a virtual environment. In one or more embodiments components are provided for generating reviewing processing storing retrieving analyzing and optimizing information input to or output from a virtual environment.

In one or more embodiments the components may comprise for example video camera components. The video camera components may be stand alone devices or alternatively devices mountable on a tripod or other camera mounting equipment. The video camera components permit a user such as a camera person to select from one or more views within a virtual environment such as a video game being executed and to provide alternative views within the confines of the virtual environment.

Each video camera component permits a person operating such component as for example a camera person to select from multiple views and to manipulate the video camera component in a predefined or user defined fashion. Exemplary movements include a rotation leftward or rightward a tilt upward or downward a translation for example a track movement leftward rightward forward or backward a rolling leftward or rightward a zooming inward or outward and a camera position adjustment for example crane movement upward or downward.

In one embodiment the video camera component is designed to provide video capture from within the virtual environment that emulates very closely video capture from real world events. Accordingly the video camera component may permit a professional motion picture camera person to extract views and employ devices recognized in the motion picture art resulting in video images of virtual environments having the attributes of video capture of real world events.

In the disclosed embodiments related apparatus methods and systems permit one or more directors to select between a multitude of views provided by the foregoing video camera components as well as additional views including views determined by one or more controllers operated by the directors and the individuals primarily involved in the virtual environment such as video game players. The selection may be performed in real time or delayed time resulting in professional grade digital video footage of virtual environments having the attributes of professional video capture of real world events. As one example during a head to head video game match a sports television director can place multiple sports camera persons within the video game and direct a multi camera live switch delivering an exciting spectator experience.

The disclosed embodiments are not limited to the foregoing examples but can apply to any virtual type of environment including for example a virtual reality system an augmented reality system a video game system and a virtual movie including systems augmented with or based upon real world input output and artificial intelligence or its derivatives.

For example the disclosed embodiments can be used to extract process and store delayed time or real time inputs to and outputs from video film taken from within an individual s body in order to extract virtual video from different perspectives for diagnostic testing and to provide output to laser surgical apparatus for surgery. Additional embodiments include i digital filmmaking ii simulations of military equipment and personnel readiness during war games iii flight simulation training for pilots iv modeling simulations for biological chemical and molecular analyses v simulations related to graphical rendering of building facilities for architects builders and governmental registration authorities and vi any other simulations that may be contemplated.

Unless defined otherwise all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which the disclosed embodiments belong. Where a term is provided in the singular the inventor also contemplates the plural of that term.

All headings are for the convenience of the reader and should not be used to limit the meaning of the text that follows the heading unless so specified. Various changes and departures may be made to the disclosed embodiments without departing from the spirit and scope thereof. Accordingly it is not intended that the disclosed embodiments be limited to any specifically described embodiment in the specification or as illustrated in the examples but only as set forth in the claims.

Further objectives and advantages of the disclosed embodiments will become apparent when taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawings. To gain a full appreciation of the scope of the disclosed embodiments it will be further recognized that various aspects of the disclosed embodiments can be combined to make desirable embodiments of the invention.

While specific exemplary examples environments and embodiments are discussed below it should be understood that this is done for illustration purposes only. A person skilled in the relevant art will recognize that other components and configurations can be used without parting from the spirit and scope of the invention. In fact after reading the following description it will become apparent to a person skilled in the relevant art how to implement the invention in alternative examples environments and embodiments.

In one or more embodiments the invention is practiced in the environment of a computer network or networks. The network can include a private network or a public network for example the Internet as described below or a combination of both. The network includes hardware software or a combination of both.

As skilled persons will recognize from a high level telecommunications oriented view the network can be described as a set of hardware nodes interconnected by a communications facility with one or more processes hardware software firmware or a combination thereof functioning at each such node. The processes can inter communicate and exchange information with one another via communication pathways between them called interprocess communication pathways.

On these pathways appropriate communications protocols are used. Skilled persons will recognize that the distinction between hardware software and firmware is not always easily defined with the same or similar functions capable of being preformed with use of either. This is especially true for functionality associated with the communications between processes.

Each node includes one or more processes executable by processors incorporated into the nodes. The processes can include any executable instructions including any combination of hardware firmware or software including source code binary code machine code in the form of any applets applications modules processes and any subcomponents of the foregoing regardless of whether operable by one or more processors resident on or remote from the nodes .

It is possible that a single process can be run by multiple processors or that multiple processes can be run by a single processor . Processor can comprise any combination of processors including an application specific integrated circuit ASIC a chipset a processor a microprocessor a logic circuit and any other data processing device functioning in association with related memory including read only memory ROM random access memory RAM EPROM EEPROM flash memory cells secondary or tertiary storage devices such as magnetic media optical media tape or soft or hard disk whether resident on node or remotely accessible from node .

Additionally each of nodes can provide an interface point between network and the outside world. In addition each node can incorporate a collection of subnetworks comprising one or more portions of communications network whose features and functions are described in greater detail below. As one example processes are software processes that include software and or hardware entities that perform work over time such as tasks threads and intelligent agents. Also each process can refer to multiple processes for carrying out instructions in sequence or in parallel continuously or intermittently.

In one embodiment the processes communicate with one another through interprocess communication pathways supporting communication through any communications protocol. The pathways can function in sequence or in parallel continuously or intermittently. The pathways can use any of the communications standards protocols or technologies described below with respect to communications network in addition to standard parallel instruction sets used by many computers.

Nodes include any entities capable of performing their respective processing functions. Examples of nodes that can be used with the described embodiments include computers such as personal computers laptops workstations servers mini computers mainframes or combination of the foregoing handheld wireless and or wireline devices such as cellular telephones personal digital assistants PDAs modern cell phones with processing capability wireless e mail and or two way text pagers including BlackBerry devices document processing devices such as scanners printers facsimile machines or multifunction document machines complex entities such as local area networks or wide area networks to which are connected a collection of processors as described and any ancillary equipment such as wireline and wireless communications portals modems PCMCIA cards and access terminals . As one example in the context of the disclosed embodiments a node itself can be a wide area network WAN a local area network LAN a private network such as a Virtual Private Network VPN or collection of networks having one or more of the aforementioned devices interconnected and running in such environment.

Communications between nodes is made possible by communications network . A node can be connected either continuously or intermittently with communications network . As an example in the context of the disclosed embodiments communications network can be a digital communications infrastructure providing adequate bandwidth and information security.

Communications network can include wireline communications capability via telephone network wireless communications capability via wireless network or a combination of both at any frequencies using any type of standard protocol or technology. In addition in the present invention communications network can be a private network for example a VPN or a public network for example the Internet .

A non exclusive list of networks comprising in whole or in combination wireless network includes a cellular telephone network a Bluetooth technology network a wideband network including a microwave network a satellite network a short range wireless network a home radio frequency HomeRF network an infrared network including an Infrared Data Association IrDA a shared wireless access protocol SWAP network and a land mobile radio network.

A non inclusive list of exemplary wireless protocols and technologies used by communications network includes BlueTooth private communications service PCS a public or private Internet a public or private Intranet wireless fidelity alliance Wi Fi Alliance wireless Ethernet compatibility alliance WECA 802.11 short range wireless microwave or infrared such as Infrared Data Association IrDA and satellite networks home radio frequency HomeRF shared wireless access protocol SWAP land mobile radio global system for mobile communications GSM general packet radio service GPRS cellular digital packet data CDPD mobile solutions platform MSP multimedia messaging MMS wireless application protocol WAP code division multiple access CDMA wide code division multiple access WCDMA short message service SMS wireless markup language WML handheld device markup language HDML binary runtime environment for wireless BREW radio access network RAN and packet switched core networks PS CN .

Also included are various generation wireless technologies. These generational wireless technologies include 1G 2G 2.5G 3G and 4G. 1G refers to the first generation wide area wireless WWAN communications systems dated in the 1970s and 1980s. These devices are analog designed for voice transfer and circuit switched and include AMPS NMT and TACS. 2G refers to second generation WWAN communications dated in the 1990s characterized as digital capable of voice and data transfer and include HSCSD GSM CDMA IS 95 A and D AMPS TDMA IS 136 . 2.5G refers to the generation of WWAN communications between 2G and 3G. 3G refers to third generation WWAN communications systems recently coming into existence characterized by data rates of 144 Kbps to over 2 Mbps high speed being packet switched and permitting multimedia content including GPRS 1xRTT EDGE HDR W CDMA. 4G refers to fourth generation WWAN communications systems expected to come in the years 2006 2010 characterized by very high speed over 20 Mbps data rates permitting high resolution for video.

A exemplary non inclusive list of primarily wireline protocols and technologies used by communications network includes asynchronous transfer mode ATM enhanced interior gateway routing protocol EIGRP frame relay FR high level data link control HDLC Internet control message protocol ICMP interior gateway routing protocol IGRP internetwork packet exchange IPX ISDN point to point protocol PPP transmission control protocol internet protocol TCP IP routing information protocol RIP and user datagram protocol UDP . As skilled persons will recognize any other known or anticipated wireless or wireline protocols and technologies can be used.

Furthermore the processes and processors need not be located at the same physical locations. In other words each processor can be executed at one or more geographically distant processor over for example a LAN or WAN connection. Persons of skill in the art will appreciate a great range of possibilities for practicing the invention using different networking hardware and software configurations.

Management server or computer can be in communication over LAN with a separate data bank for storing the gathered data including the data that is gathered from one or more of nodes . Mainframe can be a data server. For example data server can be in communication with management server or computer to provide data flow control and post processing capabilities. Management server data bank and data server may be present on the illustrated network with any other network components that are needed to provide cellular telecommunication services. In one embodiment management server computer and or data server communicate with wireless network through a data link such as the Internet over a secure LAN WAN or other comparable network.

MSCs are central switching points to which each call is connected to control the routing of the call. MSCs permits wireless devices to move freely from cell to cell with continuation of the placed calls. BSSs are comprised of one or more base transceiver stations BTSs which are land based stations in wireless network including transceivers and antennas to handle the radio interface to a wireless device mobile station controlled by one or more mobile control processing devices called base station controllers BSCs . Wireless network can carry data switched voice communication or a combination of both. For example wireless network can include an Internet portion for data transfer and a switched voice services portion for voice information transfer.

In one or more embodiments wireless devices can include modern cellular telephones manufactured to handle advanced computing capabilities comprising individual personal computers or hand held PDAs. The wireless devices can communicate voice and data packets over wireless network . In one embodiment wireless devices include application programming interfaces APIs onto their local or remotely accessible processing platforms allowing software applications that operate on the wireless devices and control functionalities on the devices.

In one or more embodiments the steps associated with the disclosed embodiments are embodied in machine executable instructions. The instructions can be used to cause a processing device for example a general purpose or special purpose processor which is programmed with the instructions to perform the steps of the disclosed embodiments.

Alternatively the steps of the disclosed embodiments can be performed by specific hardware components that contain hardwired logic for performing the steps or by any combination of programmed computer components and custom hardware components.

For example the disclosed embodiments can be provided as a computer program product. In this environment the disclosed embodiments can include a machine readable medium having instructions stored on it. The instructions can be used to program any processor or other electronic devices to perform a process according to the disclosed embodiments.

The machine readable medium can include for example floppy diskettes optical disks DVDs CD ROMs and magneto optical disks ROMs RAMs EPROMs EEPROMs magnet or optical cards or other type of media machine readable medium suitable for storing electronic instructions but is not limited to the foregoing.

In addition the disclosed embodiments can also be downloaded as a computer program product. Here the program can be transferred from a remote computer e.g. a server to a requesting computer e.g. a client by way of data signals embodied in a carrier wave or other propagation medium via a communication link e.g. a modem or network connection .

In one embodiment as illustrated in system of each node comprises a bus and one or more components communicating with bus . Specifically as illustrated the components can comprise a processor component a memory component a communications component an input output component and a graphics sound component . The features and functions of the foregoing components are described in greater detail with reference to below.

Memory component and input output component of computer system are combined to include main memory secondary memory including hard disk drive removable storage drive and interface and removable storage units .

Communications component of computer system includes communications interface and communications path . Computer system is connected via communications path to external networks. Various embodiments are described in terms of this example computer system. After reading this description it will be apparent to a person skilled in the relevant art how to implement the invention using other computer systems and or computer architectures.

Processor which can represent multiple processors is connected to a communications bus . Display interface forwards graphics data from the bus for display on the display unit . This graphics data includes graphics data for the screen displays described herein.

Main memory can be a random access memory RAM and can also include a secondary memory . In the disclosed embodiments the secondary memory can include for example a hard disk drive and or a removable storage drive representing a floppy disk drive a magnetic tape drive an optical disk drive etc. The removable storage drive reads from and or writes to a removable storage unit in a well known manner. Removable storage unit represents a floppy disk magnetic tape optical disk etc. which is read by and written to by removable storage drive . As will be appreciated the removable storage unit includes a computer usable storage medium having stored therein computer software and or data.

In alternative embodiments secondary memory can include other similar means for allowing computer programs or other instructions to be loaded into computer system . Such means can include for example a removable storage unit and an interface . In the disclosed embodiments examples can also include a program cartridge and cartridge interface such as that found in video game devices a removable memory chip such as an EPROM or PROM and associated socket and other removable storage units and interfaces which allow software and data to be transferred from the removable storage unit to computer system .

Graphical user interface module transfers user inputs from peripheral devices to bus . These peripheral devices can be a mouse keyboard touch screen microphone video game controller stylus light pen or any other type of peripheral unit. Peripheral devices can include a graphics subsystem or engine. Here the graphics subsystem can be implemented as one or more processor chips. In fact the graphics subsystem can also be included as part of processor as shown in . Graphics data is output from the graphics subsystem to the bus .

Computer system can also include a communications interface . Communications interface allows software and data to be transferred between computer system and external devices via communications path . Examples of communications interface that can be used with the disclosed embodiments include a standard or cable modem a DSL connection a network interface such as an Ethernet card a communications port a LAN connection a WAN connection etc. Computer programs and data transferred via communications interface are in the form of signals which can be electronic electromagnetic optical or other signals capable of being received by communications interface via communications path . Note that communications interface provides a means by which computer system can interface to a network such as the Internet.

The disclosed embodiments can be implemented using computer programs i.e. software or computer control logic running on Processor . The software can be originally stored as a computer program product on removable storage device or hard disk drive . Therefore computer program product refers to means for providing software to computer system .

Computer programs can also be stored in main memory and or secondary memory . Computer programs can also be received via communications interface . Such computer programs when executed enable the computer system to perform the features of the disclosed embodiments as discussed herein. In particular the computer programs when executed enable the processor to perform the features of the disclosed embodiments.

In another embodiment the disclosed embodiments are implemented primarily in firmware and or hardware using for example hardware components such as application specific integrated circuits ASICs . Implementation of a hardware state machine so as to perform the functions described herein will be apparent to persons skilled in the relevant arts.

In the example environment shown communication interface provides a two way data communication coupling via a communications path to a local network . For example if communication interface is an integrated services digital network ISDN card or a modem communication interface provides a data communication connection to the corresponding type of telephone line which comprises part of communications path . If communication interface is a local area network LAN card or connects to a LAN then it can provide a data communication connection via communications path to a compatible LAN. Wireless links are also possible. In any such implementation communication interface sends and receives electrical electromagnetic or optical signals which carry digital data streams representing various types of information.

Communications path typically provides data communication through one or more networks to other data devices. For example in the disclosed embodiments communications path can provide a connection through local network to host computer or to data equipment operated by an Internet Service Provider ISP . In turn ISP provides data communication services through the worldwide packet data communication network commonly called the Internet .

Local network and Internet both use electrical electromagnetic or optical signals that carry digital data streams. The signals through the various networks and the signals on communications path and through communication interface which carry the digital data to and from computer are exemplary forms of carrier waves transporting the information.

Computer system can send messages and receive data as well as computer programs through the network or networks communications path and communication interface . If the network used is the Internet server can transmit a requested code for an application program through Internet ISP local network and communications path . Examples of such applications are the application programs run by application servers and database servers as described in detail below.

Though system is described as a node comprising a video game console or other console with intensive graphics rendering capability the disclosed embodiments may be implemented in any other computer system configurations including for example hand held devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics minicomputers mainframe computers and the like.

The disclosed embodiment may also be used in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network where the program modules may be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

Accordingly in one or more embodiments system is a node comprising a video game console. As an example system may comprise a personal computer PC based video game or a specially suited video console. One example of a specially suited video console is Playstation 2 manufactured by Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. Another example of a specially suited video console is Xbox manufactured by Microsoft Corporation. Skilled persons will realize that the foregoing video game consoles are presented by way of illustration and that the present embodiments are not limited to the foregoing video game consoles but may instead include any type of video game consoles.

Beginning with memory component of system includes a main memory and a secondary memory connected to bus . Main memory includes a primary memory and a read only memory . Primary memory is illustrated to store an operating system an applications modules component and a data component . Secondary memory includes a hard drive and an interface from hard drive to system bus .

Bus may comprise any type of computer bus structure. Examples include a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using a bus architecture such as PCI VESA Microchannel MCA ISA and EISA. Memory component includes read only memory ROM and main memory for example a random access memory RAM . ROM stores a basic input output system BIOS which contains the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within system such as during start up of system . Main memory may store an operating system one or more application programs and modules and program data .

In one or more embodiments hard drive of secondary memory may also store operating system application programs and modules and program data not shown . Hard drive is interfaced with bus via hard drive interface .

System may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote processors such as a remote processor . Remote processor may be a server a router a peer device or other common network node and may include many or all of the elements described relative to system . The logical connections include the illustrated LAN connection and WAN connection.

When used in a LAN networking environment system is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment system may include a modem or other devices for establishing communications over WAN such as the Internet. Modem may be internal or external to system . Modem is connected to bus via a serial interface . In a networked environment one or more memories associated with remote processor may store program modules relative to system or portions thereof .

As shown system includes a floppy or other magnetic disk drive to read from or write to a removable disk and a CD ROM or other optical disk drive to read from or write to other optical media. The floppy drive and CD ROM drive are respectively connected to system bus by exemplary magnetic disk drive interface and optical disk drive interface . In one embodiment computer readable media placed in the respective drives provide nonvolatile storage of data and computer executable instructions including program code comprising executable files and linking libraries. It should be noted that other media readable by system may also be included including flash memory cards digital video disks and magnetic cassettes.

The user of system may enter commands and information into the system through a keyboard and a pointing device such as mouse . Other input devices include a game controller and its components such as a video game controller a game pad and one or more video camera component whose features and functions are described in detail below in reference to . Additional input devices not shown may include microphones satellite dishes and scanners. The foregoing and other input devices may be connected to processor component through interfaces coupled to system bus . Exemplary interfaces include a serial port interface a parallel port interface a game port interface and a universal serial bus USB interface.

Monitor or any other type of device is connected to system bus via exemplary interface which in this case may be display controller or video adapter. Other types of peripheral output devices that are not shown include speakers printers and fax machines.

Sound processor generates music and other sound effects based on instructions from main processor over system bus . Sound buffer is used by sound processor to record waveform data. The output of sound processor may be directed to an output device in the input output component via system bus such as a speaker not shown or monitor .

Graphics interface is an interface for translation over system bus between main processor and image processor or for translation over system bus between numerical calculation processor and image processor .

Image processor includes a rendering engine a memory interface a display controller and an image memory . Display controller may be for example a programmable CRT controller. Image memory may for example use a unified memory structure where a texture rendering region and a display rendering region are set in a uniform area. Rendering engine executes operations for rendering of predetermined graphical image data in image memory through memory interface . These operations are executed in relation to and in correspondence with rendering commands supplied from main processor of processor component over system bus .

In one embodiment memory interface and rendering engine are connected over a first bus and memory interface and image memory are connected over a second bus. The bit width of the aforementioned buses increases as the graphical rendering technology develops and includes as one example a bit width of 128 bits for high speed rendering by rendering engine . In one embodiment for example rendering engine is capable of real time rendering of image data respectively of 320 240 pixels or 640 480 pixels conforming to for example NTSC or PAL standards. For example the rendering rate may be several tens of times per one sixtieth of a second interval or one thirtieth of a second interval .

In one embodiment the aforementioned nodes processors and processes running on the processors are described by virtue of their functions with respect to information retrieval within a network.

Specifically a node that requests information is termed a client and a node that transmits the requested information is termed a server. A node can have thee dual roles of serving as both a client as well as a server.

The processes running on the clients are termed client applications and the processes running on a server are termed server applications. Information exchange occurs between the server application providing the information or services and the client application receiving the provided information and services.

Client includes a client application which is an information requesting or receiving application associated with client . Client application either runs directly on client or is remotely accessible from client .

Server includes a server application which is an information retrieval application associated with server . Server application either runs directly on server or is remotely accessible from server .

In an exemplary operation client application is executed on client . In response client issues a request for information transmitted over network . The request is received by server which executes server application . The requested information and or services are then transmitted back to client over network .

As noted network can be any type of network either private or public. In one or more embodiments environment including network refers to the Internet and World Wide Web Web . In these embodiments clients and servers transmit information in formats and media acceptable to the Internet and Web.

Internet refers to a worldwide system of interconnected computer networks that use the Transmission Control Protocol Internet Protocol TCP IP set of protocols. TCP IP in turn typically refers to a bundle of network protocols including i the IP a network layer protocol where unique IP addresses identify each network and each of its hosts ii TCP a connection oriented protocol where a connection is established via handshakes before any data is transmitted and iii certain application layer protocols including telnet and file transfer protocol FTP .

The parts of the Internet that are most widely used are electronic mail e mail and the aforementioned Web. The Web is a network of computers located all over the world. These international computer networks can be comprised of clients and servers that users access to locate resources.

In one embodiment all the clients and servers in the Web can communicate with each other and normally use a communication standard called Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP . HTTP is an application protocol i.e. a set of rules for exchanging files on the Web that runs on top of TCP IP.

The information on the Web is stored in documents called Web pages which are files stored on the servers comprising the Web. The clients request the Web pages from the servers specifically server applications running on the servers . More specifically client applications running on the clients request the Web pages from server applications running on the servers .

In the present embodiment the client applications are typically called Web browsers. Examples of well known browsers that can be used with the disclosed embodiments include Spry s Mosaic Microsoft s Internet Explorer and Netscape s Navigator. Browsers are capable of understanding a variety of program languages used to design the Web pages as well as protocols used to transmit the Web pages.

Web browsers have varying levels of sophistication and functionality. Each screenful of information includes such items as highlighted words graphics menu choices through which users can hyperlink or link to retrieve further information either from the client itself for local files or from servers located on the Web. Table 2 contains common Internet terms known to skilled persons.

The manner of displaying the retrieved informational content in a web browser is primarily according to formatting and display languages. Examples of formatting and display languages that can be used with the disclosed embodiments include Hyper Text Markup Language HTML eXtensible Markup Language XML EXtensible HyperText Markup Language XHTML and Cascading Style Sheets CSS .

HTML is used to create text files that contain markup tags which inform the browser how to display the page. HTML files must have an htm or html file extension and can be created using a simple text editor. XML is a markup language permitting users to define their own markup tags. The markup tags in XML are not predefined as with HTML. XML uses a Document Type Definition DTD or an XML Schema to describe the data. While HTML was designed to display data focusing on how the data appears looks XML was designed to describe data focusing on the data itself providing the ability to structure store and to send information. XML is pared down version of Standard Generalized Markup Language SGML specifically designed for Web documents. SGML is a comprehensive system for the organization and tagging of document elements. Rather than specifying particular formatting SGML specifies the rules for tagging elements. XHTML is the same as a version of HTML referenced as HTML 4.01. It is HTML defined as an XML application and applies a strictly defined version of HTML. CSS is used to design stylesheet pages which define how the document is displayed or printed to the browser. CSS sheets can be attached to the HTML document itself. The cascading feature supported by CSS permits a single document to use two or more stylesheets which are applied according to specified priorities.

The manner of formatting the information for retrieval from servers and transmitting the retrieved information over network are determined by protocols. A variety of protocols can be used to implement the disclosed embodiments over the Internet including the aforementioned HTTP FTP telnet as well as for example Internet Relay Chat IRC .

The main protocol or set of rules for navigation and exchanging of files between clients and servers used on the Web is HTTP designed for exchanging files running on top of TCP IP. HTTP not only defines how messages are formatted and transmitted but also what actions Web server applications and browsers should take in response to various commands.

The act of using a client browser to download a Web page located at a server application can also be called navigating the Web or browsing the Web or linking to Web sites on the Web. Each Web page has a Web address called a Uniform Resource Locators URLs . Consequently Web pages are located by linking to the URL of a Web page and displaying it in the browser . Users can link to Web pages by selecting or clicking on menu choices highlighted words or graphics associated with URLs. When a user enters a URL in his her browser or otherwise attempts to link to a website it causes an HTTP command to be sent to the appropriate Web server directing it to fetch and transmit the requested Web page.

In the remainder of the description portion of the specification the technology discussed in the foregoing sections is applied to a specific type of environment. The embodiments are described with respect to generating reviewing processing storing retrieving analyzing and optimizing information input to or output from a virtual environment. In particular the embodiments are described with respect to generating reviewing processing storing retrieving analyzing and optimizing information in the form of image snapshots and videos within a virtual environment though the described embodiments are not limited merely to extracting image snapshots and videos but can be used for any input or output of information to or from a virtual environment.

The particular type of virtual environment is not limited to the described embodiments but can apply to any virtual type of environment including for example i a virtual reality system ii an augmented reality system iii a video game system and iv a virtual movie including v systems augmented with or based upon real world input output and artificial intelligence AI or its derivatives. For example the disclosed embodiments can be used to extract process and store delayed time or real time inputs to and outputs from video film taken from within an individual s body in order to extract virtual video from different perspectives for diagnostic testing and to provide output to laser surgical apparatus for surgery.

Additional embodiments include i digital filmmaking ii simulations of military equipment and personnel readiness during war games iii flight simulation training for pilots iv modeling simulations for biological chemical and molecular analyses v simulations related to graphical rendering of building facilities for architects builders and governmental registration authorities and vi any other simulations that may be contemplated.

Beginning with arena two video game players play a real time or delayed time video game together respectively using consoles for submitting their video game input commands and monitoring their activities from a perspective within the video game. As used herein consoles may refer to consoles as the term is used in the applicable technology or any type of computer generated virtual environment and the like which may also be processed and or stored remotely from the physical devices . Arena includes a circular field of play with video game fans and enthusiasts seated at seating sections to watch both the players in real life as they play and to watch the game competition on a large screen display above their heads not shown .

Consoles i permit video game players to employ any known or thought of methods for inputting their commands such as for example via a video game controller an optical device and the like and ii permit video game players to review their gaming activities from within the game employing any known or thought of methods such as two dimensional or three dimensional flat screen displays three dimensional holographic images and the like in the manner of one or more perspectives from within the video game. It should be noted that the functions associated with consoles may also be performed remotely by remote processing hardware software firmware and the like.

In one embodiment the video game is executed by one or more of the video console processors. Here for example the views of the video game players from within the video game as chosen by the video game players are transmitted from processors of video consoles over video connections to monitors of the video consoles . In another embodiment the video game is executed by one or more processors located remotely from the video game consoles . Here for example the views of the video game players from within the video game as chosen by the video game players are transmitted from such remote processors over video connections to monitors of the video consoles . In one or more described embodiments the connections described herein refer to data connections over a wireline or wireless or combined wireline and wireless connections.

The aforementioned perspectives chosen by the video game players are also transmitted over data lines from the console video game displays to an Ethernet data hub for distribution over data line . In one embodiment hub provides data access to the video game by providing one or more data connections to the one or more processors running the video game. Accordingly data line may provide access to and from the video game that is running through hub .

In one or more embodiments each video console comprises a node having processes located resident on the node or remotely accessible by the node executed on one or more processors located resident on the node or remotely accessible by the node for such functions as executing the video game receiving inputs from video game players and transmitting outputted video images from within the video game being executed. In one embodiment where the video game is executed remotely from video consoles the video game is run on another node in the form of processes located resident on the node or remotely accessible by it and executed on one or more processors located resident on the node or remotely accessible by it. Accordingly the aforementioned input output and processing related components can have any alternative structures and functions described herein with reference to nodes including their processors and their respective processes .

In addition in one or more embodiments the data connections and associated processing units including hub and telecommunications processing systems including instructional hardware software and or firmware running on video consoles or remotely from them comprise communications network . Accordingly the aforementioned communications related components can have any alternative structures and functions described herein with reference to communications network . As one example video game players and their respective video consoles can be located remotely from one another and respectively remotely located from a third node where the video game is being executed with the inputs and outputs respectively submitted and received over data connections over a data network for example the Internet comprising communications network .

For example i the video game can be executed on video consoles or executed remotely from them such as through an Internet or other data connection through a communications network ii the view perspectives from within the video game being monitored on consoles respectively by video game players can be output from either a local video game being executed on video consoles or output from the aforementioned remotely executed video game and iii the input of video game commands by video game players respectively to consoles can be input to either a local video game being executed on video consoles or input to the aforementioned remotely executed video game.

As noted the second main component of environment is Gamecaster Cybercam facility . As illustrated Gamecaster Cybercam facility is a truck facility though Gamecaster Cybercam facility can be any type of facility known.

Gamecaster Cybercam facility includes one or more camera persons respectively having access to video camera components .

Video camera components respectively permit camera persons to view the video game being played according to the respective desires of camera persons and the operational parameters of video camera components whose features and functions are described in greater detail below.

Each camera person can preset or set in real time his or her respective video camera component to display one or more perspective views from within the video game. The perspective views can be set in accordance with the working functions of the video game processing system such as for example set through the spectator mode of a video game executing in main processor of processor component shown in possibly in combination with image processor of graphics sound component shown in according to instructional commands sent from the video camera components to the video game via interface shown in .

Alternatively in another embodiment the perspective views of video camera components can also be set in accordance with programs and or executable code passed to the video game processor of processor component shown in possibly in combination with image processor of graphics sound component shown in such as by way of applets causing views according to parameters desired by the camera persons and according to the operational parameters of video camera components .

As shown with respect to exemplary video camera component data and instructions can be sent from or received to the processors executing the video game by way of data line connected to data line . Accordingly 

Referring back to Gamecaster Cybercam facility in one or more embodiments any display views of the video camera components can be transmitted over data line to video consoles . One or more directors respectively have access to and may control operations with respect to video consoles .

Video consoles respectively include displays associated with respective processing units as for example display associated with processor of video console . In addition however the processing capability of video consoles may be located remotely and remotely accessible from video consoles .

Video consoles enable director to monitor any of the perspective views from within the video game received from video consoles . As noted the data from video consoles operated by camera persons are transmitted to the director s video consoles via data line .

In one or more embodiments an exemplary video console also enables director to remotely monitor one or more unique views from within the video game. The foregoing may be performed passively as for example where video console is set whether in delayed time or in real time to one or more perspective views from within the video game. For example the data and associated commands from the video game being executed are received from data line by data line connected to video console .

Instead of a passive viewing of the video game director can also i employ his or her own video camera component not shown or ii may operate a live broadcast switch to switch between the different views offered by video camera components . Here the director s device is preset or set in real time to display one or more perspective views from within the video game. The perspective views can be set in accordance with the working functions of the video game such as for example set through the spectator mode of the video game according to instructional commands sent from the video camera component to the video game. Alternatively the perspective views of the video camera components can also be set in accordance with programs and or executable code passed to the video game such as by way of applets causing views according to parameters desired by the director operating the video camera component. Here the data and associated commands are transmitted to data line and received from data line respectively by way of data lines connected to video console . The foregoing applies where for example the video console is a video camera component. Unlike a real world sports event the actions of the video game players within an executed video game may be recorded for playback. This permits the director to run a prerecorded video game and switch between the camera shots of video game components . Accordingly though not possible in real world sports events the disclosed embodiments permit director to replay the prerecorded video game over and over establishing unique camera shots in each replay.

In one or more embodiments one or more of the video consoles employed by director are used to transmit their resident or remotely accessible video images to a remote display. For example the remote display can be a very large video display apparatus located above the center of arena for display by fans and enthusiasts seated in seats . Here the image displayed on monitor of video console is transmitted as data over data lines to hub where the data signal is transmitted to the video display apparatus. As another example the image data is transmitted as a video broadcast feed and displayed over for example network television cable television or an Internet webcast.

In one or more embodiments one or more of the video consoles employed by director have processors located resident to the video console or remotely accessible by the video console to permit director to switch between the perspective views from within the video game as shown on monitor of video game console . In particular video game console can be used to switch between any of the videos received from video consoles the videos reviewed by the director s own video consoles as well as the videos viewed by video game players .

In one or more embodiments each video camera component and video console comprises a node having processes located resident on the nodes or remotely accessible by the nodes executed on one or more processors located resident on the nodes or remotely accessible by the nodes for such functions as transmitting and receiving commands related to a view from within the video game. Accordingly the aforementioned video camera components and video consoles can have any alternative structures and functions described herein with reference to nodes their processors and their processes .

In addition in one or more embodiments the data connections and associated processing units including telecommunications processing systems including instructional hardware software and or firmware running on video camera components and video consoles or remotely from them comprise communications network . Accordingly the aforementioned communications related components can have any alternative structures and functions described herein with reference to communications network . As one example any of the parties i video game players and their respective consoles ii the additional node if any from which the game is being executed iii the location of any one of camera persons and or any video camera component and iv the location of any one of directors and or any video console can be respectively remotely located from one another and can exchange data respectively between one another over data connections over a data network for example the Internet comprising communications network .

Beginning with the front perspective view of exemplary model for an exemplary video camera component is shown. includes base component connector components rotation assembly optional locking device display component video screen and visor .

In one or more embodiments visor prevents reflection of light on screen from a direction above model including any other type of glare protection. Also in one or more embodiments model is designed to be mounted on one or more tripods. Here base is mounted on top of any type of known or specially designed tripod.

In one embodiment rotation assembly permits only upward and downward rotational tilt of display component including screen and visor from base component respectively permitting viewing of image perspectives based upon upward and downward tilting of a video camera component . Here model is fixedly attached to a tripod and the movement of the respective tripod arms see C permits model to be rotated leftward and rightward in directions horizontal to the plane of the ground and to be rotated leftward and rightward in directions vertical to the plane of the ground respectively permitting viewing of image perspectives based upon rotating of a video camera component .

In another embodiment rotation assembly permits any one of i upward and downward rotational tilt of display component including screen and visor from base component respectively permitting viewing of image perspectives based upon upward and downward tilting of a video camera component and ii leftward and rightward horizontal rotation of display component including screen and visor from base component respectively permitting viewing of image perspectives based upon leftward and rightward rotation of a video camera component .

In the disclosed embodiments connector components include any type of connector connecting model as a node in communications system to another node. In one or more embodiments connector components of a first node for example model of video camera components permit its connection to an input output component of a system for example via connection to interface as shown in . Examples of connector components may include for example a proprietary 9 pin serial interface connector for a Playstation 2 video game a USB connector modified for use with an Xbox video game a USB connector programmed to connect to any personal computer video game and any other type of connector. As another example connector may be a connector for a communications interface for communications over communications network such as for example a LAN and a WAN .

Extensible respective left and right arms may be tilted in the up down direction to tilt the camera view upward or downward. Extensible respective left and right arms may also be rotated in a direction horizontal to the plane of the ground to rotate the camera view leftward or rightward. Referring to in an exemplary video game system adapted for a personal computer movement of a mouse upward or downward simulates the motion of an up down tilting view whereas movement of the mouse leftward or rightward simulates a left right rotating view. Accordingly in these disclosed embodiments the aforementioned motion of tilting video camera components in the upward and downward directions and rotating them in the leftward and rightward direction are mapped to corresponding mouse commands to simulate movement of the mouse for personal computer based video gaming systems. It should be noted that rotation of the device in the leftward and rightward directions in response to input signals causing the rolling of the horizon called rolling or Dutching is also enabled.

The camera person s left thumb is positioned to actuate the left thumb actuator . Referring to in one embodiment the left thumb actuator i permits a view simulating or resembling a translation of the camera leftward or rightward and ii permits a view simulating or resembling a translation of the camera forward or backward . These motions are referred to as track truck dollie motions of a camera or flying a camera in art recognized parlance. As shown in in an exemplary video game system adapted for a personal computer the keyboard may be used to reflect these motions including but not limited to an A causing a left track a D causing a right track a W causing a forward track and an S causing a backward track. A video game controller may cause the same output for a video game console or a personal computer based on the respective leftward rightward forward and backward displacement of the video game controller handle. Accordingly in these disclosed embodiments the aforementioned actuations of the left thumb actuator may be respectively mapped to the leftward rightward forward and backward motions of an exemplary video game controller or other type of controller to implement the aforementioned tracking controls.

In exemplary embodiments the camera person s right thumb is positioned to actuate the right thumb actuator . Referring to in one embodiment the right thumb actuator i permits views simulating or resembling a craning of the camera upward or downward and ii permits views simulating or resembling zooming of the camera inward and outward . As shown in in a video game system adapted for a personal computer the keyboard may be used to reflect these motions with a C causing a left crane operation a space causing a right crane operation an E causing a zooming inward operation and an R causing a zooming outward operation. A video game controller may cause the same output for the personal computer based on the respective leftward rightward forward and backward displacement of the video game controller handle. Accordingly in these disclosed embodiments the aforementioned actuations of the right thumb actuator may be respectively mapped to the aforementioned leftward rightward forward and backward motions of an exemplary video game controller or other type of controller to implement the aforementioned craning and zooming controls.

The vertical angular rate sensor senses the aforementioned upward and downward tilt rotation by measuring the rate of movement of a video camera component in upward and downward tilting rotations. The horizontal angular rate sensor senses the aforementioned leftward and rightward rotations parallel to the ground plane by measuring the rate of movement of a video camera component in leftward and rightward rotations. In an exemplary embodiment respective vertical and horizontal gyroscopes are used as the aforementioned vertical and horizontal angular rate sensors. Any other types of motion sensors suited for the same purposes may be used as well including accelerometer sensors that measure the respective accelerations rather than the respective angular rates of the aforementioned tilting up down and rotating left right motions. Respective signals corresponding to the vertical angular rate and horizontal angular rate of the video camera component are transmitted to processor .

The left thumb controller generates a control signal based upon the aforementioned movement of the left thumb actuator . Similarly right thumb controller generates a control signal based upon the aforementioned movement of the right thumb actuator . The respective left and right thumb control signals are transmitted to processor .

Processor generates one or more control signals for transmission to an exemplary system which may be for example a proprietary video game console or a personal computer through an appropriate interface .

The control device may use one or more sensors used to measure any required parameter. For example as shown both an accelerometer and a gyroscope are employed to measure motion in the up down tilt directions specifically the respective acceleration and rate of displacement of the video camera component whereas in this embodiment a single gyroscope is employed to measure motion in the left right rotation directions specifically the respective rate of displacement of the video camera component. As known to skilled persons however any combination of sensors may be used to measure relative displacement in any type of direction. The outputs of these sensors are measured in volts for example as between 0 and 5 volts. Processor is programmed to read the voltages and convert the analog signals into digital signals for transmission by interface or other pertinent interface to input output component of system .

In one embodiment video game controller module comprises two potentiometers which are variable resistors one for measuring movement in the forward backward directions and one for measuring movement in the leftward rightward directions. The resistance varies in each case based on the relative displacement of the video game controller handle. The output of each potentiometer is measured for example as between 0 and 5 volts. Processor is programmed to read the voltages and convert the analog signals into digital signals for transmission by interface or other pertinent interface to input output component of system .

As noted the type of interface depends upon the system . For example if system is a Playstation 2 video game interface may be a proprietary 9 pin serial interface connector. If system is an Xbox video game interface may be a USB connector modified for use with an Xbox video game. If system is a personal computer executing a personal computer video game interface may be a USB connector programmed to connect processor to any personal computer video game device. Skilled persons will realize that the foregoing interfaces are presented by way of illustration and that the present embodiments are not limited to the foregoing interfaces but may instead include any type of interfaces.

Because gyroscopes and other components may have sensitivities based on ambient temperatures and other external factors the values emitted by such devices to processor and measured by processor may become inaccurate. Accordingly when actuated by a user calibrate button sets the inputs to processor to null or zero value. This feature increases the accuracy of the control device of through extended usage.

Processor is programmed to map the control signals generated by components and to inputs expected by system and to do so in an efficient manner. For example in one embodiment the analog input ports are all continuously read 16 times with each reading being separated from the next in 10 millisecond intervals. The result of each of the 16 reads is averaged to produce more accurate outputs from processor .

The mapping may be performed based on parameters expected by system . For example in one embodiment of processor the output digital signals resulting from the input analog signals of devices are transmitted to system separated by predetermined time intervals from the output digital signals resulting from the input analog signals of devices . In another embodiment however the output digital signals resulting from the input analog signals of all devices are transmitted to system at or about the same time intervals.

In addition the time delay between output transmissions from processor to interface or alternatively from interface to system may be set according to the requirements of system . For example i in an embodiment where system is an Xbox video game the delay may be set to 10 milliseconds ii in an embodiment where system is a personal computer running a personal computer adapted video game the delay may be set to 4 milliseconds.

The bi color LEDs provide one or more single or multi colored displays for the user. For example a red color LED may indicate that a battery power if any is running low or that the device has been powered up but has not been connected to system . As another example a green color LED may indicate that three is sufficient battery power if any or that the device has been powered up and has been connected to system .

In an exemplary embodiment processor runs firmware. For example a developer develops code pertaining to functions of processor in the C programming language. A compiler is used to link convert the source code into binary object code link the object code modules together and generate machine language assembly instructions. The assembly instructions are loaded into processor through an appropriate port such as a parallel port printer port or USB port using for example a device programmer such as the model BP1200 provided by BP Microsystems Inc. or for example a circuit debugger.

In different exemplary environments a variety of different manufactured device components may be used to perform the aforementioned functions. For example in one exemplary embodiment i microcontroller processor is a model Microchip PIC16F877A manufactured by Microchip Technology Inc. ii accelerometer is the model Memsic 2125EB distributed by Parallax Inc. iii gyroscopes are models ADXRS150EB manufactured by Analog Devices Inc. iv video game controller module is a model CTS253B103B60NA manufactured by CTS Corporation and USB mini type connector is a model 15430384 100 manufactured by Delphi Connection Systems Inc. v LCD display modules include models AND TFT 64PA and PC TFT 64PA manufactured by AND Electronics Inc. vi bi color LED is a model ZMM5231B 7 manufactured by Diodes Inc. and vii calibrate button is a model MTH2UOANAGX manufactured by E Switch Inc.

Initially the hardware is initialized step which may include setting the proper configuration for the firmware running on processor including configuring the analog to digital initially setting the color of LED to red configure the input and output ports and configuring the processor modules by turn off unneeded modules and turning on needed modules.

Next the interface device such as USB is initialized and configured step to interface with external system which includes setting up and preparing the necessary USB packets and related protocols.

The input voltages are initially automatically set to null or zero values to initially calibrate processor which has the same effect as calibration provided by calibrate button step .

In one or more embodiments the video camera component may be powered by an internal rechargeable battery or by alternating current AC through connection to an external outlet. If the device is battery powered the battery may be checked to determine whether it is below a predefined threshold such as 10V step and LED may be set to red to indicate low batter power step .

Processor optionally reads the control signals inputs from the gyroscope and accelerometer components step and outputs a corresponding output signal to interface . However if the calibrate button is pressed step the output data to interface must be cleared out.

Processor optionally reads control signals inputs from a mouse controller or other controller which are not shown step and outputs a corresponding output signal to interface . However if the calibrate button is pressed the output data to interface must be cleared out not shown .

Processor also optionally reads the control signals inputs from the thumb control modules step and outputs a corresponding output signal to interface . However if the calibrate button is pressed the output data to interface must be cleared out .

Processor also optionally reads control signals inputs from a keyboard or other controller which are not shown step and outputs a corresponding output signal to interface . However if the calibrate button is pressed the output data to interface must be cleared out not shown .

Depending upon the input parameters required by system a time delay such as 2 milliseconds may be required to separate the respective outputs from one another steps . The input process is repeated by reverting control back to step .

While various embodiments of the present invention have been described above it should be understood that they have been presented by way of example only and not limitation. Thus the breadth and scope of the present invention should not be limited by any of the above described exemplary embodiments but should instead be defined only in accordance with the following claims and their equivalents.

