---

title: Method and apparatus for combination catalyst for reduction of NOin combustion products
abstract: A method and apparatus for catalytically processing a gas stream passing therethrough to reduce the presence of NOtherein, wherein the apparatus includes a first catalyst composed of a silver containing alumina that is adapted for catalytically processing the gas stream at a first temperature range, and a second catalyst composed of a copper containing zeolite located downstream from the first catalyst, wherein the second catalyst is adapted for catalytically processing the gas stream at a lower second temperature range relative to the first temperature range.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07803338&OS=07803338&RS=07803338
owner: Caterpillar Inc.
number: 07803338
owner_city: Peoria
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050621
---
This invention was made with Government support under DOE Contract No. DE AC05 00OR22725 awarded by the U.S. Department of Energy. Accordingly the Government may have certain rights to this invention.

The present invention is related to that of co pending Ser. No. 11 514 544 filed on Sep. 1 2006 for Reformer Assisted Lean NOx Catalyst Aftertreatment System And Method. 

The present invention relates generally to methods and apparatus for removing pollutant gases from the exhaust gas stream formed by a combustion process such as required in the operation of internal combustion engines furnaces power plants and so forth and is more particularly related to catalysts used in removing nitrogen oxide NO from the exhaust gases resulting from a combustion process.

A continuing effort has been made over the years for developing methods and systems for removing pollutant gases from exhaust gases produced by combustion equipment. In recent years environmental regulations have been made law in numerous countries around the world in an effort to reduce the emission of pollutant gases into the atmosphere from combustion equipment. Of major concern is the production of nitrogen oxides NO by motor vehicles driven by internal combustion engines such as gasoline driven engines and particularly diesel engines. Other combustion apparatus are also of concern such as furnaces installed in factories commercial and home heating devices power plant equipment and so forth.

During the combustion process in such equipment when nitrogen in the air reacts with oxygen within a combustion chamber under the high temperature and pressure conditions that typically exist therein such as in the cylinder of an internal combustion engine nitrogen oxides NO are produced which typically include either one or a combination of nitrogen monoxide and nitrogen dioxide commonly referred to as NOemissions. The NOemissions are major atmospheric pollutants that cause smog and acid rain. The major industrialized countries throughout the world have instituted regulations for reducing NOemissions.

As a result a major effort has been ongoing over an extended period of time for developing methods and systems to substantially eliminate the emission into the atmosphere of nitrogen oxides or NOvia exhaust gas streams from combustion equipment. Recognizing that automobile emissions are a major source of air pollution in the 1966 automobile model year the state of California passed regulations requiring the use of exhaust emission control systems in vehicles sold in California. Similar regulations were instituted throughout the United States by automotive model year 1968.

In combustion processes the perfect mixture of a fuel and air is referred to in thermodynamics by the term stoichiometric. This is the point at which the amount of air is just enough to combust all of the fuel with no excess oxygen remaining. For many reasons internal combustion engines cannot be run stoichiometrically and are typically run lean where there is an excess of oxygen to fuel relative to the stoichiometric condition. Although both gasoline and diesel internal combustion engines are typically run as lean burn engines such a condition is most often found in operating diesel engines and leads to the emission of undesirable amounts of NOin the exhaust gases from such engines. At times engines may run rich that is with an excess of fuel relative to oxygen. Note that for gasoline the stoichiometric mixture is 14.6 1. Even under these conditions some nitrogen from the air can react with oxygen to form NOx

The exhaust gas stream from lean burn engines contain significant amounts of oxygen thereby preventing the efficient removal of NOfrom the gas stream through use of conventional exhaust catalysts such as a 3 Way Catalyst. As a result NOtrap or NOstorage reduction systems have been developed to assist in removing NOfrom current lean burn engines. However these systems must rely on close engine control for alternating between rich and lean conditions in the exhaust gas stream. During the lean phases the catalyst employed stores NO. During the rich phases the catalyst reduces NOto N. Also HC SCR systems have been developed as retrofits for use in reducing NOfrom the exhaust gas stream of internal combustion engines but such systems have found only limited use.

Accordingly there is a need in the art for improved methods and apparatus for removing NOfrom the exhaust gas stream of a combustion device such as internal combustion engines.

The present invention relates to a method and apparatus for catalytically processing a gas stream to remove or at least substantially reduce NOcompounds therefrom. The apparatus of the present invention provides an efficient means for reducing or eliminating NOcompounds in exhaust gases produced by an internal combustion engine. In particular the apparatus of the present invention efficiently processes the exhaust gases from lean burn engines such as diesel engines for example whose exhaust gases exhibit a relatively large proportion of oxygen content. The present invention makes use of a combination of a first catalyst that exhibits NOconversion activity at a relatively high temperature with a second catalyst that exhibits at least similar activity at a lower temperature to yield a synergistic result. The present invention is characterized by a broader temperature range of operation and enhanced gas stream processing capacity. More particularly the present invention makes use of catalyst combinations that result in a synergistic effect better than the sum of the parts by producing the correct set of intermediate nitrogen compounds on the first catalyst and reducing these over the second catalyst.

The apparatus of the present invention comprises generally a first catalyst adapted to operate at an optimal first temperature and a second catalyst adapted to operate at a lower optimal second temperature relative to the first temperature. The first catalyst is positioned upstream from the second catalyst in a manner which enables the exhaust gases in the form of a gas stream to flow from the first catalyst to the second catalyst. The first and second catalysts may be arranged immediately one after another or in a spaced apart relationship.

In one embodiment of the present invention a reductant generally in the form of a hydrocarbon compound is introduced into the gas stream to further enhance the NOremoval activity of the apparatus via hydrocarbon selective catalytic reduction HC SCR .

In a preferred embodiment of the present invention the first catalyst is composed of a metal containing alumina material and the second catalyst is composed of a metal containing zeolite material. During operation the exhaust gases are passed through the apparatus and sequentially processed by the first and second catalysts. The first and second catalysts in combination operate to remove or at least substantially reduce the NOx compounds and convert them into environmentally compatible b products in a simple cost efficient manner.

In one aspect of the present invention there is provided an apparatus for catalytically processing a gas stream passing therethrough to reduce the presence of NOx therein the apparatus comprising 

a first catalyst having a first optimal processing temperature range for catalytically processing the gas stream and

a second catalyst located downstream from the first catalyst said second catalyst having a second lower optimal processing temperature range relative to the first temperature range for catalytically processing the gas stream subsequent to the first catalyst.

In a particular aspect of the present invention there is provided an apparatus for catalytically processing a gas stream passing therethrough to reduce the presence of NOtherein the apparatus comprising 

a first catalyst comprising metal containing alumina said first catalyst having a first optimal processing temperature range for catalytically processing the gas stream and

a second catalyst comprising metal containing zeolite located downstream from the first catalyst said second catalyst having a second lower optimal processing temperature range relative to the first optimal processing temperature range for catalytically processing the gas stream subsequent to the first catalyst.

In another aspect of the present invention there is provided a method for catalytically processing a gas stream to reduce the presence of NOtherein said method comprising 

delivering the gas stream to a first catalyst having a first optimal processing temperature range for catalytically processing the gas stream and

conveying the gas stream from the first catalyst to a second catalyst wherein said second catalyst has a lower second optimal processing temperature range relative to the first optimal processing temperature range for catalytically processing the gas stream subsequent to the first catalyst.

The present invention is directed to method and apparatus for catalytically processing a gas stream to remove or at least substantially reduce NOcompounds therefrom. The apparatus and method of the present invention provides an efficient means for reducing or eliminating NOcompounds in exhaust gases produced from an internal combustion engine. The apparatus and method of the present invention is designed to promote the catalytic conversion of NOcompounds present in the exhaust gases into environmentally compatible products. The apparatus of the present invention has been observed to yield a synergistic effect utilizing a combination of first and second catalysts in the presence of a reductant generally in the form of a hydrocarbon while using minimal packaging space. It is envisioned that the apparatus disclosed herein is suitable for use in lean NOexhaust aftertreatment systems.

The present invention is designed to promote a synergistic effect from the combination of different catalysts by tailoring the intermediate reactant species producing ammonia amines nitrites and other organo nitrogen species. The present invention is capable of generating higher NOx reduction performance while maintaining the same packaging volume and space velocity.

Referring to a schematic diagram showing an apparatus of the present invention identified by reference numeral coupled to a lean burn engine in the form of a diesel engine. As used herein a lean burn engine is defined as one that produces an oxygen rich exhaust which is defined as an exhaust having a higher molar ratio of oxygen than the total molar ratio of reductive compounds such as CO hydrogen and hydrocarbons. The exhausts have an oxidative environment. Examples of such engine systems include diesel engine systems spark ignited natural gas or alternative fuel engine systems liquid or gaseous fueled turbine engines and various lean burn gasoline engine systems. Generally diesel engine systems as shown in generate an exhaust having an oxygen content of from 4 to 16 depending on the load conditions and the running mode of the diesel engine.

An oxygen rich exhaust exits engine and is directed to the apparatus . Preferably this exhaust is supplemented by the addition of a reductant in the form of an atomized hydrocarbon or mixture of hydrocarbons . In the illustrated embodiment one source of these hydrocarbons can be the diesel fuel in a tank used as the primary source of fuel for the diesel engine . The hydrocarbon reductants can be the residual hydrocarbons remaining in the exhaust after the combustion event during an engine cycle. Alternatively the supplemental hydrocarbons can be introduced as a post injection event preferably during the power stroke or exhaust stoke of a four stroke diesel engine. Yet another alternative as illustrated is to introduce the supplemental hydrocarbon in the exhaust system at a location downstream of the engine cylinders using an auxiliary injector controlled by the engine control module ECM . It is also well known to use hydrocarbons other than the primary diesel fuel.

The engine exhaust is directed to the apparatus comprising a catalytic unit . Deposited within the catalytic unit is a combination of metal containing catalysts having the customized physical and chemical characteristics disclosed herein that yield both high NOremoving performance as well as other advantageous lean NOcatalyst performance characteristics. The composition of the combination of metal containing catalysts as well as the catalytic reactions is described in greater detail below.

Referring to the apparatus includes a catalytic unit which is placed downstream from the lean burn engine along the outgoing exhaust pipe . The exhaust in the form of a gas stream represented by an arrow from the engine is conducted along the exhaust pipe in the direction indicated by the associated arrow in . For one embodiment of the present invention the apparatus includes an airtight housing defining a packaging volume occupied by the catalytic unit an inlet port at one end and a outlet port at the opposed end thereof. The packaging volume is in fluid communication between the inlet and outlet ports and respectively. The inlet port supplies the exhaust from the combustion engine and the outlet port discharging an outgoing purified exhaust gas stream .

The catalytic unit of the apparatus includes a first catalyst having a first optimal processing temperature range for catalytically processing the gas stream of the exhaust and a second catalyst located downstream from the first catalyst . The second catalyst exhibits a second lower optimal processing temperature range relative to the first temperature range for catalytically processing the gas stream subsequent to the first catalyst . In particular the first catalyst is adapted to facilitate the reaction of NOx with hydrocarbons to yield nitrogen containing intermediates such as amines ammonia organo nitrogen species and oxygenates. These intermediate species desorb into the gas phase along with activated NOx species. The second catalyst is adapted to facilitate the reaction of these intermediates for further reduction into N. The inventors believe the first catalyst not only converts some of the NOx directly to N2 but also produces intermediate species from the remaining NOx that further react to form N2 over the second catalyst.

In a preferred embodiment of the present invention the first catalyst is composed of a catalytically active metal containing alumina AlO material preferably a metal containing alumina material and the second catalyst is composed of a catalytically active metal containing zeolite material preferably a metal containing ZSM 5 material. The first and second catalysts and are generally structurally arranged into catalyst beds which may be in the form of powders pellets particles washcoated or formed monoliths such as a honeycomb structure and the like.

The metal of the first catalyst is preferably selected from silver indium gallium tin cobalt and mixtures thereof and more preferably from silver. The loading of the metal of the first catalyst is preferably from about 1 to 15 wt based on the total weight of the first catalyst and more preferably from about 2 to 5 wt . With the use of a reductant in the exhaust a metal loading of at least 2 is preferred. In a preferred embodiment of the present invention the first catalyst is composed of silver containing alumina catalyst Ag alumina .

It has been found that alumina formed by a sol gel method produces a material having unique properties for utilization in lean NOcatalytic treatment of oxygen rich exhaust. Various methods of forming the alumina component were investigated. In one embodiment alumina was prepared by a complexing agent assisted sol gel method. Another embodiment had the alumina support material prepared by sol gel method without the use of a complexing agent.

The alumina component of the first catalyst is preferably synthesized via sol gel methods using a complexing agent in combination with a washing step employing an alcohol such as for example 2 propanol. The sol gel method is advantageous in that the resulting product is characterized by a basic pH excellent hydrothermal stability and optimized metal dispersion on the alumina component to maximize loading capacity and uniformity thereby enhancing greater reduction of NOcompared to conventional preparation methods. Specific details on the sol gel process can be found in Example 2 hereinafter. Further details on the synthesis of alumina via the sol gel process can be found in U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 703 343 and 6 706 660 the teachings of which are incorporated herein by reference to the extent they do not conflict herewith.

The metal doping or loading of the alumina material is preferably accomplished in one of two ways. In one method the subject metal dopant is solubilized in the water that is used to stop gelation during the sol gel procedure described above.

In a second method the calcined sol gel alumina is doped with a metal by an incipient wetness impregnation method. In the preferred incipient wetness impregnation method the calcined powder sol gel prepared alumina is brought into contact with a solution of the appropriate metal. The solution of the metal is present in an amount equal to or greater than the total pore volume of the alumina sample. The pore volume of alumina prepared is preferably between about 0.5 and about 2.0 cc g of alumina.

To form an indium or indium oxide doped alumina by the incipient wetness method an appropriate amount of In NO or InCl is dissolved in a water solution and brought into contact with the sol gel alumina. The indium or indium oxide doped alumina catalyst is then calcined at 600 C. for about 5 hours.

Tin or tin oxide doped alumina is prepared in the same manner using SnClin an ethanol solution instead of water. The tin or tin oxide doped alumina catalyst is calcined at 600 C. for about 5 hours and then at 800 C. for about 2 hours.

A third promising metal promoter evaluated is gallium or gallium oxide. A gallium or gallium oxide doped alumina is prepared by exposing the alumina to a water solution of Ga NO HO which is added to the aluminum oxide gel during the alumina preparation in the sol gel method. The gallium or gallium oxide doped alumina catalyst is calcined at 600 C. for about 5 hours to form oxides of gallium loaded alumina.

The metal of the second catalyst is preferably selected from copper iron cobalt mixtures thereof and more preferably from copper. The loading of the metal of the second catalyst is preferably from about 2 to 15 wt based on the total weight of the second catalyst and more preferably from about 3 to 11.5 wt . In a preferred embodiment of the present invention the second catalyst is composed of a copper containing zeolite catalyst Cu zeolite . The zeolite component may be selected from any suitable zeolite including but not limited to ZSM 5 ZSM 11 ZSM 35 MCM 22 MCM 49 Beta MCM 56 ITQ 13 and MCM 68. A preferred zeolite is ZSM 5. Further details on metal doping or loading the ZSM 5 component can be found in Example 1 hereinafter.

The first and second catalysts and of the catalytic unit are enclosed within the packaging volume of the housing with the first catalyst positioned upstream from the second catalyst . The first and second catalysts are present in an amount ratio ranging from about 1 2 to 2 1 with a ratio of about 1 1 being preferred. In this embodiment the first and second catalysts and are arranged in juxtaposition to one another. Alternatively the first and second catalysts and are maintained spaced apart at some distance L from one another. Typically performance increases as the residence time decreases. The first catalyst in combination with the second catalyst function to convert and reduce the presence of NOin the gas stream of the exhaust entering through the inlet port and exiting out of the outlet port of the apparatus in a more purified form.

As discussed above the exhaust can be injected with a reductant before the catalytic unit to enhance the catalytic reaction associated with converting NOto N. The reductant can be tapped off the fuel tank associated with the combustion engine and injected into the exhaust via a fuel injector or other suitable means. Other examples of suitable reductants in association with a diesel engine include dodecane ethanol propane diesel fuel kerosene diesel range paraffins diesel range non aromatic streams and the like. Other examples of suitable reductants in association with a gasoline engine include gasoline propane ethanol octane and the like.

A sample of copper containing ZSM 5 zeolite catalyst was produced by preparing a solution containing 68 grams of copper II nitrate hydrate and 1000 ml of deionized water. Thereafter 200 grams of ZSM 5 zeolite crystal were added while the solution was stirred. The resulting mixture was stirred for about 1.5 hours and then the pH was adjusted to 7.25 by the addition of 35.7 grams of NHOH. The stirring of the mixture continued for about 1 hour. The zeolite mixture was filtered and washed with 1000 ml of deionized water. The filtrate was dried overnight at about 85 C. The exchanged zeolite was then air calcined by ramping the temperature at a rate of 2 C. min to 550 C. holding for about 2 hours and then cooled to room temperature. Copper analysis indicated the copper loading was about 11.5 wt. .

A sample with 3 weight copper loading was prepared using the above procedure by varying the amount of copper II nitrate hydrate.

 Alumina support was prepared by utilizing a complexing agent assisted sol gel method. 500 grams of aluminum isopropoxide AIP 98 Aldrich Chemical Company Inc. was dissolved in 600 ml of 2 methyl 2 4 pentanediol MPD 99 Aldrich Chemical Company Inc in a beaker. The resulting mixture was stirred vigorously with a mechanical polyethylene stirrer. Once the mixture was mixed homogenously the beaker was placed in a constant temperature bath at a temperature of about 120 C. and stirred continuously for about an hour. Once all the AIP was dissolved a clear yellowish green solution was obtained. The AIP reacts with MPD to yield 2 propanol in the form of a vapor at the 120 C. reaction condition and the solution begins to gel. Once the gelation is completed after 4 hours 400 ml of water was added to terminate the gelation and yield a white precipitate aluminum hydroxide . The white solid product was redispersed in water and aged at 90 C. overnight under constant stirring.

After aging overnight 600 ml of 2 propanol was added to remove the water from the pores of the precipitate. Although 2 propanol or methanol is preferred any organic solvent having a surface tension of about equal to or less than 30 mN m will be useful. It is just necessary that the solvent have a surface tension significantly below that of water which is about 72 mN m. The slurry was vacuum filtered and dried at 90 C. in an oven for about 48 hours.

Calcination was carried out in a temperature programmed tube furnace with 5 L min air flowing through it. A general calcinations schedule is as follows ramp the temperature from 100 C. to 700 C. at about 1 C. min maintain at 700 C. for a prescribed time and turn off the heat and continue air over the alumina until the temperature is reduced to 100 C. During calcinations a selected amount of water e.g. 2 to 6 or more can be added to partially sinter the powders.

This procedure can be controlled so as to yield alumina with pre aging surface areas greater than about 200 m g pre aging pore volumes of from about 1.0 to 2.0 cc g and pre aging pore sizes averaging from about 4 to 20 nm. The resulting alumina product had a surface area of from about 200 to 230 m g.

Several samples of silver containing alumina catalysts were prepared via the incipient wetness impregnation technique. Aqueous silver nitrate or silver sulfate solution was added drop wise and mixed with the alumina product of Example 2. The volume of the nitrate solution was calculated to substantially match the pore volume of the alumina product which was about 1.4 ml per gram of alumina. Thus 0.322 grams of silver nitrate was dissolved in 14 ml of water and mixed with 10.0 grams of alumina. The impregnated sample was then manually mixed with a spatula dried overnight at 90 110 C. and calcined for about 5 hours at 600 C. in the presence of air. In another preparation 0.2966 grams of silver sulfate was dissolved in 42 ml of water because of lower solubility and this was added in three steps using 14 ml each time with drying and calcination between the steps. The silver loading in the catalyst was 2 weight based on the total weight of the catalyst.

Two catalysts were prepared by dissolving 500 g aluminum isopropoxide AIP in 600 ml 2 methyl 2 4 pentanediol MPD using the sol gel procedure described in Example 2. In this example however as part of the preparation 4.025 g Ag NO3 or 3.7075 g Ag2 SO4 was dissolved in 600 mL propanol and added to the slurry during the propanol washing step of Example 2. The slurry was mixed for about an hour and the resulting products were vacuum filtered to yield the catalysts.

Catalyst evaluation experiments were conducted in a quartz reactor heated in an electric furnace. A gas mixture was passed over a catalyst bed supported in the quartz reactor. The gas mixture contained 1000 ppm NO nitric oxide 1000 ppm propylene as a reductant and 9 oxygen with the remaining portion composed of helium. The total flow rate of the gas was about 1500 ml minute and the catalyst volume was about 3.0 ml to yield a gas hourly space velocity GHSV of 30 000. The temperature of the catalyst was increased from 150 C. to 550 C. and then reduced back to 150 C. Data were recorded as the temperature was reduced. In one evaluation 1.5 ml of Ag alumina catalyst was placed upstream of 1.5 ml of Cu ZSM 5 catalyst. In the second and third evaluations the catalysts were evaluated individually. The copper loading was about 11.5 wt based on the total weight of the copper containing catalyst. The alumina catalyst contained 2 wt silver.

As shown in the graph of the results of the evaluations compare the performance of the combination of catalysts to the performances of the catalysts individually. The graph shows that the combination of catalysts as represented by curve exhibited a broader temperature window of activity in removing NOwhen compared to the individual catalysts as represented by curves and respectively.

A catalyst evaluation experiment was conducted in a quartz reactor heated in an electric furnace in accordance to the procedures described in Example 5 except the gas mixture passing over the catalyst bed included 7 water. Further evaluations were made to compare the effects of copper loading at about 3 wt and about 11.5 wt respectively based on the total weight of the copper containing catalyst.

As shown in the graph of the results of the evaluations compare the performance of the combination of catalysts to the performances of the catalysts individually. The graph shows that the combination of catalysts as represented by curve maintains a broader temperature window of catalytic activity in removing NOeven in the presence of water than the individual catalysts as represented by curves and respectively.

As further shown in catalytic activity at the higher end of the temperature range was observed to be improved with lower Cu loading at about 3 wt represented by curve as compared to the Cu loading of about 11.5 wt. based on the total weight of the copper containing catalyst represented by curve .

The Ag alumina and Cu ZSM 5 catalysts were wash coated onto a 1 diameter by 3 long monolith and evaluated with dodecane a diesel range molecule as a reductant. The evaluations were carried out in a quartz reactor heated in an electric furnace. A gas mixture was passed over a catalyst bed supported in the quartz reactor. The gas mixture contained 500 ppm NO nitric oxide 3000 ppm dodecane as a reductant 50 ppm propene 500 ppm CO 8 carbon monoxide 7 water and 9 oxygen with the remaining portion composed of helium. The gas hourly space velocity GHSV was adjusted to about 35 000. The temperature of the catalyst was increased from 150 C. to 550 C. and then reduced back to 150 C. Data were recorded as the temperature was reduced. In one evaluation the Ag alumina catalyst was placed upstream of the Cu ZSM 5 catalyst. In the second and third evaluations the catalysts were evaluated individually.

As shown in the graph of the results of the evaluations compare the performance of the combination of catalysts to the performances of the catalysts individually. Surprisingly the performance of the combination of catalysts as represented by curve was observed to be better than the additive performance of the individual catalysts as represented by curves and respectively.

A set of ZSM 5 powders of varying crystal sizes and silica alumina ratios were exposed to steam at a concentration of 10 water vapor for about 16 hours at 600 C. to simulate aging induced by engine exhaust. The powders were subsequently pelleted and tested or evaluated for NOconversion. A second set of catalysts was prepared from same starting powders except the catalysts were impregnated with iron prior to being exposed to the steam. The second set of iron containing catalysts was prepared by adding 5.4 grams of iron III nitrate nonahydrate to 40 grams of deionized water under constant stirring. The resulting solution was added drop wise to mix with 30 grams of ZSM 5. The impregnated powder was then dried overnight at about 85 C. The iron containing ZSM 5 catalyst was air calcined at about 400 C. for about 3 hours. The resulting catalysts contained 2.5 wt iron.

The catalysts were evaluated using a quartz reactor heated in an electric furnace. A gas mixture containing 1000 ppm NO nitric oxide 1000 ppm propylene 9 oxygen and the remaining portion being helium was passed over the catalyst bed supported in the quartz reactor. The total flow rate of the gas mixture was about 1500 ml min and the catalyst volume was maintained at about 3.0 ml to yield a gas hourly space velocity GHSV of about 30 000. The temperature of the catalyst was increased from 150 C. to 550 C. and then reduced to 150 C. Data was recorded during the temperature reduction. The results are summarized in Table 1 below.

An evaluation was implemented which tested a combination catalyst consisting of Ag alumina and Cu ZSM 5 located downstream therefrom and a combination catalyst consisting of Ag alumina intermixed with Cu ZSM 5. The catalysts were evaluated using a quartz reactor heated in an electric furnace. A gas mixture containing 1000 ppm NO nitric oxide 1000 ppm propylene 2000 ppm hydrogen 9 oxygen and the remaining portion being helium was passed over the catalyst bed supported in the quartz reactor. The total flow rate of the gas mixture was about 1500 ml min and the catalyst volume was maintained at about 3.0 ml to yield a gas hourly space velocity GHSV of about 30 000. The temperature of the catalyst was increased from 150 C. to 550 C. and then reduced to 150 C. Data was recorded during the temperature reduction. The results are shown in .

The results indicate that a mixed combination catalyst as represented by curve operates less effectively than a staged catalyst having Ag alumina upstream of Cu ZSM 5 as represented by curve . The peak NOconversion to Nwas about 63 for the staged catalyst while the mixed catalyst had a peak NOconversion to Nof about 43 .

A catalyst evaluation experiment was conducted in a quartz reactor heated in an electric furnace in accordance to the procedures described in Example 5 except the gas mixture passing over the catalyst bed included 7 water. The NOx removing activity was measured at 475 C. using the combination of Ag alumina and downstream Cu ZSM 5 catalysts with 3 wt Cu loading and the combination of Ag alumina and downstream Pt alumina with 1 wt Pt loading. The results of the evaluation is shown in . The combination of Ag alumina and downstream Cu ZSM 5 catalysts exhibited 80 NOconversion to Nas represented by bar while the combination of Ag alumina and downstream Pt alumina exhibited 4 NOconversion to Nas represented by bar .

Applicants believe that the initial reaction of NOx with hydrocarbons on Ag alumina catalysts results in the formation of intermediate species such as ammonia amine organo nitrogen species and oxygenates. These intermediates desorb into the gas phase together with activated NOspecies. Further homogenous gas reaction leads to Nformation. These species are reacted on Cu ZSM 5 for further reduction to N. However the same species are reacted on Pt alumina and oxidized to NOwhich drastically reduced NOconversion.

Although various embodiments of the invention have been shown and described they are not meant to be limiting. Those of skill in the art may recognize various modifications to these embodiments which modifications are meant to be covered by the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

