---

title: Mid-IR optically pumped semiconductor laser
abstract: A waveguide mode isolation layer added between the active region and the heat sink bonding material of an optically pumped semiconductor laser isolates the optical mode from the bonding material.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07469001&OS=07469001&RS=07469001
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Air Force
number: 07469001
owner_city: Wahington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050523
---
The conditions under which this invention was made are such as to entitle the Government of the United States under paragraph I a of Executive Order 10096 as represented by the Secretary of the Air Force to the entire right title and interest therein including foreign rights.

The vast majority of semiconductor lasers are diode lasers that rely on passing an electrical current through the layered semiconductor structure to create the electrons and holes that are needed for laser action. In order to accomplish this diodes must include layers which are doped either positive or negative. These doped cladding layers are low index materials that act as a waveguide to confine the laser s optical mode from spreading much beyond the active region and they are very good absorbers of the laser light. These characteristics keep the optical mode from touching the epitaxial bonding surface.

In contrast the optically pumped semiconductor laser OPSEL is fundamentally different in that it does not require the presence of doped layers for operation. Furthermore the substrate materials must be transparent to the pump laser wavelengths. This leads to a simplified layered structure in which the active layer has very weak index guiding. The broadened waveguide allows for the formation of a very wide optical mode whose transverse dimension extends far beyond the active and waveguide region. Since this wide mode can reach the physical limit of the semiconductor structure it can touch the bonding metallization and incur significant optical loss and reduced power output. It is this problem unique to the structure of an OPSEL with a broadened waveguide design that is addressed herein.

High powered optically pumped semiconductor lasers operating in the mid IR range 2 10 microns generate a large amount of heat that must be dissipated. shows a typical GaSb based OPSEL structure in cross section with an added waveguide mode isolation layer. The laser is optically pumped by another laser from the top not shown . The structure is comprised of a substrate an active region where the mid IR laser light is generated an upper clad layer a waveguide mode isolation layer and a protective cap . The different layers of a typical OPSEL structure may be grown in a molecular beam epitaxial MBE chamber on a GaSb substrate . The laser active region light emitting region may then be deposited on the substrate followed by a thicker layer of GaSb a thin mode blocking layer 0.02 0.2 m and then a thin cap layer . The mode blocker layer may be comprised of any material that is lattice matched or nearly lattice matched to the upper clad layer and has an approximate 0.5 lower index of refraction 0.3 to 0.7 than the upper clad layer. In the example given the waveguide mode isolation layer may be comprised of a Al x Ga 1 x As y Sb 1 y compound where x is approximately 0.90. The index of refraction of this layer may be between 3.2 and 3.3.

Two methods have been used in the past to isolate the laser s optical mode from the bonding material or metal in optically pumped mid IR lasers. The first uses a combination of bonding metals with the correct refractive properties such that if the laser s optical mode touches these metals no increase in loss will occur. The drawback of this method is that the correct metallization must be determined and used or the waveguide loss will increase and the laser power will be decreased. The second method is to mount the laser epitaxial side up and pressure bond a diamond block heat sink on the epitaxial side. The disadvantages of this method are that the optical pump beam is reflected at the diamond surface and the contact quality must be very good. Additional mounting hardware is also necessary to achieve the final heat sinked semiconductor package. Epitaxial up mounting also cannot be used when the laser is run under thermally stressing conditions such as high duty cycle or quasi CW operation

To experimentally test the effectiveness of the waveguide mode isolation layer two similar devices were grown and compared. The structure of device A is shown in and contained the waveguide mode isolation layer. Device B was identical in all respects except it did not have a waveguide mode isolation layer or cap layer. and shows the measured output powers for device A and device B respectively when tested epi side up and epi side down. When mounted epi up the mode cannot touch the substrate metallization the losses are minimized and consequently the power measured in this configuration yields an upper power limit for the device. For device A only a small drop in power 6 is observed when the device is mounted epi down. In comparison device B which does not have the waveguide mode isolation layer shows a much larger drop in power 50 when mounted epi down.

