---

title: Systems and methods for managing wireless communication
abstract: Systems and methods for managing wireless communication between information handling system/s and one or more peripherals or other external devices, and that may be implemented in one embodiment to provide a virtual wireless docking environment for a portable information handling system and associated wired and wireless attached devices and peripherals.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07590075&OS=07590075&RS=07590075
owner: Dell Products L.P.
number: 07590075
owner_city: Round Rock
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050415
---
This invention relates generally to networks and more particularly to managing wireless communication between host information handling system s and one or more peripherals or other devices in a networking environment.

As the value and use of information continues to increase individuals and businesses seek additional ways to process and store information. One option available to users is information handling systems. An information handling system generally processes compiles stores and or communicates information or data for business personal or other purposes thereby allowing users to take advantage of the value of the information. Because technology and information handling needs and requirements vary between different users or applications information handling systems may also vary regarding what information is handled how the information is handled how much information is processed stored or communicated and how quickly and efficiently the information may be processed stored or communicated. The variations in information handling systems allow for information handling systems to be general or configured for a specific user or specific use such as financial transaction processing airline reservations enterprise data storage or global communications. In addition information handling systems may include a variety of hardware and software components that may be configured to process store and communicate information and may include one or more computer systems data storage systems and networking systems.

Portable information handling systems in the form of notebook computers enjoy widespread use today. The portability of these devices allow them to be employed in fixed locations e.g. home office etc. as well as in mobile environments e.g. airplane automobile train etc. A docking station is often employed as a cable replacement mechanism at fixed locations for facilitating I O and peripheral connectivity to a notebook computer and the applications executing thereon. Such a docking station requires a notebook computer platform to mechanically and electrically engage or dock with the docking station to engage attached peripherals e.g. projector printer etc. and I O devices e.g. mouse keyboard external display etc. . While docked in the docking station applications executing on the notebook computer make wired connection with external I O devices such as external mouse and external keyboard through the docking station in a transparent manner such that the applications executing on the notebook computer operate as if communicating with devices internal to the notebook computer such as integrated touchpad and integrated keyboard .

Docking system architectures have been developed for portable information handling systems such as notebook computers and personal data assistants PDAs . illustrates a typical conventional docking configuration in which a portable information handling system configured as a notebook computer makes mechanical and electrical connection with a conventional docking station via a mechanical docking mechanism that includes electrical connectors. Docking station in turn makes wired connection with various peripherals. In docking station makes wired connection with television wired connection with router access point wired connection with cable satellite television source and wired connection with wired I O device . Wired connection between portable information handling system and these devices is enabled when portable information handling system is docked in docking station .

Still referring to portable information handling system may also make wireless connection directly i.e. independently of docking station with one or more wireless communication enabled devices enabling communication with these devices when portable information handling system is not docked with docking station . In portable information handling system is shown making a single active wireless connection with router access point while docked with docking station . In this docked condition wireless connection with cable modem and wireless connection with wireless I O devices are both inactive as shown. As further shown in cable modem makes wired connection with television and makes wireless connection with router access point . Router access point is in communication with broadband Internet source via wired connection and is in communication with a second portable information handling system via wireless connection .

Portable information handling systems may be implemented as wireless devices that communicate with peripherals and other information handling systems using wireless networking and Personal Area Network PAN technologies such as IEEE 802.1x Ultra Wide Band UWB IEEE 802.15.3 Bluetooth BT etc. For example UWB has emerged as a high speed Personal Area Network technology that may be considered for short range wireless links between devices for bandwidth intensive applications like video audio and I O interconnectivity. UWB is a high speed point to point wireless personal area network architecture capable of 480 Mbps data rate at the low end scaling to 1 Gbps at the high end over short distances. However wireless communication with peripherals using current and emerging wireless technologies requires an information handling system user or application executing on the portable information handling system to choose a peripheral and the proper wireless communication technology for communication with the chosen peripheral.

Disclosed herein are systems and methods for managing wireless communication between information handling system s and one or more peripherals or other external devices. The disclosed systems and methods may be implemented in one embodiment to provide a virtual wireless docking environment for a portable information handling system e.g. a mobile wireless computing platform such as a notebook computer and associated wired and wireless attached devices and peripherals. Such a virtual docking environment may be utilized to allow a portable information handling system to be used for purposes of implementing computing and I O connectivity tasks and or to communicate with wireless peripherals and other devices that reduce or substantially eliminate the cable management challenges that may be encountered in networking environments such as in the office workspace and in the Digital Home.

In the practice of the disclosed systems and methods wireless docking capabilities of portable information handling system may be implemented by for example incorporating a wireless docking manager e.g. docking layer on top of both wired and wireless network interfaces of the portable information handling system. In such an embodiment the wireless docking manager may be implemented to provide seamless connectivity for applications executing on the portable information handling system by providing a single or common point of contact for each application to various network interfaces. This capability may be implemented in a manner that provides application transparency so that individual applications are not required to maintain or manage individual network interfaces but at the same time are allowed to select among available external devices for connection and communication. Because the wireless docking manager manages interface operations with external devices it may also be configured to authenticate such devices across one or more interfaces and to provide a secure interface for the application layer. Examples of network docking layer functionalities that may be implemented by a wireless docking manager include but are not limited to maintenance of authentication information for external docking devices on a network maintenance of connection status for devices connected through one or more network interfaces maintenance of bandwidth availability data for devices connected through one or more network interfaces providing active feedback to an application layer about device and network interface statistics combinations thereof etc.

In one exemplary embodiment the disclosed systems and methods may be implemented to enable wireless delivery of multimedia content for example throughout a networking environment such as a home. This capability may be enabled for example by facilitating aggregation and simultaneous usage of multiple networks by a portable information handling system so that available bandwidth may be utilized efficiently. The disclosed systems and methods may be advantageously implemented in another exemplary embodiment to enable integration of modern high speed wireless technology to address needs of a mobile docking and wireless desktop environment without requiring any physical contact. In one example a portable information handling system such as a notebook computer may be implemented as the hub of multiple wireless peripherals and or other devices and to support high definition television HDTV quality I O bandwidths. Alternatively or at the same time a portable information handling system may also be implemented in a manner that maintains seamless links with multiple wireless networks e.g. in the digital home.

In one respect disclosed herein is an information handling system including communication processing components the communication processing components including a wireless docking manager.

In another respect disclosed herein is an information handling system including communication processing components the communication processing components including an application layer a network interface layer and a wireless docking manager communicating between the application layer and the network interface layer.

In another respect disclosed herein is a method of managing communication between one or more applications and two or more network interface components using a wireless docking manager wherein the one or more applications and the two or more network interface components include communication processing components of an information handling system.

In the illustrated embodiment of portable information handling system is configured as a virtual docking station that communicates via a wireless interface with peripheral I O devices e.g. optical drives external storage devices displays mice keyboards printers projectors webcams etc . Portable information handling system may also be capable of communicating via wireless interface with various networks WLAN WPAN WWAN cellular etc. and may be capable of communicating using wireless interface for ad hoc connections with various media devices e.g. in one exemplary embodiment providing support for HDTV streams of from about 25 to about 34 Mbps . In this regard portable information handling system may be advantageously configured in one exemplary embodiment as a virtual docking station that is capable of managing connectivity on multiple simultaneous active wireless links using one interface e.g. in wireless connections and are all active. Although illustrates a wireless docking architecture implemented on a portable information handling system configured as a notebook computer it will be understood that the disclosed systems and methods may be implemented on information handling systems of other configurations including but not limited to non portable desktop personal computers PCs PDAs etc.

Referring to the exemplary embodiment of in greater detail portable information handling system makes wired connection e.g. S Video Interface Digital Visual Interface DVI etc. with television wired connection e.g. Ethernet with router access point wired connection e.g. Coaxial Cable Video Component Cable S Video Cable etc. with cable satellite television source and wired connection e.g. USB Serial Port RS 232 Parallel Port etc. with wired I O device . It will be understood that the illustrated configuration is exemplary only and that any one or more of these wired connections may alternatively be wireless connections. For example wired connection may alternatively be a wireless connection e.g. UWB etc. and wired connections and may alternatively be wireless connections e.g. UWB 802.11 Bluetooth etc. .

Still referring to portable information handling system also makes wireless connection with one or more wireless communication enabled devices. For example portable information handling system makes wireless connection e.g. IEEE 802.11n with router access point makes wireless connection e.g. UWB etc. with cable modem and makes wireless connection e.g. Bluetooth Wireless USB etc. with wireless I O devices . As further shown in cable modem makes wired connection with television and makes wireless connection e.g. IEEE 802.11n with router access point . Router access point is shown in communication with broadband Internet source via wired connection and is in communication with a second portable information handling system via wireless connection e.g. IEEE 802.11n etc. .

It will be understood that the illustrated wired and wireless connections of are exemplary only and that a portable information handling system may make other combinations of wired and wireless connections as desired or needed to fit the requirements of a particular networking environment. Furthermore it will also be understood that any combination of one or more wireless connection technologies e.g. UWB 802.11n etc. may be employed that is suitable for establishing wireless communication between any of the devices of that are capable of wireless communication. In this regard UWB offers a unique set of characteristics that may make it desirable for certain wireless docking applications. These characteristics include relatively low power and relatively low cost implementation that is well suited for some mobile devices. UWB also possesses relatively high data rates i.e. from about 480 Mbps and scaling upward to multi Gbps that may be implemented to support connectivity that is similar to a USB 2.0 connection. UWB utilizes a relatively low noise wide frequency band i.e. from about 3.1 GHz to about 10.6 GHz that may be implemented in a manner that helps reduce or substantially eliminate interference issues with WLAN deployments. UWB may also be implemented in a manner that offers efficient spectrum reuse capability due to relatively short range i.e. about 10 meters 

Still referring to wireless docking capabilities of portable information handling system may be implemented in one exemplary embodiment by incorporating a wireless docking manager on top of both wired and wireless network interfaces e.g. UWB 802.11a g n BT USB and Ethernet of portable information handling system . As will be described further herein such a wireless docking manager may not only be implemented to provide basic docking functionality but also in a manner that provides one or more additional features that include but are not limited to seamless connectivity application transparency and or authentication and security. In this regard the wireless docking manager may be implemented to provide seamless connectivity for applications executing on portable information handling system by providing a single or common point of contact for each application to various network interfaces. This capability may be implemented in a manner that provides application transparency so that individual applications are not required to maintain or manage individual network interfaces but at the same time are allowed to manage or select among available external devices for connection and communication. Because the wireless docking manager manages interface operations with external devices it may also be configured to authenticate such devices across one or more interfaces and to provide a secure interface for the application layer.

Still referring to application layer may include any one or more applications that are capable of communicating over a wired or wireless network connection. Examples of such applications include but are not limited to universal serial bus USB applications universal plug and play UPnP applications IEEE 1394 applications Bluetooth BT applications storage applications networking applications multimedia applications etc. Interface of docking layer with application layer may be made for example through standard software application programming interfaces APIs that allow docking layer to be accessed by any of the applications of application layer .

As further illustrated in example components of data link layer include but are not limited to media access control MAC layer components such as UWB MAC component 802.11 a g n MAC component BT MAC component Ethernet MAC component and Serial I O MAC component etc. it being understood that layer may include any other type s of data link layer or other components suitable for interfacing with network media of physical PHY layer . Physical layer of is shown including the following example physical layer components that correspond to MAC components of data link layer UWB PHY component 802.11 a g n PHY component BT PHY component Ethernet PHY component and Serial I O PHY component it being understood that layer may include any other type s of physical layer components. Together data link layer and physical layer form a network interface layer having network interface components that in the illustrated embodiment are each defined by the combination of a given MAC component of layer e.g. UWB MAC component and its respective PHY component of layer e.g. UWB PHY component . Interface of docking layer with network interface layer may be made for example through the network device drivers with standard APIs being used to allow the device drivers to access docking layer .

Still referring to the exemplary embodiment of docking layer may be configured to handle peripheral device connectivity and networking connectivity requirements of application layer . In this regard docking layer may be configured to select appropriate components of MAC layer and or PHY layer based on application bandwidth requirements and or available network connectivity. For example if a UWB connection from a wireless docking station to a given external device e.g. display device is dropped e.g. due to distance docking layer may be configured to dynamically re route connection with the given external device to one or more other wired or wireless interfaces such as 802.11 n. Thus this capability may be implemented in one exemplary embodiment to provide seamless and dynamic connectivity e.g. for mobile devices PCs etc. In another exemplary embodiment this capability may be implemented to provide the integration of various piconets overlapping or isolated of UWB devices through a backbone of 802.11a g n links e.g. one information handling system with connections to UWB peripheral devices may use the 802.11n link to connect to another information handling system with connection to other UWB peripheral devices allowing the sharing of peripheral devices in different piconets.

To illustrate assume that portable information handling system of is connected to television by a wireless UWB connection . When this wireless connection is interrupted e.g. portable information handling system is moved out of UWB communication range from television docking layer may establish an alternate connection between portable information handling system and television using available alternate wireless interface s that are within communication range. For example depending on distance between portable information handling system television and cable modem docking layer may establish connection between television and portable information handling system via UWB connection to cable modem and wired connection e.g. if portable information handling system is within UWB communication range of cable modem or via 802.11 n connection to wireless access point 802.11 n connection and wired connection e.g. if portable information handling system is out of UWB communication range of cable modem but within 802.11 n communication range of wireless access point . In this regard docking layer may be configured to choose among multiple available interfaces based on one or more connection policies e.g. preference for an available shorter range higher bandwidth UWB interface over an available longer range lower bandwidth 802.11 n interface.

In operation docking layer of may engage a given application of application layer and provide active feedback to the given application that identifies external devices that are currently available for docking e.g. projector video display etc. . At this time the given application or a user communicating with the given application may be allowed to choose a given available device for docking e.g. a set top box STB device and to communicate this choice to docking layer . Docking layer may then manage the connectivity between the chosen device and the given application in a manner that is transparent for the given application.

Capabilities of communication processing components that include a wireless docking manager e.g. docking layer of may be implemented in one exemplary embodiment to allow automatic selection of the most desirable external device for connection under given circumstances e.g. based on one or more connection policies that may be defined for specific combinations of applications and available external devices. For example referring to the exemplary embodiment of a presentation application e.g. Microsoft Power Point of an application layer executing on a notebook computer may be configured to display a presentation on the internal display of the notebook computer as long as docking layer identifies no external projector device is available for docking and connection to the presentation application. When docking layer identifies a projection device that is available for connection it communicates this information to the presentation application of application layer . The presentation application may be configured to automatically select an available projection device for display of the presentation and to communicate this choice to docking layer . Docking layer may in turn manage the connectivity between the presentation application and the projection device in order to display the presentation on the projection device without the necessity of user choice although it is also possible that a user may be given the option of approving the connection to the projection device prior to establishing the connection. Upon a failure of the projection device docking layer may also be configured to switch display of the presentation back to the internal display of the notebook computer and or to an alternate display device such as back up projector based on connection preference information received from the application and or based on connection policy information maintained by docking layer .

Communication processing components including a wireless docking manager may be implemented in another exemplary embodiment to automatically maintain connection between a given application and a given external device using two or more available interfaces between the external device and the application. For example still referring to the exemplary embodiment of if a STB is virtually docked over an Ethernet interface to a given application of application layer but the Ethernet connection is broken and the STB device is moved to another room docking layer may automatically switch connectivity e.g. to 802.11 n without noticeable interruption or glitch detected at level of the given application. If the STB moves within UWB range docking layer may automatically switch connectivity to the higher bandwidth UWB interface. This connectivity management capability of docking layer of may be implemented to provide hot plugging of devices over wireless connections and advantageously in a manner such that the applications of layer don t have to maintain individual interfaces to components of layer and so that operating system OS doesn t need to add the device each time such a device is docked.

In one exemplary embodiment a docking manager may be configured to authenticate connection with each external device without need for authentication by applications of an application layer. For example docking layer may authenticate a given external device for connectivity with a first interface component of layer e.g. using standard authentication mechanism s for the first interface component and then leverage this authentication by applying it to other interface components of layer . At the same time docking layer may be configured to provide a robust secure interface to application layer that shields a connected application of layer e.g. from timeouts delays associated with wireless connectivity.

As further illustrated in a docking profile manager may be optionally provided in communication with a wireless docking manager e.g. such as docking layer and may be configured to among other things maintain information concerning characteristics e.g. authentication information such as encryption codes connection status etc. of external network devices and or network interfaces to organize such external devices into various classes or profiles etc. In this regard profile manager may be configured to maintain data entries concerning external network devices and particular network interfaces of network interface layer associated therewith. Examples of device classes or profiles that may be maintained by profile manager include but are not limited to wireless network devices used at work or wireless network devices used at home UWB devices only Bluetooth devices only etc. Such a docking profile manager may be provided in one embodiment to make the docking experience simpler yet more secure by virtue of the fact that the above described information may be maintained in one place so that individual applications do not need to separately maintain and separately process such information. It will be understood that the configuration of communication processing components of is exemplary only and that any other configuration of processing layers or logic suitable for implementing a wireless docking manager and accomplishing one or more of the virtual docking features described elsewhere herein may alternatively be employed.

As further shown in information handling system also includes central processor CPU in communication with NIC . In one exemplary embodiment an application layer a wireless docking manager in the form of a docking layer and a docking profile manager e.g. such as application layer docking layer and docking profile manager of may be resident and executing on the central processor although this is not necessary and a docking manager may implemented in NIC or any other alternative suitable processing component. In operation processor receives and transmits data to and from NIC in a manner that is suitable for accomplishing the features described elsewhere herein. It will be understood that the configuration of is exemplary only and that any other configuration of one or more processors and or software layers suitable for accomplishing one or more of the virtual docking features described elsewhere herein may alternatively be employed. For example information handling system may also include other components such as optional memory storage and the functions of processor and NIC may be combined or divided further or in any suitable alternative fashion.

In one exemplary embodiment support from the graphics sub system of a portable information handling system e.g. laptop computer PDA etc. may be employed in conjunction with docking layer to enable superior graphics performance while performing operations for multimedia content over wireless links. In this regard the docking layer embodiment of may be particularly desirable to manage device connectivity for relatively high bandwidth connections e.g. bandwidths of greater than or equal to about 1 Gbps between applications of layer and external devices such as projectors displays surround sound audio printers etc. Relatively high bandwidth connections with such device may be supported for example using UWB links to portable information handling system e.g. notebook computer PDA etc. . In one exemplary embodiment PCI Express support for real time data and quality of service QoS may be linked to the QoS implementation over UWB and 802.11 to provide additional robustness. The disclosed systems and methods may also be advantageously implemented in one embodiment in conjunction with Peripheral Component Interconnect Special Interest Group Wireless Form Factor PCISIG WFF interface technologies and highly integrated wireless solutions on information handling system e.g. notebook PC etc. and peripheral platforms. PCISIG WFF and other such implementations may be implemented in one embodiment to provide highly integrated wireless solutions that leverage the mechanisms provided by the disclosed system and methods. Advantageously docking layer may scale to provide docking functionality with better MAC PHY support for smart cognitive and agile radio architectures of the future.

Still referring to if there is no existing authentication data entry for the available external device and the given network interface the docking layer may be configured to prompt an application and or application user in step to provide authentication data for the device. Examples of such authentication data includes but is not limited to data for standard network security protocols such as Wi Fi Protected Access WPA information Extensible Authentication Protocol EAP information Lightweight Extensible Authentication Protocol LEAP information etc. data for OS application security mechanisms e.g. Windows login network login etc. or a combination thereof. Upon receipt of authentication data from application and or user in step the docking layer authenticates the device according to the proper authentication method in step e.g. using standard network security protocol s OS application security mechanism s or a combination thereof. At this time the authentication information may also be stored e.g. on profile manager as a data entry for the given device and network interface that may be utilized for future authentication. However if an existing authentication data entry is found in step for the available external device and the given network interface then the docking layer may automatically load the existing authentication data in step and then proceed directly to authentication of the device in step without the need for prompting the application or user. Thus when existing authentication data is available authentication may proceed more rapidly and in an automated manner.

Once authentication has occurred in step the docking layer registers the authenticated device as an available device in step e.g. docking layer of FIG. A may register the authenticated device with profile manager . Upon registration of a given device as being available on at least one network interface a check may be performed in step to determine if the same given device has been registered as available on any other network interface. This check may be performed by a profile manager e.g. profile manager or any other suitable logic executing on an information handling system e.g. such as portable information handling system of . The docking layer may then determine available bandwidth of all available link s to the given device in step and may update the connection status of the given device in step e.g. by providing the current connection status of the given device to a profile manager. As shown in the docking layer may monitor the connection status and available bandwidth for the given device on a recurring basis as illustrated by arrow .

Referring now to step of if the requested device is available then the docking layer may request bandwidth or data rate requirements from the application layer for connection to the given requested device and the docking layer may receive these requirements as feedback from the application layer in step although in other embodiments this information may be received from the application layer without a corresponding request from the docking layer. Based at least in part on the bandwidth requirement feedback provided in step the docking layer may evaluate the best network interface available for connection to the given device in step . Other parameters besides bandwidth requirement feedback that may be used by the docking layer to evaluate and determine the best network for connection to the given device are network characteristics such as QoS requirements latency jitter characteristics level of authentication etc. A preference for maintaining a wireless connection over a wired connection or vice versa may also be defined as a policy which the docking layer may use in determining the best available network interface. Based on the evaluation performed in step the docking layer may make choose the best available network interface and make the given device available to the application layer over this interface in step .

Still referring to the docking layer may monitor the status of the existing network connection between the given external network device and the application layer in step . As shown the docking layer continues to monitor the status of this connection as long as the connection and its required bandwidth are found to be maintained in step as represented by arrow . However in the event that the existing network connection to the given external network device is found to be broken and or connection bandwidth is unavailable in step then the docking layer may attempt to make the given device available thorough another and alternate available network interface. For example methodology may be repeated starting at step so as to confirm continued device availability and to determine the best available network interface for same as represented by arrow .

It will also be understood that the configuration of communication processing components of is exemplary only and that any other configuration of communication processing components may be employed that is suitable for implementing one or more of the virtual docking features described elsewhere herein. It will also be understood that the methodologies of are exemplary only and that the disclosed systems and methods may be implemented using any other methodologies that are suitable for implementing one or more of the virtual docking features described elsewhere herein. In this regard it will be understood that either of the methodologies of and or may be implemented by varying the order of the illustrated steps and or by using fewer additional or alternate steps in any combination that is suitable for implementing one or more of the virtual docking features described elsewhere herein. For example in one exemplary embodiment a docking layer e.g. docking layer of may provide an application layer e.g. application layer of with information concerning characteristics of a requested external network device other than the device connection status. Such information may be provided for example in response to a request for same from the application layer e.g. in step of the methodology of . Examples of types of such other information include but are not limited to available bandwidth for connection to the requested device and or a comparison of the characteristics of suitable network interfaces for the requested device.

It will be understood that the disclosed systems and methods may be implemented in heterogeneous or non heterogeneous network environments that employ one or more wireless communication technologies. Examples of such wireless technologies include but are not limited to those technologies listed in Tables 1 and 2. Tables 1 and 2 also list exemplary wireless technology characteristics e.g. range data rate one or more of which may be employed as criteria for the determination of best available wireless connection technology between a given application executing on an information handling system and a given external device.

For purposes of this disclosure an information handling system may include any instrumentality or aggregate of instrumentalities operable to compute classify process transmit receive retrieve originate switch store display manifest detect record reproduce handle or utilize any form of information intelligence or data for business scientific control entertainment or other purposes. For example an information handling system may be a personal computer a PDA a consumer electronic device a network storage device or any other suitable device and may vary in size shape performance functionality and price. The information handling system may include memory one or more processing resources such as a central processing unit CPU or hardware or software control logic. Additional components of the information handling system may include one or more storage devices one or more communications ports for communicating with external devices as well as various input and output I O devices such as a keyboard a mouse and a video display. The information handling system may also include one or more buses operable to transmit communications between the various hardware components.

While the invention may be adaptable to various modifications and alternative forms specific embodiments have been shown by way of example and described herein. However it should be understood that the invention is not intended to be limited to the particular forms disclosed. Rather the invention is to cover all modifications equivalents and alternatives falling within the spirit and scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims. Moreover the different aspects of the disclosed systems and methods may be utilized in various combinations and or independently. Thus the invention is not limited to only those combinations shown herein but rather may include other combinations.

