---

title: Collateral valuation confidence scoring system
abstract: Confidence scoring entails receipt of a predicted property value for a given property, where the predicted property value is determined based upon application of a property value prediction model. A set of values corresponding to input factors is determined for the property value prediction model, and model parameters are estimated based upon those values. A confidence score for the predicted property value is then calculated using a confidence scoring model and the model parameters. The confidence score is preferably provided as an accuracy probability. This may further be in the form of a probability that the predicted property value has an error within a specified range, such as a specified range expressed in terms of a percentage error.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07729965&OS=07729965&RS=07729965
owner: Fannie Mae
number: 07729965
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050426
---
This invention relates generally to property value prediction and more particularly to confidence scoring for predicted property values.

A confidence score is a quantification of the likelihood that a result is correct or accurate. Typically a good confidence score indicates that a predicted property value is likely to be accurate and a bad confidence score indicates otherwise. The score may be variously provided including but not limited to percentages numbers or ranges.

Confidence scoring systems and corresponding techniques have been developed for predicted property values. A confidence score offers a form of accuracy indication for property values predicted by a collateral assessment or property value prediction PVP model. This accuracy indication together with the predicted property value is used for mortgage underwriting post purchase review of mortgages and other purposes. Having a reliable indication of accuracy may be as important as having a reliable predicted property value in support of various business operations.

While conventional confidence scoring for property value prediction has been useful there remains a need for confidence scoring that provides useful results to the user that integrates well with property value prediction models and that provides consistently accurate results.

The present invention provides a confidence scoring system useful for assessing predictions made by property value prediction models.

In one embodiment confidence scoring entails receipt of a predicted property value for a given property where the predicted property value is determined based upon application of a property value prediction model. A set of values corresponding to input factors is determined for the property value prediction model and model parameters are estimated based upon those values. A confidence score for the predicted property value is then calculated using a confidence scoring model and the model parameters.

The confidence scoring model may implement a logistic specification with the model parameters being calculated from the input factors using a maximum log likelihood method.

The confidence score the result is preferably provided as an accuracy probability. This may further be in the form of a probability that the predicted property value has an error within a specified range such as a specified range expressed in terms of a percentage error.

Although it may be implemented in single model applications the confidence scoring may be applied in the context of a property value prediction system that combines multiple property value prediction models such as where the predicted property value is determined based upon a weighted combination of property value prediction models.

In one embodiment the plurality of property value prediction models may include a repeat transactions index model a tax assessment valuation model and a property characteristic valuation model.

The present invention can be embodied in various forms including business processes computer implemented methods computer program products computer systems and networks user interfaces application programming interfaces and the like.

In the following description for purposes of explanation numerous details are set forth such as flowcharts and system configurations in order to provide an understanding of one or more embodiments of the present invention. However it is and will be apparent to one skilled in the art that these specific details are not required in order to practice the present invention.

The present invention provides confidence scoring for real property value prediction as part of a confidence scoring system in one embodiment. The confidence scoring system may operate in conjunction with a property valuation system that implements multiple property value prediction models produces results with practical meaning and accounts for the importance of various contributing factors. The confidence scoring system also provides accuracy and more uniform performance across geographic regions.

Preferably the confidence scoring system works in conjunction with property value prediction that incorporates a plurality of models which may be referred to as property value prediction PVP models. is a schematic diagram that illustrates an example of a property value prediction scheme that includes results from multiple models as well as related confidence scoring. With regard to the property value prediction scheme a predicated property value may be predicted based upon value reconciliation corresponding to a plurality of PVP models .

The present invention is not limited to any particular model or combination of models but for ease of discussion some specific models are described. The models include a Repeat Transactions Index RTI model which uses data on properties with repeat transactions to estimate the house price index and uses the house price index to predict current property values based on the prior transaction values. A Tax Assessment Valuation TAV model uses the tax assessments to predict property prices. Finally a Property Characteristic Valuation PCV model uses information about property characteristics such as the lot size living area etc. to predict property values.

Some properties will have predicted values from just one model whereas others may have predicted values from multiple models. Value reconciliation accommodates the determination of predicted values corresponding to properties such that each property is uniquely associated with a predicted value in the results. When a property has predicted values from more than one model a weighted average method may be used to provide a final prediction of the property value. Each model also provides a variance of model residuals for each property. Accordingly each property in the set of final predicted property values will have an associated variance. Each of the underlying models for property value prediction or collectively the combination of models may be referred to as a PVP model. Various techniques for combining models are known and the present invention is not limited to any particular technique. One example of a technique is described in commonly assigned U.S. Pat. No. 6 876 955 entitled Method and Apparatus for Predicting and Reporting a Real Estate Value Based upon a Weighted Average of Predicted Values. 

The confidence scoring system and more particularly the confidence scoring application implements the CS model and provides a result that accommodates an assessment of predicted property values. Particularly confidence scoring may comprise receiving a predicted property value for a given property based upon a PVP model. For the PVP model a set of values corresponding to input factors are determined and confidence scoring model parameters are determined from the set of values. Finally a confidence score is calculated for the predicted property value using the confidence scoring model and the determined model parameters.

Conventional ranking of predicted property values provides some information but is believed to be lacking. The confidence scoring system provides a result that quantifies the potential for error in any given predicted property value. This is preferably in the form of an accuracy probability. More particularly the accuracy probability is the probability that the prediction error of a property value lies within a specified range such as a probability expressed in terms of a percentage error. In one embodiment the accuracy probability is the probability of a prediction error pe in log form of less than 10 . Although a preferred confidence score takes this form the confidence score may be variously formulated in accordance with the present invention.

The input factors and corresponding estimation of model parameters and confidence score calculation is now further described. The preferred confidence scoring system uses a CS model that has a logistic specification such that 

A preferred set of input factors used by the confidence scoring system includes property valuation model uncertainty the underlying PVP model conformity data integrity and neighborhood consistency. Values corresponding to each of these input factors are used to determine model parameters. In the context of the regression model the model parameters may also be referred to as coefficients. The input factors are described further as follows.

Model uncertainty corresponds to the effect of model residual variance. In one embodiment the square root of the model residual variance is denoted by and both 1 and may be used in the logistic model to account for model uncertainty. The reason for using 1 is that if the property value prediction model prediction error has a normal distribution and the model residual variance can perfectly reflect the variance of the prediction error then 1 in the logistic model will more accurately reflect the probability of a prediction error of less than 10 or any other percentage values . In general the larger the the smaller the probability of prediction error less than 10 . Thus the coefficient of 1 will be expected to be positive and the coefficient of to be negative.

The next input factor is model conformity which corresponds to the dispersion of predicted property values by the multiple underlying property price prediction models from that of the weighted prediction. Lack of agreement from the three underlying models can indicate the prediction uncertainty. Model conformity may be denoted as mc and calculated as the square root of dispersion of the three model predictions from the weighted prediction in log form to measure the model conformity. The coefficient of mc in logistic regression is expected to be negative.

Data integrity corresponds to the effect of data reliability. A large possibility of data error entails less confidence in the predicted property values. For the RTI model if the difference of the two predictions based on the most recent two prior transactions is large then the possibility of data error is assumed to be large. The difference between these two RTI predictions in log form denoted as di and its absolute value denoted by di may be used to proxy the data integrity. The coefficient of di in the logistic regression is expected to be negative while the coefficient of di can be positive or negative. If a property only has one RTI prediction based on one prior transaction then di will be set to zero and a dummy variable will be used to indicate such is the case.

Typically other types of models may not have a data integrity determination as only one set of data is present for any given property. However when data integrity can be calculated from more than one PVP model something such as the average of data integrity from the relevant PVP models may be used.

Neighborhood consistency corresponds to the effect of the consistency of a property s predicted value with that of the neighborhood. In general the larger the deviation of the predicted property price from that of the neighborhood median the more likely that the predicted property price is less accurate. The deviation of the predicted property price from the neighborhood median property price is used as the factor that impacts the prediction accuracy. In denoting the deviation from the neighborhood median as nb and its absolute value as nb and using both in the logistic model the coefficient of nb is expected to be negative while the coefficient of nb can be either positive or negative.

Although some preferred input factors are discussed the present invention is not necessarily so limited and may use alternative input factors or additional ones. For example a dummy variable may be used to indicate single family or condo properties because they are expected to behave differently. This may be referred to as a condo dummy variable cd . It might be desirable to run the condo confidence scoring model separately from that of single family. However there may not be a sufficient number of condo observations to estimate a separate set of reliable model parameters. These and other input factors may be included as desired.

The confidence scoring system may also implement techniques to refine the determination of accuracy probabilities such as rescaling and truncation. Referring again to the graphical diagram of when the predicted probability of pe 

The cause of this is believed to be the model s inability to accommodate the tail end of the input factors. In order to make the model fit the tail end of the input factors and produce a predicted probability that is more in line with the realized probability two techniques are employed. The first is the rescaling of the aggregated input factor in the logistic model and the second is the truncation of model probability. Implementation of these techniques is as follows.

The aggregated input factor in the logistic model is x. To rescale it an arctangent function is used to transform it into arctan if x0. Eq. 2 

The y variable is then used in Eq. 1 in place x. The degree of rescaling is determined by the b parameter. Separate scaling factors for cases where x0 may be used to accommodate different degrees of rescaling treatment. A smaller b parameter results in more rescaling of the aggregated input factor. is a graphical diagram that illustrates this particularly illustrating the resulting values for the y variable for various x values presuming different degrees of rescaling b 1 b 20 . As is evident significant rescaling occurs where b 1 and little where b 20.

As described the refinement techniques may also include truncation. The truncation of accuracy probability results may be provided according to the following equations 

This effectively restricts the predicted probability to a range of 15 to 85 . The rescaling and truncation steps are done during the model estimation process where band bare estimated. The model parameters are estimated by using the maximum likelihood method. The resultant accuracy probability estimation is expressed as 

The confidence scoring application includes PVP model information property data CS model parameter estimation confidence score computation and confidence score interfacing and reporting modules.

The property data module includes information about predicted property values. It may be organized as a database in conventional fashion with information that accommodates an identification of the property to further unique association of records to properties. The property data module may be variously populated such as by collection of data importation of the entire database aggregation of data from multiple sources or combinations thereof.

The PVP model information module includes information corresponding to the PVP models that are used to produce predicted property values alone or in combination including but not limited to the above described PVP models and the techniques for combining such models such as in weighted fashion. The input factors are thereby accessible by the CS model parameter estimation module which identifies the input factors and performs corresponding estimation of the CS model parameters such as described above.

The confidence score computation module is in communication with the CS model parameter estimation module as well as the PVP model information module and thus accesses the CS model parameters as well as the input factors corresponding to any given property value estimation. The confidence score is determined using the CS model and these values as described in the equations above. The confidence score may be in the form of an accuracy probability such as the probability that the prediction error of a property value lies within a specified range as described. For example the accuracy probability may be the probability of a prediction error in log form of less than 10 .

The results of the confidence scoring model may be estimated and tested using an existing database of property data. It is desirable to remove systematic biases from the database prior to application of the confidence scoring model since the model is preferably a measure of the uncertainty in predicted property values rather than a prediction of bias for various reasons e.g. time lag in the property data transaction type bias etc. .

It is preferable to divide the properties into different groups according to the availability of the property value prediction PVP models and estimate separate confidence score model for each group of properties. There are two rationales for the grouping of properties. First the input factors available in the confidence score model for each group can be different. Second the distribution of the input factors also can be different. This means that for a three model embodiment seven CS models are estimated. Preferably the model parameters for the confidence scoring models are estimated by the maximum log likelihood method.

If there are various types of properties such as single family and condo properties it may be desirable to run a separate model for each type of property. However if the condo properties or any determined type are in such small numbers that a separate model cannot be reliably estimated then techniques such as a dummy variable to distinguish such properties may be used.

Accordingly each dataset group and each type of property can have different corresponding sets of confidence score parameters. The computation of confidence score uses the relevant set of confidence score parameters for a given property.

To demonstrate the input factors for three groups of properties are listed in Table 1. For group because the properties only have one PVP model prediction there is no model conformity for such properties. Thus the input factors of the confidence score model for the properties in this group do not include the model conformity measure mc . Consequently the confidence score model parameter of mc for the properties in this group will not be estimated. Also some properties do not have data integrity di measure. The dummy variable for di takes the values of 0 if di is available and takes the value of 1 if di is unavailable. The example list of input factors for the confidence score model are thus summarized in Table 1.

The confidence score computed by the described method indicates the likelihood of the predicted property value is within the 10 range of the true property value. However if a practitioner chooses to use other measures of accuracy of the prediction such as the standard deviation or the dispersion of the prediction from the true property value then the confidence score can be easily converted to such a measure.

Conversion of the confidence score to other measures of accuracy may be accommodated by a simple calibration process. For example one can utilize the property dataset used in the confidence score model parameter estimation step group the properties in the dataset by the confidence score such as 0.15 to 0.25 group 0.25 to 0.35 group etc. and compute the standard deviation of the prediction error for each group. This information may then be used to build a look up table mapping confidence score to standard deviation of prediction. This allows the user to review the standard deviation of the predicted property value for any property for which the confidence score is determined.

Thus embodiments of the present invention produce and provide real property pricing confidence scoring. Although the present invention has been described in considerable detail with reference to certain embodiments thereof the invention may be variously embodied without departing from the spirit or scope of the invention. Therefore the following claims should not be limited to the description of the embodiments contained herein in any way.

