---

title: Multifunctional explosive fragmentation airburst munition
abstract: An explosive fragmentation munition having a longitudinal axis which includes a cylindrical shell portion having a thickness and an interior; a rounded shell portion having a thickness and an interior, the rounded shell portion being disposed at a front end of the cylindrical shell portion; an explosive disposed in the interiors of the cylindrical shell portion and the rounded shell portion; wherein the thickness of the rounded shell portion equals the thickness of the cylindrical shell portion where the rounded shell portion joins the cylindrical shell portion, and wherein the thickness of the rounded shell portion increases in a forward direction along the longitudinal axis.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07451704&OS=07451704&RS=07451704
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07451704
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050912
---
This application is a continuation in part of application Ser. No. 11 011 022 filed Dec. 3 2004 now issued as U.S. Pat. No. 6 983 699 which in turn is a continuation of application Ser. No. 10 249 479 as originally filed on Apr. 14 2003 now abandoned by Vladimir Gold and Ernest L. Baker for Explosive Fragmentation Munition which itself claims benefit under 35 USC 119 e of U.S. provisional application No. 60 320 027 filed Mar. 20 2003 the entire file wrapper contents of which applications are hereby incorporated by reference as though fully set forth. This application also claims benefit under 35 USC 119 e of U.S. provisional application No. 60 595 315 filed Jun. 22 2005 the entire file wrapper contents of which application are hereby incorporated by reference as though fully set forth.

The inventions described herein may be manufactured used and licensed by or for the U.S. Government for U.S. Government purposes.

The invention relates to a multifunctional airburst explosive fragmentation munition with improved fragment spray aerial coverage and fragment mass distribution that can be launched from small medium and large caliber high velocity gun systems. The technical feasibility of the present invention is based on recent advances in miniaturized electronic fuse control systems with improved intelligence and reliability permitting a round to assess its position at a pre determined location within approximately 5 meters from target. This enables a munition to function in a number of modes including airburst mode point impact mode and delayed initiation mode. In the delayed detonation mode the munition can act as a high strength kinetic energy projectile capable of breaching light armor and reinforced concrete and masonry walls in urban terrain military operations.

In the airburst fragmentation mode the munition is detonated in the air at a location near the target projecting fragments in a forward direction. This results in high fragment density in a radial distribution around the detonated shell including the direction of travel which maximizes the lethal area of the fragment engagement footprint at the target.

The present invention achieves an optimal use of materials for lethality requirements against a number of targets including full body armor combat personnel lightly armored combat vehicles personnel carriers mobile radar stations urban structures etc. Multifunctional capabilities are possible within a single round of ammunition with destructive capabilities superior to current fragmentation approaches such as hand or rocket launched grenades and for both anti vehicle and anti personnel destruction. Such ammunition comprises projectiles with specially designed warheads in the frontal areas and can be 40 mM to 120 mM caliber Tank Rounds e.g. or even in bullet form. The warheads ultimately break into pieces fragments which have comparatively higher velocity and relatively larger total mass than for instance hand thrown grenades greatly increasing the destructive power. Design of the warhead liner enables fragment direction of flight to be reasonably well chosen. A one piece solid high mass of material may be positioned in the front of the warhead which will fragment and it will spray the frontal and side targets with fragments. However the fragments will all be relatively large in size and all about the same diameter. These larger fragments are good against a vehicle target. However rather than a one piece solid high mass of material in front it is preferred to have such added material made up of one or more layers liners where each liner by itself is less in mass but together all the layers constitute the desired high mass of material in front.

The liners create two types of fragments in one warhead numerous smaller diameter fragments which are anti personnel plus higher mass larger diameter fragments which are anti vehicle thus dual purpose and can be similarly made for multiple purposes. The anti personnel fragments though smaller in diameter are more numerous in the number of fragments than what would result from a one piece solid high mass of material in the front. The significantly larger quantity of fragments will spray the area well and although smaller in diameter are adequate and thus preferred to do the anti personnel function. The larger mass fragments though fewer in number are still adequate for the anti vehicle function.

The projectile takes advantage of the extremely high launch velocities as contrasted to a hand thrown grenade. This propels at a greater velocity plus with a larger mass than in a hand thrown grenade mass in the front areas which can be more successfully used for anti vehicle anti personnel missions. The hand thrown grenade destructive ability is primarily due to its own explosion and disintegration driving the pieces as fragments in various directions. A hand grenade s walls are relatively thinner to facilitate explosion but that leaves comparatively less mass of the fragments from such thinner wall mass to have the destructive power and lower velocity in a desired forward direction compared to a round. As mentioned in this invention relatively greater mass can be employed in a frontal warhead such as and . More precise design of the warhead liner shapes that are employed in this invention enable a finer result of directional choice for propelling the fragments.

It is possible to have near perfect coverage of moving fragments in the areas needed to successfully kill personnel and destroy vehicles such as in ideal front direction coverage in a fan shape pattern looking down on a cross section of the field of fragment distribution. The warhead liners cross sectional shapes might be designed on a computer provisionally to follow a third order parametric polynomial curve nine degrees of freedom . This mathematically modeled curve allows for more tailored shaping through iterations of the warhead shape which seems best in testing for superior kill results. It is further possible to design the warheads with embedded fragments of selected grain diameter sizes specially chosen for the targets with chosen packing densities as a further factor in the warhead s lethality. For instance smaller grain sizes adequate to kill personnel and larger grain sizes are included as well to kill light vehicles or perhaps to destroy radar sights missiles armor wooden or tile walls or timber clearing of a forest area destroying gypsum wood masonry concrete brick or block walls in Urban Terrain Military Operations being mission targets e.g. . Various mechanisms are discussed which can cause successful breakup of the warhead into desired fragments of various sizes and velocities including pre embedding fragments scoring of the warhead outer surfaces or having small holes made in the warhead such as by drilling small dimple like holes in the projectile s front cap area or employing multiple liner warheads . A brief description of the present invention is as follows.

Examples of possible idealized geometries for the airburst explosive fragmenting shell are shown in . Upon initiation of the high explosive charge rapid expansion of high pressure high velocity detonation products results in high strain high strain rate dilation of the metal shell encapsulating the explosive which eventually ruptures generating a spray of high velocity fragments moving with trajectories at angles with the z axis. Accordingly the principal lethality parameter of the explosive fragmenting shell is the number of fragments as a function of the angle which determines the statistical probability of incapacitation of the assaulted target and ultimately overall efficiency of the munition. Assuming that the changes in the trajectories of the fragments due to air resistance are negligible the angular distribution of the fragment spray is a function of the initial geometry of the fragmenting shell s surface the strength the density and the thickness thereof.

For example in the case of an idealized cylindrical shell of uniform thickness t with longitudinal axis z see launched along a trajectory tangential to the z axis the available shell mass at the ends is relatively small and therefore only a small number of fragments will be ejected in the direction of the projectile s path of flight. Thus since approximately more then three quarters of the projectile s anterior target space i.e. ahead of the point of the explosion is covered with only a small number of fragments whereas the bulk of the fragment spray is ejected predominantly in the direction normal to the z axis the overall effectiveness of cylindrical airburst shells is relatively low. On the other hand in the case of an idealized spherical shell of the same mass the fragment spray distribution pattern at the quasi static burst conditions is nearly perfect but unfortunately the concept is impractical for gun launched munition applications because of projectile design constraints including payload to gun caliber ratio and projectile stability. In addition high terminal projectile velocities tend to degrade penetration capability of fragments ejected from the posterior portion of a shell thereby reducing warhead lethal area by approximately a factor of two compared to that at quasi static burst conditions.

An alternate approach to the problem is shown in whereas the ogive like front portion of the shell is thickened and rounded t t. Thickening and rounding the front portion of the shell enables generation of a fixed number of fragments per unit length of the shell and per unit angle of the target space which integrates the best features of the two idealized geometries of and maximizes warhead lethality. According to the present invention the idealized embodiment of a munition such as in is extended to that of a composite multi material fragmenting shell of enabling even greater lethality than that of the single material approach.

With reference to the cylindrical body portion of the fragmenting shell encapsulates the explosive and smoothly blends into a rounded front end and . According to the invention the front portion of a munition comprises a composite fragmentation liner such as shown by a close up view in which has a pusher liner to transfer explosive momentum to the anterior fragmenting liner that projects fragments to the front. Pusher liner here is actually a part of the front portion of the munition shown in . Since the munition may have to withstand high G gun launch loads a material of choice for the main fragmenting shell and pusher liner are high strength grades of steel. In order to avoid premature rupture of a shell and leakage of the detonation products the end parts of the fragmenting anterior liner are tapered such as shown in smoothly blending with the main fragmenting shell a proper taper of the liner is a key factor for maximizing efficiency of the warhead. In order to optimize preferred fragment size distribution the anterior liner could be multi layered comprising of a series of two or more layers of liners stacked to each other rather than just the one piece single anterior liner shown in .

To generate an approximately fixed number of fragments per unit length of the shell significant amount of shell mass is required in the front so the anterior liner has to be fabricated from a high density preferably structurally robust high strength material. Another rationale for using high density high strength metals and metal alloys is the superior penetration efficiency of these materials enabling generation of larger numbers of lethal fragments per unit mass of fragmenting shell and significantly increasing the warhead lethality. Accordingly a material which can be chosen for the fragmenting anterior liner is tungsten alloy it has both high density and also high strength properties. The anterior liner could also be made from a variety of other high density structurally robust metals and metal alloys including tantalum hafnium lead and depleted uranium.

Images in show the effectiveness of the embodiment of the munition of having a tungsten alloy anterior fragmenting liner versus a baseline all steel airburst warhead of of the same mass of steel. The assessment of the lethality of both munitions had been performed by taking into account a complex battlefield scenario of an assault against a typical combat personnel target including the number and positions of soldiers the soldiers posture and combined effects of helmets body armors and unprotected portions of the body. Accordingly images in polar area graphs of show the resulting munition lethality plots representing statistical predictions of probabilities of body wounds that incapacitate targeted combatants preventing them from active resistive actions. The input for the statistical lethality analyses included the fragment velocity and mass distribution from the continuum physics and the fragmentation physics computations at static burst conditions plus projectile terminal ballistics parameters at the given range including warhead velocity at burst orientation of warhead the height of burst and other factors. As shown in images of versus that of assuming ideal fragmentation 0 losses of the anterior liner the lethal area of the invented munition is more than four to eight times that of the baseline warhead of . The enormous gain in the warheads lethality is due to the multiplicity of high lethality tungsten alloy fragments ejected by the anterior liner that fill the entire front space of the warhead between bat wings and .

As is illustrated in the drawings according to the current invention the pusher liner and the anterior liner interface are rounded and curved. This is an important feature of the current invention that in addition to achieving a uniform distribution of fragment mass per unit angle also produces high strain high strain rate continuum flow both in the circumferential hoop direction and in the tangential direction along the projectile axis enabling uniform fracturing of the liner material. Accordingly in order to maximize the warhead performance and to achieve the optimum fragment distribution parameters the pusher liner and the anterior liner have to have properly engineered surface profiles thicknesses and curvatures. According to the current invention the preferable mathematical formulation of the pusher liner and the anterior liner surfaces is given by the following equations 0 0 0 0 0 3 1 0 2 0 1 3 1 0 2 0 1 2 0 1 0 1 2 0 1 0 1 

The equations above represent a third order parametric vector curve segment right arrow over R shown in whereas vector right arrow over R is a function of a scalar dimensionless parameter 0 1 z and r are the axial and radial coordinates and and are the unit directional vectors corresponding to coordinate axes z and r respectively. As shown in the figure vectors right arrow over R and right arrow over R denote the start point 0 and the end point 1 of the curve segment right arrow over R respectively vectors right arrow over T and right arrow over T are the tangents at these two points with lengths and respectively. Although the required shape of the pusher and anterior liners may be achieved employing a number of other high order curve and or spline equations the advantage of the above formulation is that in addition to superior curve design flexibility the shape of the curve segment is conveniently controlled using positions of two end points and tangents thereof.

According to the current invention properly engineering surface profiles of the pusher and anterior liners preferably with use of the above equations enables efficient uniform fracturing of high strength fragmentation liner materials including high strength steel pusher liners solid homogenous tungsten alloy anterior liners with and without scoring as in and heterogeneous anterior liners made of preformed fragments embedded in metal alloy matrix such as in . In addition the present invention as shown in achieves an even density in lethal fragments in a radial distribution including the direction of flight making use of the entire body of the anterior liner without any low strength light weight preformed fragment bonding material for example that does not contribute to the munition lethality but may interfere with the fragments hitting their targets. The multi layered anterior liner of this invention can be prefabricated and then disposed on the outer surface of the pusher liner in a high throughput production manner with easy access for assembly and quality inspection to assure consistent performance.

Thus according to the invention the anterior liner can be made either from a homogeneous solid high density high strength material or from a multiplicity of high density high strength preformed fragments embedded in a metal alloy matrix as in all in spatially compact and structurally robust manner with appreciable structural strength. Accordingly a material of choice for the preformed anterior liner is preformed tungsten alloy fragments embedded in tungsten alloy matrix. In the case of the solid homogeneous anterior liner in order to produce preferred fragment sizes the liner can be fabricated with surface patterns of scores as in or holes as in .

The second layer here is attached to the first layer the pusher liner for example by an adhesive or by shrink fitting.

Either or both of the second and third layers may have fragments disposed therein in a similar fashion as shown with reference to layer in . The second layer is attached to the first layer and the third layer is attached to the second layer by for example an adhesive or shrink fitting. Third layer may also be scored as discussed above with reference to layer of .

It is possible to employ for good effect in a single warhead all or any combination of the three features of embedding fragments scoring and also of adding the small holes such as in . This further could be carried over into multiple liner warheads such as in in various combinations. If holes and scoring were both being used then the placement of holes should be between scoring grooves.

While the invention has been described with reference to certain preferred embodiments numerous changes alterations and modifications to the described embodiments are possible without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined in the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

