---

title: Flush rinse apparatus for electroplating operations
abstract: An apparatus for rinsing an article includes a tank having an upper portion, the upper portion including a rim; a discharge pipe connected to the tank; a generally cylindrical spray assembly disposed in a middle portion of the tank; a second tank; a source of rinse fluid connected to the second tank and to the spray assembly through a valve, the valve being operable to open to both the second tank and the spray assembly when a level of rinse fluid in the second tank is decreasing and operable to close to both the second tank and the spray assembly when the level in the second tank is at a full level; a fluid connection between the second tank and the rim of the tank; and a second valve disposed in the fluid connection and operable to open to allow rinse fluid to flow from the second tank to the rim of the tank and operable to close to allow refilling of the second tank.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07631652&OS=07631652&RS=07631652
owner: 
number: 07631652
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050107
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for government purposes without the payment of any royalties thereof.

The invention relates in general to an apparatus for conducting electroplating operations and in particular to an apparatus for rinsing electroplated articles or objects.

U.S. Pat. No. 4 269 208 issued on May 26 1981 is hereby expressly incorporated by reference. U.S. Pat. No. 4 269 208 discloses an electroplating apparatus comprising a non linear array of treating tanks having a central rinse tank. A plurality of showerheads are located around the rinse tank for spray rinsing articles in the rinse tank. A hoist or other apparatus is provided for moving the article or articles being treated from the treating or process tanks to the rinse tank. The discharge from the rinse tank flows to a two way valve. In one position of the two way valve the rinse discharge flows to an ordinary sewer. In another position of the two way valve the rinse discharge flows to a set of concentrating tanks for concentrating the contaminants contained in the rinse discharge. Contaminants from the several treatment steps are not segregated thereby complicating recovery operations for recovering any valuable contaminants. Further the rinse tank itself is not fully cleaned after each rinse further resulting in a mixing of contaminants in the rinse discharge water.

The present invention segregates the various contaminates from each treatment or process step thereby resulting in a plurality of recovery tanks each containing only a single contaminant. Because each recovery tank contains only a single contaminant the process of recovering that single contaminant if desired is simpler as compared to a recovery tank containing multiple contaminants. Furthermore the present invention flushes the rinse tank each time an article is rinsed therein so that multiple contaminants are not mixed by virtue of residue remaining in the rinse tank. Further the present invention permits a specific article to be immersed or submerged in a rinse fluid where different rinse fluid types may be used for example hot fluids cold fluids deionized water and non aqueous based fluids. Further the present invention includes a single rinse tank which advantageously reduces precious manufacturing floor space. Accordingly the present invention has a wide variety of commercial and non commercial applications including plating processes and electronics fabrication.

In the instant invention after a part or article is treated it is placed into the rinse tank that is filled with a rinse fluid such as typically deionized water or alternatively a non aqueous based fluid. After a length of time the rinse tank is flushed similar to a toilet flush and the article is sprayed while the tank is being flushed. The rinse discharge goes to a recovery tank dedicated to one type of contaminant. The article is then placed in a process tank for further processing or if processing is finished removed to another area.

Some advantages of the instant invention include a single rinse tank usable for all processes full control over rinse water quality at all times rinse fluid may be hot for a certain operation then cold for another operation compact size minimizes floor space minimal distance between tanks minimizes oxidation during transfers smooth flush tank minimizes cross contamination rinse tank is filled by gravity laminar flow or pump to minimize fluid aeration rinse tank is drained by gravity or pump rinse tank waste fluid is diverted for recovery by type of contaminant batch plating may be automated using rotary gantry with linear actuator wherein the position of the gantry is used to position the waste water diverter multiple parts may be processed using different process steps for each part by utilizing a rotary robot.

The invention will be better understood and further objects features and advantages thereof will become more apparent from the following description of the preferred embodiments taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

A discharge pipe in the form of a siphon tube is connected to the bottom portion of the tank . A flush mounted valve or removable plug is disposed in the discharge pipe at the low point near where the discharge pipe joins the bottom portion of the tank for cleanout purposes. A grate is disposed at the bottom of the middle portion to support article and or prevent articles from falling downward near the cleanout port. Article may for example be supported from above without a grate. Grate may also be in the form of an article support mesh basket.

A generally cylindrical spray assembly is disposed in the middle portion . A second tank holds a rinse fluid referred to as fluid such as typically deionized water or alternatively a non aqueous based fluid. A source of the fluid is connected to the second tank and to the spray assembly through a valve . Valve opens to allow flow of the fluid to both the second tank and the spray assembly when the level of the fluid in the second tank is decreasing. Valve closes to stop the flow of the fluid to both the second tank and the spray assembly when the level of fluid in the second tank is at a full level.

A fluid connection for example a pipe connects the second tank and the rim of the tank . A second valve is disposed in the fluid connection and is operable to open to allow fluid to flow from the second tank to the rim of the tank and is operable to close to allow refilling of the second tank . Disposed adjacent rinse tank is one or more process tanks . Process tanks are filled with a process chemical appropriate for the particular process being carried out. Article is immersed in chemical while being held by an article holder . Process tank includes a lip portion that extend above and overlaps the upper portion of the tank . The purpose of lip portion is to catch chemical that may drip from article when it is removed from tank and moved towards tank for rinsing therein.

Referring to flushing of the rinse tank begins by moving valve from a closed to an open position thereby allowing fluid typically deionized water referred to as water from tank to flow to rim of tank . The fluid flows around rim and is discharged into tank through circumferential opening . The flow of fluid into tank causes the siphon discharge pipe to fill which starts water flowing out of tank through discharge pipe . Valve may be actuated manually or automatically for example under computer control. As seen in as valve is opened and the level of fluid typically water in tank begins falling valve begins to open by for example action of float .

Opening valve allows fluid typically water from a fluid source typically a deionized water source to flow into spray assembly and tank . Spray assembly includes a plurality of spray heads directed at article . The flow of fluid into tank through valve is smaller than the flow of fluid out of tank through valve such that tank will become substantially empty. When tank is substantially empty and tank is again full valve is closed by for example action of a flapper valve or a solenoid connected to for example a computer. Closing valve allows tank to begin filling. As tank reaches full capacity valve returns to a closed position thereby stopping the flow of fluid into tank and into spray assembly . Those of skill in the art will recognize the sequence of events described above as similar to the flushing of modern toilets. Prior to tank refilling article is removed from the tank so that article does not contaminate the tank . Article is then moved to another process tank or area for further processing or drying for example.

If desired rinse tank may be flushed each time a new article is placed therein. However there may be situations where one may desire to flush tank only when the concentration of a particular contaminant reaches or exceeds a preset level. In that case and with reference to a contamination meter that measures the concentration of a particular contaminant is disposed in tank and electrically connected to valve . When meter senses that the concentration of contaminant has been reached a signal is sent to valve to begin the flushing sequence.

In many types of processes the contaminants contained in the rinse water are valuable and worth recovery. However recovery is best accomplished when only one contaminant is present in the recovery water. To that end another embodiment shown schematically in includes a plurality of rinse discharge recovery tanks. While two tanks are shown preferably there is a separate recovery tank for each type of process being employed or type of contaminant that is desired to be recovered. A diverter valve disposed in the discharge pipe enables the rinse discharge flow to be diverted to any one of the plurality of recovery tanks.

An operator inputs information into computer . Such information includes which process tanks will be utilized for which articles and in what order when rinsing and flushing of each article should take place and in what position the recovery tank valve should be for each flushing operation. As an alternative the computer could compute the order and times of processing. In this manner the apparatus can process several articles simultaneously. When the rinse tank is ready for flushing computer sends an open signal to flush valve thereby beginning the rinse and flush operation. Just prior to the beginning of the flushing operation the computer sends a signal to recovery tank valve to divert its flow if necessary to a position corresponding to the proper recovery tank for the contaminant being rinsed off the article .

While the invention has been described with reference to certain preferred embodiments numerous changes alterations and modifications to the described embodiments are possible without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined in the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

