---

title: System and method for indicating reminders via a portable computing device
abstract: A method of processing location data at a portable computing device is provided and includes receiving information associated with a user defined location at the portable computing device. The information includes a central point and an entry indication perimeter. An entry alert associated with the user defined location is received at the portable computing device. The location of the portable computing device is monitored to determine when the portable computing device crosses the entry indication perimeter associated with the central point of the user defined location indicating that the portable computing device is proximate to the user defined location. The method further includes switching the portable computing device from a roaming state to an entry state indicating that the portable computing device is about to enter the user defined location. An indication can be provided to the user that the portable computing device has switched to the entry state.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08065079&OS=08065079&RS=08065079
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 08065079
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050331
---
The present disclosure generally relates to portable computing devices. More particularly the disclosure relates to indicating reminders to a user using a portable computing device.

Advances in technology have resulted in smaller and more powerful personal computing devices. For example there currently exist a variety of portable personal computing devices including wireless computing devices such as portable wireless telephones laptop computers personal digital assistants PDAs and paging devices that are small lightweight and easily carried by users. More specifically portable wireless telephones for example further include cellular telephones that communicate voice and data packets over wireless networks. Further many such wireless telephones provide significant computing capabilities and as such are becoming tantamount to small personal computers and hand held PDAs.

Typically these smaller and more powerful personal computing devices are often resource constrained. For example the screen size the amount of available memory and file system space and the amount of input and output capabilities may be limited by the small size of the device. Because of such severe resource constraints it is can be desirable to maintain a limited size and quantity of software applications and other information residing on such personal computing devices client computing devices .

Some of these personal computing devices utilize application programming interfaces APIs that are sometimes referred to as runtime environments and software platforms. The APIs can be installed onto a local computer platform and can be used to simplify the operation and programming of such devices by providing generalized calls for device specific resources. Further some APIs can provide software developers the ability to create software applications that are fully executable on such devices. In addition APIs can provide an interface between a personal computing device system hardware and the software applications. As such the personal computing device functionality can be made available to the software applications without requiring the software developer to access the source code of the specific personal computing device. Further some APIs can provide mechanisms for secure communications between personal devices such as client devices and server systems using secure cryptographic key information.

Examples of such APIs some of which are discussed in more detail below include those currently publicly available versions of the Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW software developed by Qualcomm Inc. of San Diego Calif. BREW can be described as a thin veneer that exists over the operating system of a computing device such as a wireless cellular phone. BREW can provide a set of interfaces to particular hardware features found on personal computing devices.

Further BREW is advantageous in that it can be provided on personal computing devices at a relatively low cost with respect to the demands on device resources and with respect to the prices typically paid by consumers for devices containing the BREW APIs. Additionally BREW provides an end to end software distribution platform that includes a variety of benefits for wireless service operators software developers and computing device consumers. One such currently available end to end software distribution platform includes logic distributed over a server client architecture wherein the server can perform billing security and application distribution functionality and wherein the client can perform application execution security and user interface functionality.

Oftentimes a user forgets his or her portable computing device e.g. when going to work. Further many users often forget other items such as car keys glasses etc. when traveling. Accordingly it would be advantageous to provide a portable computing device that can provide reminders to users.

A method of processing location data at a portable computing device is provided and includes receiving information associated with a user defined location at the portable computing device. The information includes a central point and an entry indication perimeter. Further the method includes receiving an entry alert associated with the user defined location at the portable computing device. Also a location of the portable computing device is monitored. Moreover it is determined when the portable computing device crosses the entry indication perimeter associated with the central point of the user defined location indicating that the portable computing device is proximate to the user defined location.

In a particular embodiment the entry indication perimeter is a distance from the central point. Also the entry alert can be a recurring entry alert or a one time only entry alert. In a particular embodiment the method further includes switching the portable computing device from a roaming state to an entry state to indicate that the portable computing device is about to enter the user defined location. Particularly an indication can be provided to the user that the portable computing device has switched to the entry state.

Additionally in a particular embodiment the entry alert is presented to a user of the portable computing device when the portable computing device switches to the entry state. However an indication can be received from the user to prevent the portable computing device from switching to the entry state. Also when the portable computing device is prevented from switching to the entry state the entry indication perimeter can be modified e.g. reduced.

In a particular embodiment after the alert is presented to the user the portable computing device switches from the entry state to a home state. The portable computing device may wait a predetermined time period before switching to the home state.

Further in a particular embodiment the method can include determining whether the portable computing device is moving toward the central point. If so a reminder can be presented to a user via the portable computing device.

In another embodiment a method of providing alerts via a portable computing device is provided and includes receiving information associated with a user defined location at the portable computing device. The information includes a central point and a departure indication perimeter. A departure alert is received and is associated with the user defined location at the portable computing device. Further the location of the portable computing device is monitored to determine when the portable computing device crosses the departure indication perimeter associated with the central point of the user defined location.

In yet another embodiment a method of reminding a user via a portable computing device is provided and includes sounding a wake alarm at the portable computing device when a wake time is reached. Also at a predetermined time before a predetermined departure time a reminder alarm is sounded. Thereafter it is determined whether the reminder alarm is acknowledged. If not the volume of the reminder alarm is increased.

In still another embodiment a portable computing device is provided and includes a processor a memory device accessible by the processor and a global positioning module. The portable computing device also includes a computer program that is embedded within the memory and that is responsive to the global positioning module. The computer program includes instructions to monitor a location of the portable computing device and instructions to determine when the portable computing device crosses an entry indication perimeter associated with a user defined point indicating that the portable computing device is proximate to a user defined location.

In yet still another embodiment a portable computing device is provided and includes a processor a memory device accessible by the processor and a location determination module that is embedded within the memory device. The portable computing device also includes a computer program that is embedded within the memory. The computer program also includes instructions to monitor a location of the portable computing device. Particularly the location is determined by the location determination module. Further the computer program includes instructions to determine when the portable computing device crosses a departure indication perimeter associated with the user defined point of the user defined location indicating that the portable computing device is about to depart the user defined location.

In another embodiment a portable computing device includes a processor a memory device that is accessible by the processor and a computer program that is embedded within the memory. Particularly the computer program includes instructions to sound a wake alarm and instructions to sound a reminder alarm a predetermined time before a predetermined departure time. Further the computer program includes instructions to determine whether the reminder alarm is acknowledged.

In still another embodiment a user interface for a portable computing device is provided and includes a set home point button. Particularly in response to selection of the set home point button one or more location coordinates associated with a home point location are saved at the portable computing device.

In yet another embodiment a computer program is provided and is embedded within a computer readable medium. The computer program includes instructions to monitor the location of a portable computing device outside of a virtual perimeter around a user defined point. Also the computer program includes instructions to determine whether the portable computing device crosses an entry indication perimeter around the virtual perimeter indicating that the portable computing device is proximate to the virtual perimeter.

In still yet another embodiment a computer program is provided and is embedded within a computer readable medium. The computer program includes instructions to monitor a location of the portable computing device within a virtual perimeter around a user defined point. Further the computer program includes instructions to determine whether the portable computing device crosses a departure indication perimeter within the virtual perimeter indicating that the portable computing device is about to cross the virtual perimeter.

In another embodiment a computer program is embedded within a computer readable medium and includes instructions to sound a wake alarm and instructions to sound a reminder alarm at a predetermined time before a predetermined departure time is reached. Additionally the computer program includes instructions to determine whether the reminder alarm is acknowledged and instructions to increase a volume of the reminder alarm when the reminder alarm is not acknowledged.

Other aspects advantages and features of the present disclosure will become apparent after review of the entire application including the following sections Brief Description of the Drawings Detailed Description and the Claims.

The word exemplary is used herein to mean serving as an example instance or illustration. Any embodiment described herein as exemplary is not necessarily to be construed as preferred or advantageous over other embodiments. Further many embodiments are described in terms of sequences of actions to be performed by for example elements of a computing device. It will be recognized that various actions described herein could be performed by specific circuits e.g. application specific integrated circuits ASICs by program instructions being executed by one or more processors or by a combination of both.

Further the embodiments described herein can additionally be considered to be embodied entirely within any form of computer readable storage medium having stored therein a corresponding set of computer instructions that upon execution would cause an associated processor to perform the functionality described herein. Thus various aspects of the disclosure may be embodied in a number of different forms all of which have been contemplated to be within the scope of the claimed subject matter. In addition for each of the embodiments described herein the corresponding form of any such embodiment may be described herein as for example logic configured to perform a certain action or code operable to perform the described action. The following detailed description describes methods systems software and apparatus used in connection with one or more portable computing devices.

In one or more embodiments a personal computing device may utilize a runtime environment such as a version of the Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW software platform developed by QUALCOMM Inc. of San Diego Calif. In at least one embodiment in the following description the system used to provide communications between client computing devices and servers is implemented on a computing device executing a runtime environment such as the current version of the BREW software platform. However one or more embodiments of the system used to provide communications between client computing devices and servers are suitable for use with other types of runtime environments that for example operate to control the execution of applications on wireless client computing devices.

As illustrated in the portable computing device can be a cellular telephone a personal digital assistant a pager or a separate computer platform that has a wireless communication portal. In a particular embodiment the pager can be a two way text pager. Further in an alternative embodiment the portable computing device can have a wired connection to a network or the Internet. The exemplary non limiting system can include any form of a remote module including a wireless communication portal including without limitation wireless modems PCMCIA cards personal computers access terminals telephones with or without a display or keypad or any combination or sub combination thereof.

As depicted in the application download server is coupled to a network with other computer elements in communication with the wireless network . The system includes a second server and a stand alone server and each server can provide separate services and processes to the portable computing devices across the wireless network . Further as indicated in the system also includes at least one stored application database that stores software applications that are downloadable by the portable computing devices . Different embodiments are contemplated that locate logic to perform secure communications at any one or more of the application download server the second server and the stand alone server .

In a block diagram is shown that more fully illustrates the system including the components of the wireless network and interrelation of the elements of the system . The system is merely exemplary and can include any system whereby remote modules such as the wireless client computing devices communicate over the air between and among each other and or between and among components connected via a wireless network including without limitation wireless network carriers and or servers. The application download server and the stored application database along with any other servers such as server are compatible with wireless communication services and can communicate with a carrier network through a data link such as the Internet a secure LAN WAN or other network. In an illustrative embodiment the server contains a server security module that further contains logic configured to provide for secure communications over the carrier network . In a particular embodiment the server security module can operate in conjunction with a client security module located on a client computing device such as portable computing devices to provide secure communications.

The carrier network controls messages sent as data packets sent to a mobile switching center MSC . The carrier network communicates with the MSC by a network such as the Internet and or POTS plain ordinary telephone system . Typically the network connection between the carrier network and the MSC transfers data and the POTS transfers voice information. The MSC is connected to multiple base transceiver stations BTS . The MSC can be connected to the BTS by both a data network and or Internet for data transfer and POTS for voice information. The BTS ultimately broadcasts messages wirelessly to the portable computing devices such as to cellular telephone by the short messaging service SMS or other over the air methods known in the art.

The portable computing device e.g. a wireless client computing device such as cellular telephone has a computer platform that can receive and execute software applications transmitted from the application download server . The computer platform may be implemented as an application specific integrated circuit ASIC a processor microprocessor logic circuit or other data processing device. The ASIC is installed at the time of manufacture of the portable computing device. The ASIC or other processor can execute an application programming interface API layer that interfaces with resident programs in the memory of the portable computing device. The memory can be comprised of read only or random access memory ROM or RAM EEPROM flash memory or any other memory suitable for computer platforms.

The API also includes a client security module containing logic configured to provide for secure communications over the carrier network . In a particular embodiment the client security module can operate in conjunction with the server security module to provide secure communications. As illustrated in the computer platform can further include a local database that can hold applications not actively used in memory . In an illustrative embodiment the local database is stored within a flash memory cell but it can be stored within any secondary storage device as known in the art such as magnetic media EEPROM optical media tape or floppy or hard disk.

A wireless client computing device for example the cellular telephone can download one or more software applications such as games news stock monitors and the like from the application download server . Further the wireless computing device can store the downloaded applications in the local database when not in use and can load stored resident applications from the local database to memory for execution by the API when desired by the user. Further communications over the wireless network may be performed in a secure manner at least in part due to the interaction and operation of the client security module and the server security module . further illustrates that the API can include a global positioning system GPS module that can be used to determine the location of the portable computing device . Also the API can include a reminder module that can be executed in order to send reminders or alerts to a user based on the location of the portable computing device . In a particular embodiment the reminder module can be downloaded to the portable computing device from the application download server via an over the air interface.

As shown in an entry indication perimeter can be established around the virtual perimeter . In an illustrative embodiment the entry indication perimeter can be established by adding a predetermined distance to the home radius . Particularly the predetermined distance can be user defined. As described in detail below when a user approaches the virtual perimeter of the home location while carrying the portable computing device and crosses the entry indication perimeter the portable computing devices switches itself from a roaming mode to an entry mode and begins indicating entry alerts to the user. For example an entry alert can be an indication to a user to not leave his or her glasses cellular phone etc. in a car.

Referring now to a method of configuring a portable computing device to alert a user when the user enters or leaves a particular location is shown and commences at block . At block the portable computing device receives information for a location from a user. In a particular embodiment the information includes the name of the location a home point associated with the location and a home location radius associated with the location. Further the information can include subpoints associated with the location and a subpoint radius for each subpoint. At block the portable computing device receives an inputted alert for the location. In a particular embodiment the alert can be a reminder to a user to not forget something such as car keys lunch money opera tickets a cellular telephone a wallet a purse a laptop computer a portable digital assistant a pager a brief case etc.

Moving to block the alert is stored at the portable computing device. Thereafter at decision step the portable computing devices queries the user in order to determine whether the alert is a recurring alert or a one time only alert. If the alert is a recurring alert the method moves to block and the portable computing device flags the alert as a recurring alert. On the other hand if the alert is a one time only alert the portable computing device flags the alert as a one time only alert at block .

Continuing to decision step the portable computing device queries the user in order to determine whether the alert is an entry alert or a departure alert. If the user indicates that the alert is a departure alert the method moves to block and the portable computing device flags the alert as a departure alert. Conversely if the user indicates that the alert is an entry alert the method proceeds to block . At block the portable computing device flags the alert as an entry alert. Accordingly a particular alert may be flagged as a recurring entry alert a one time only entry alert a recurring departure alert or a one time only departure alert.

At decision step the portable computing device can query the user in order to determine whether the user would like to input another alert for this particular location. If the user has would like to input another alert for this location the method returns to block and continues as described. If the user does not want to input another alert for this particular location the method moves to decision step and the portable computing device can query the user in order to determine whether the user has another location to set one or more alerts. If the user does have another location where the user wants to set one or more alerts the method returns to block and continues as above for a new location. On the other hand if the user does not have another location the method ends at state .

If the portable computing device is within the entry indication perimeter the method proceeds to decision step and the GPS module confirms a predetermined number of times that the portable computing device has crossed the entry indication perimeter. If the GPS module is not successful in confirming crossing of the entry indication perimeter the method returns to block and continues as described herein. Conversely if the GPS module is successful in its confirmation the method continues to block and the portable computing device switches itself from a roaming state to an entry state. Next at decision step the portable computing device determines whether there are any entry alerts for the location associated with the user defined point. If so the portable computing device presents a first entry alert at block and the method then moves to decision step . If the portable computing device determines that there are no alerts for the location associated with the user defined point the method proceeds to block and the portable computing device indicates a state change. The presentation of the alert can be by a special sound a digital verbal recording etc. The method then moves to decision step .

At decision step the portable computing device queries the user to determine whether the user would like to return the portable computing device to the roaming state. If the user chooses to return the portable computing device to the roaming state the method proceeds to block and the entry indication perimeter is modified. Particularly the size of the entry indication perimeter is reduced.

Returning to decision step if the user chooses not to return the portable computing device to the roaming state the method moves to block and the remaining entry alerts for the location are presented. Next at block the portable computing device waits a predetermined time period. In a particular embodiment the predetermined time period is user defined. At block the portable computing device switches itself to a home state. In a particular embodiment the wait period prevents the portable computing device from switching too quickly to the home state to avoid triggering departure alerts since the device has not yet moved within the departure indication perimeter. The method ends at block .

Referring now to a second method of alerting a user via a portable computing device is shown and starts at block . At block the GPS module monitors the location of the portable computing device. At decision step the GPS module determines whether the portable computing device has moved beyond a departure indication perimeter that is relative to a predefined point. In a particular embodiment the predefined point is a user defined point such as a user s home or work location. Further in a particular embodiment the departure indication perimeter can be user defined and can be a distance from the user defined point. If the portable computing device has not moved beyond the departure indication perimeter the method returns to block and the GPS module continues to monitor the location of the portable computing device.

If the portable computing device has moved beyond the departure indication perimeter the method proceeds to decision step and the GPS module confirms a predetermined number of times that the portable computing device has crossed the departure indication perimeter. If the GPS module is not successful the method returns to block and continues as described. Conversely if the GPS module is successful in its confirmation the method continues to block and the portable computing device switches itself from a roaming state to a departure state. Next at decision step the portable computing device determines whether there are any departure alerts for the location associated with the user defined point. If so the portable computing device presents a first departure alert. The method then moves to decision step . If the portable computing device determines that there are no departure alerts for the location associated with the user defined point the method proceeds to block and the portable computing device indicates a state change. The method then moves to decision step .

At decision step the portable computing device queries the user to determine whether the user would like to return to the home state. If the user chooses to return the portable computing device to the home state the method proceeds to block and the departure indication perimeter is modified. Particularly the departure indication perimeter is increased.

Returning to decision step if the user chooses not to return the portable computing device to the home state the method moves to block and the remaining departure alerts are presented. Next at block the portable computing device waits a predetermined time period. In a particular embodiment the predetermined time period is user defined. At block the portable computing device switches itself to a roaming state and the method ends at block .

Each method shown in and uses distance as a way to determine whether the portable computing device is entering or departing a particular location. However direction of travel distance and travel velocity can be used to determine an estimated time of arrival or an estimated time of departure at a particular location. Based on the estimated time of arrival or the estimated time of departure the portable computing device can alert the user just before arriving at or departing from a particular location.

Moving to block the portable computing device receives a departure time. The departure time is the time that the user expects to leave home e.g. to go to work. At block the portable computing device receives an alarm volume selection. The alarm volume selection can be chosen from a range of alarm volumes. Proceeding to block the portable computing device receives a selection of a wake alarm type e.g. a song a sound or other type of audible signal. At block the portable computing device receives a selection of a reminder alarm. In a particular embodiment the reminder alarm can be a song a sound or other type of audible signal. Continuing to block the portable computing device receives a back up telephone number. Particularly the back up telephone number is a telephone number that the portable computing device can contact if the user fails to respond to a wake alarm.

At block the portable computing device receives an alarm expiration time period. In an illustrative embodiment the alarm expiration time period is an amount of time that the portable computing device waits before automatically turning off the wake alarm if the user fails to turn off the wake alarm. Next at block the portable computing device receives a verification method selection e.g. the manner in which a user can acknowledge a reminder alarm. In a non limiting exemplary embodiment the verification method can be disconnecting the portable computing device from a charger the verification method can be a key press or the verification method can be a GPS method in which the GPS module detects when the portable computing device has moved a particular distance from the user defined point indicating that the portable computing device has left a particular location e.g. a user s home. The method then ends at state .

Referring now to a method of waking a user via a portable computing device and reminding a user not to forget the portable computing device when leaving home is shown and commences at block . At block when a wake time is reached the portable computing device sounds the wake alarm. At decision step the portable computing device determines whether a snooze button has been toggled. If so the method proceeds to block and the portable computing device sounds a wake alarm after a predetermined snooze time. If the snooze button is not toggled the method moves to decision step and the portable computing device determines whether the wake alarm has been turned off.

If the wake alarm is not turned off by the user the method continues to decision step and after the alarm expiration time period elapses the portable computing device automatically turns off the wake alarm. Thereafter at block the portable computing device automatically calls the back up number input by the user. The method then moves to block . The method also moves to block if the portable computing device determines that the alarm is turned off by the user at decision step .

At block when a predetermined time before the departure time is reached the portable computing device begins sounding a reminder alarm. Continuing to decision step the portable computing device determines whether the reminder alarm is acknowledged by the user. If not the method moves to block and the portable computing device increases the volume of the reminder alarm. The method then returns to decision step . At decision step if the reminder alarm is acknowledged the method continues to block and the GPS module monitors the location of the portable computing device. Thereafter at block the GPS module determines whether the portable computing device has moved a predetermined distance away from the user defined point indicating that the portable computing device has left a location e.g. a home with a user. If not the method returns to block and continues. If so the method moves to block and the reminder application is disabled. Then the method ends at state .

Referring now to a portable computing device is shown and is generally designated . As shown the portable computing device includes a display and a keypad . A reminder set up interface can be presented to a user via the display . The reminder set up interface can include a set home point soft button and a set sub point soft button . When the set home point soft button is selected the GPS coordinates associated with the home point are saved at the portable computing device. Moreover a home point set up interface shown in can be presented to the user via the display .

As illustrated in the home point set up interface includes a home location name input field in which a user can input the name of the home location associated with the previously set home point. Further the home point set up interface includes a home point radius input field in which a user can input a radius associated with the home point. Additionally the home point set up interface includes an alert input field in which a user can input an alert associated with the home location. The home point set up interface also includes a one time only soft button and a recurring soft button that can be selected in order to indicate whether the alert should be provided at a single time or at multiple recurring times.

Returning to when the set sub point soft button is selected a sub point set up interface illustrated in can be presented to the user. As depicted in the sub point set up interface includes a sub point name input field in which a user can input the name of the sub point associated with the previously set sub point. Moreover the sub point set up interface includes a sub point radius input field in which a user can input a radius associated with the sub point. also indicates that the sub point set up interface can include an enter soft button that can be toggled when the user is finished inputting the information associated with the sub point previously inputted to the portable computing device.

Those of skill would further appreciate that the various illustrative logical blocks configurations modules circuits and algorithm steps described in connection with the embodiments disclosed herein may be implemented as electronic hardware computer software or combinations of both. To clearly illustrate this interchangeability of hardware and software various illustrative components blocks configurations modules circuits and steps have been described above generally in terms of their functionality. Whether such functionality is implemented as hardware or software depends upon the particular application and design constraints imposed on the overall system. Skilled artisans may implement the described functionality in varying ways for each particular application but such implementation decisions should not be interpreted as causing a departure from the scope of the present disclosure.

The steps of a method or algorithm described in connection with the embodiments disclosed herein may be embodied directly in hardware in a software module executed by a processor or in a combination of the two. A software module may reside in RAM memory flash memory ROM memory PROM memory EPROM memory EEPROM memory registers hard disk a removable disk a CD ROM or any other form of storage medium known in the art. An exemplary storage medium is coupled to the processor such that the processor can read information from and write information to the storage medium. In the alternative the storage medium may be integral to the processor. The processor and the storage medium may reside in an ASIC. The ASIC may reside in a computing device or a user terminal. In the alternative the processor and the storage medium may reside as discrete components in a computing device or user terminal.

The previous description of the disclosed embodiments is provided to enable any person skilled in the art to make or use the present disclosure. Various modifications to these embodiments will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art and the generic principles defined herein may be applied to other embodiments without departing from the spirit or scope of the disclosure. Thus the present disclosure is not intended to be limited to the embodiments shown herein but is to be accorded the widest scope consistent with the principles and novel features as defined by the following claims.

