---

title: Purification of carboxylic acids by complexation with selective solvents
abstract: A method and apparatus for purifying carboxylic acids is disclosed. A mixture containing crude carboxylic acid is contacted with a selective crystallization solvent to form a slurry of a salt complex of the carboxylic acid and the selective crystallization solvent. The salt complex is recovered and optionally processed to recover the free carboxylic acid. The method and apparatus of the invention is particularly suitable for purifying aromatic dicarboxylic acids such as terephthalic acid. The present invention also reduces contamination by carboxybenaldehyde isomers in crude phthalic acids by oxidizing the carboxybenzaldehyde to the corresponding phthalic acid.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07307188&OS=07307188&RS=07307188
owner: GTC Technology, Inc.
number: 07307188
owner_city: Houston
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050408
---
This application is a non provisional of Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 561 000 filed Apr. 9 2004 the entire contents of which are incorporated herein by reference.

This invention was made with government support under DOE Grant No. DE FC36 011D14085. As such the government has certain rights in this invention.

The invention relates to the purification of carboxylic acids. More specifically a method and apparatus for purifying aromatic dicarboxylic acids by complexation and crystallization with a selective crystallization solvent are disclosed.

Purified carboxylic acids and particularly aromatic dicarboxylic acids are industrially important. For example purified terephthalic acid TPA is a starting material for the formation of polyester resin which is in turn used to make many materials of commerce having a variety of utilities. Purified terephthalic acid is formed from crude terephthalic acid conventionally by a number of purification methods often with the aid of catalysts. Many of the currently available methods for purifying crude terephthalic acid are not completely satisfactory either from an engineering or an economic standpoint. Yet the purity of terephthalic acid is an important determinant in the formation of polyester resin.

Many of the problems of existing and prior systems for producing purified terephthalic acid stem from the difficulties in economically running reaction systems to produce good yields of crude terephthalic acid compounded by the difficulties of refining crude terephthalic acid to eliminate impurities and unwanted components to produce purified terephthalic acid of a quality suitable as a starting material for producing polyester. Concomitant problems in prior systems include the high capital investment required for PTA plants the severity of operating conditions of prior processes both for the production of crude terephthalic acid and for its purification and the need for handling catalyst systems and reaction solvents as well as reaction byproducts in a way such that environmental problems are minimized and loss of material is also controlled.

One important factor in the production of purified terephthalic acid is the formation of crystals having a size and shape that provide them with good handling characteristics washability and filterability in the PTA manufacturing process and also provide easier handling and better processability in a polyester process.

U.S. Pat. No. 2 949 483 by Ham et al. describes dissolving terephthalic acid in N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone then precipitating a salt complex containing terephthalic acid and N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone. The solid is washed with water to remove the N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone and yield purified TPA. The patent claimed a recovery rate of about 60 to 95 of the weight of the crude terephthalic acid.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 840 968 by Lee et al. describes a method and apparatus for purifying crude terephthalic acid from a liquid dispersion also containing impurities of unreacted starting materials solvents products of side reactions and or other undesired materials. The method uses the steps of filtering the dispersion to form a crude terephthalic acid filter cake dissolving the filter cake in a selective crystallization solvent at an elevated temperature to form a solution crystallizing purified terephthalic acid from the solution in the crystallization solvent by reducing the pressure and temperature of the solution and separating the crystallized purified terephthalic acid from the solution. The selective crystallization solvent is non aqueous non corrosive and essentially non reactive with terephthalic acid. Examples of selective crystallization solvents described are N methyl pyrrolidone or dimethyl acetamide.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 929 274 by Lamshing et al. describes a method for reducing carboxybenzaldehyde isomers in crude terephthalic and or isophthalic acids IPA . Crude TPA or IPA is dissolved in N methyl pyrrolidone and is subsequently contacted with an oxidant such as substantially anhydrous hydrogen peroxide to convert the carboxybenzaldehyde isomer 4 CBA or 3 CBA to TPA or IPA under moderate temperature and pressure conditions.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 054 610 by Lee et al. describes a method and apparatus for preparing purified terephthalic acid and optionally isophthalic acid from mixed xylenes. The method purifies the oxidation reactor effluent containing a mixture of terephthalic acid and isophthalic acid as well as minor amounts of 4 carboxybenzaldehyde 4 CBA 3 carboxybenzaldehyde 3 CBA and toluic acid isomers to produce purified terephthalic acid and optionally purified isophthalic acid in an integrated process.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 140 534 by Lee et al. describes a method for preparing isophthalic acid from metaxylene and especially for purifying crude isophthalic acid IPA produced in the course of such method or otherwise from a liquid dispersion thereof also containing unreacted starting materials solvents products of side reactions and or other undesired materials. The purifying portion of the method includes the steps of 1 filtering the dispersion to form a crude IPA filter cake 2 dissolving the filter cake in a selective crystallization solvent at an elevated temperature to form a solution 3 crystallizing purified IPA from the solution in the crystallization solvent by reducing the temperature or pressure or both of the solution 4 separating the crystallized purified IPA from the solution and 5 re dissolving or soaking the washed purified IPA cake at elevated temperature to remove the final traces of the crystallization solvent and obtain the desirable particle sizes and shape. The selective crystallization solvent is typically N methyl pyrrolidone.

An embodiment of the present invention provides a method and apparatus for purifying carboxylic acid from a mixture containing one or more carboxylic acids and possibly other materials. According to a particular embodiment the carboxylic acid is terephthalic acid TPA and the other materials are starting materials side products contaminants etc. present in the effluent from a terephthalic acid production process. The carboxylic acid is purified by contacting the mixture with a selective crystallization solvent at a temperature and time effective to form a slurry of a salt complex of the carboxylic acid and the selective crystallization solvent and recovering the salt complex. The salt complex can be used as is or can be further processed to yield the free carboxylic acid. To recover the free acid the salt complex can be decomposed in a selective crystallization solvent in a second crystallization stage and crystallized to yield the free acid.

An embodiment of the present invention also provides a method and apparatus to oxidize partial oxidation products present in the effluent from a terephthalic acid production process such as carboxybenzaldehydes. An embodiment of the present invention also provides a method and apparatus for separating terephthalic acid and isophthalic acid. These and other aspects of the invention are enabled by the present disclosure.

An embodiment of the present invention provides a method of purifying a carboxylic acid from a mixture containing one or more carboxylic acids and possibly other materials. As used herein purifying means treating the mixture comprising one or more carboxylic acids to yield a composition that is enriched in the desired carboxylic acid compared to the other carboxylic acids and or other materials that were present in the original mixture. The mixture can be a solid liquid or slurry. According to a particular embodiment the carboxylic acid is a dicarboxylic acid for example terephthalic acid TPA and the other materials are starting materials side products contaminants etc. present in the effluent from a terephthalic acid production process. Alternatively the carboxylic acid can be isophthalic acid orthophthalic acid or other industrially useful carboxylic acids and or mixtures of these acids.

A number of reaction systems are known for forming crude TPA from a variety of starting materials. The present invention may be used with substantially any of these reaction systems. A common reaction system involves the oxidation of paraxylene p xylene . Conventional TPA manufacturing processes require relatively high p xylene purity 99.7 in order to achieve usable quality of product at suitable cost. This is due to the fact that such prior art processes use hydrogenation as the main method for purifying the crude TPA produced in the oxidation section of the processes. Although the hydrogenation method is very selective to eliminate the major impurity 4 carboxybenzaldehyde 4 CBA by converting it to p toluic acid the method only operates in the presence of a very small amount of 4 CBA preferably less than 3 000 ppm . Also the conventional TPA manufacturing processes are not capable of separating TPA from its isomers such as isophthalic acid IPA and phthalic acid PA .

The present invention provides a method and apparatus for preparing purified TPA and optionally isophthalic acid from mixed xylenes. Importantly the invention can purify oxidation reactor effluent containing terephthalic acid and isophthalic acid as well as minor amounts of 4 carboxybenzaldehyde 4 CBA 3 carboxybenzaldehyde 3 CBA and toluic acid isomers as well as other impurities. The invention produces purified terephthalic acid and optionally purified isophthalic acid in an integrated process. These products are useful for the production of fibers films plastic bottles and polyester resin structures often reinforced by other materials such as glass fiber.

According to an embodiment of the invention a mixture containing carboxylic acid is contacted with a selective crystallization solvent. As used herein selective crystallization solvent refers to a solvent that is capable of forming an adduct or a salt complex with the carboxylic acid. Exemplary solvents include N N dimethyl acetamide N N dimethyl formamide N formyl piperidine N alkyl 2 pyrrolidone N mercaptoalkyl 2 pyrrolidone N alkyl 2 thiopyrrolidone N hydroxyalkyl 2 pyrrolidone morpholines carbitols C Calcohols ethers amines amides esters and mixtures of two or more of these solvents. N methyl pyrrolidone is a particularly suitable selective crystallization solvent.

U.S. Pat. No. 2 949 483 by Ham et al. the entire contents of which are incorporated herein by reference describes a method of purifying TPA using N methyl pyrrolidone. According to Ham terephthalic acid is completely dissolved in N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone within the temperature range of 50 C. to 130 C. The solution is cooled to the temperature range of 10 C. to 45 C. and the solid is precipitated. The solid in this case is not terephthalic acid but is a salt complex containing terephthalic acid and N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone. Ham stated that the salt contains two moles of N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone for each mole of terephthalic acid. The solid salts formed at low temperature are filtered and washed by N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone to remove the adhering impurities. The salt is then washed with water between 10 C. to 100 C. Because N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone is totally miscible with water at all temperatures the salt is destroyed as the water washes the N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone from the salt. The remaining terephthalic acid is filtered and dried. Ham states a recovery rate of about 60 to 95 of the weight of the crude terephthalic acid.

Ham s process is not practical for purifying TPA for polyester production. Even if the TPA reaches the desired purity precipitating rinsing filtering and drying TPA as described by Ham are exceedingly difficult. The terephthalic acid crystals formed from these salts are extremely fine such that the ratio of surface area volume is too high for efficient drying. These fine crystals form a hard cake or block during filtration. Once a hard cake or block is formed it is very difficult to process the material further. Even re dissolving the block in a different solvent presents problems. Due to these disadvantages this process is not commercially viable.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 767 311 by Lee et al. the entire contents of which are incorporated herein by reference describes a multistage crystallization process. In the first crystallizer crude terephthalic acid is dissolved in N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone at the temperature range of 140 C. to 190 C. then cooled down to the temperature range of 10 C. to 20 C. to form salts. The salts are filtered and washed with pure N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone. The salts are then redissolved in N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone in a second stage crystallizer at a temperature range of 140 C. to 190 C. The solution is cooled to a temperature range of 30 C. to 60 C. to form salts again. The salts are washed with pure N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone at 45 C. to displace the remaining mother liquor on the surface and then washed with low boiling solvent such as methanol to break the salts and displace N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone. The purified terephthalic acid crystals resulting from salts breaking are still fine but by using a low boiling solvent instead of water as the wash the fines are easier to dry and it is simpler to recover the purified terephthalic acid.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 054 610 by Lee et al. the entire contents of which are incorporated herein by reference describes additional physical properties of the terephthalic acid N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone salt. For example Lee showed that salts are bright transparent and slightly pale crystals that can be easily differentiated from the opaque white terephthalic acid crystals. Lee s empirical molar ratio of N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone terephthalic acid in the salt varied from 2.04 to 3.11 instead of 2 as proposed by Ham because solvent can be trapped in the crystal during the formation of the salt crystals. Lee also showed that with increasing temperature the salt crystals begin to decompose at about 50 C. This indicates that salts are stable below about 50 C. unstable between 50 C. and 60 C. and terephthalic acid crystals are stable above 60 C. The purification process was further improved based on these observations. According to Lee crude terephthalic acid is first dissolved in N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone in a cooling crystallizer between 140 C. to 200 C. The crystallizer is then cooled to a temperature range of 30 C. to 50 C. to achieve good impurities rejection using selective salt formation. The resulting salts are filtered and washed using pure N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone. The salt slurry is then re dissolved at the temperature range of 140 C. to 200 C. and fed to a second stage series of flash crystallizers where the temperature and pressure are reduced by steps with the final temperature being in the range of 50 C. to 60 C. where no salt should be formed. Flash crystallizers are used to produce good crystal shape and size. The purified terephthalic acid crystals are then filtered and washed with pure N methyl 2 pyrrolidinone and water and then dried.

A drawback to the method of Lee described in the preceding paragraph is that the first stage crystallization requires the crude TA to be completely dissolved in the crystallization solvent at an elevated temperature and the second stage crystallization involves a flash crystallization. Both of these stages impart a significant energy burden on the process. An aspect of an embodiment of the present invention is that it does not require as great an energy burden because it does not require complete dissolution of the TA. According to an embodiment of the invention a mixture containing a carboxylic acid is contacted with a selective crystallization solvent at a temperature and time effective to form a slurry of a salt complex of the carboxylic acid and the selective crystallization solvent. One of skill in the art will appreciate that the fact that a slurry is formed indicates that the salt complex is not completely dissolved in the selective crystallization solvent. According to one embodiment the salt complex forms via a heterogeneous complexation whereby solid and liquid produce a solid product. The process proceeds at a lower temperature and therefore requires much less externally added energy than the earlier described processes. For example the temperature can be any temperature above the melting point of the crystallization solvent and below the temperature at which the salt complex decomposes. According to one embodiment the temperature can be about 0 to about 65 C. The mixture can be contacted with the selective crystallization solvent for any time period sufficient to allow the salt complex to form. If the kinetics of salt complex formation is very fast then contacting the mixture with the crystallization solvent instantaneously or for a matter of seconds may be sufficient. Alternatively the mixture can be contacted with the crystallization solvent for a longer period of time for example about 30 seconds to about 24 hours or about 1 minute to about 5 hours. If the mixture containing the carboxylic acid is a solid or a slurry it may be desirable to process the solid or slurry to produce small particle sizes prior to contacting the mixture with the selective crystallization solvent. For example the solid or crude slurry can be ground or agitated to produce particles having small size.

According to an embodiment of the invention the salt complex is recovered for example by filtration to yield a filter cake containing the salt complex and a mother liquor containing solvent and possibly excess crude carboxylic acid starting materials impurities etc. According to one embodiment the salt complex of the carboxylic acid so recovered can be used without further processing or with minimal further processing such as rinsing with solvent drying etc. Some industrially relevant processes will tolerate the salt complex of the carboxylic acid as feed stock in lieu of the free carboxylic acid. For example if a polyester process has a high tolerance for the solvent used to purify TA the TA salt complex may be added directly to the polyester process without recovering the free TA.

Alternatively the salt complex can be further processed to recover the free carboxylic acid. For example the salt complex can be crystallized in one or more second crystallization stages to yield free carboxylic acid. According to an embodiment of the invention the filter cake containing the salt complex is decomposed in a selective crystallization solvent. According to one embodiment the salt complex is essentially completely dissolved during this second crystallization stage and any following second crystallization stages if they are present . The temperature of the second crystallization stage s is typically higher than that of the first stage crystallization to promote complete dissolution of the salt complex. The temperature for the second crystallization stage s can be any temperature at which the salt complex dissolves but the final temperature should be above the temperature at which the salt complex decomposes so that the free carboxylic acid is obtained. Alternatively the salt complex can be decomposed without completely dissolving the salt complex i.e. via a heterogeneous process in a slurry of the salt complex. According to one embodiment the temperature of the second crystallization can be about 65 to about 300 C. Alternatively the temperature can be about 65 to about 200 C. Alternatively the temperature can be about 65 to about 150 C.

Crystallization of free carboxylic acid from the second crystallization stage s can be achieved for example by lowering the temperature of the slurry or solution and or reducing the volume of solvent. When lowering the temperature it is desirable that the temperature remain above the temperature at which the salt complex decomposes. For example the temperature can be reduced to about 60 to about 185 C. alternatively to about 60 to about 100 C. The volume of the solvent can be reduced for example by vacuum or by passing an inert gas stream such as nitrogen over or through the solvent. Alternatively the free carboxylic acid can be crystallized by adding an anti solvent to the second crystallization stage s . Examples of suitable anti solvents include water methanol ethanol and other alcohols acids amines ethers and aromatics.

It may be desirable to provide external energy to the second crystallization stage s for example by stirring or agitation so that the desirable crystal morphology of the free carboxylic acid is obtained. For example desirable processability in polyester manufacturing requires TA crystals be robust have good flow properties and be of a size such that subsequent dissolution can be easily achieved. In general both robustness and good flow properties are characteristics of crystals that are spherical or globular instead of bar or needle shaped. As used herein the term globular will refer to crystals that have good flow properties and robustness. The term globular does not limit the crystal to any particular aspect ratio and may encompass crystals that are spherical oblong potato shaped as opposed to needle or bar shaped.

The free carboxylic acid crystallized during the second crystallization stage s can be collected for example by filtering to yield a filter cake containing the free carboxylic acid. For example if the carboxylic acid is TPA the filter cake obtained from the second crystallization stage s contains purified TPA. This filter cake can be recovered at this point or washed recrystallized from water or another solvent as described below. From this point on the purified TPA is manageable to handle because of the desirable crystal morphology obtained by the second crystallization stage s .

According to an alternative embodiment the carboxylic acid is a mixture of terephthalic acid and one or more other acids such as isophthalic acid. An embodiment of the invention includes a process for separating terephthalic acid from isophthalic acid and or other carboxylic acids. A process for separating terephthalic acid and isophthalic acid is described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 054 610 by Lee et al. the entire contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. Briefly the second crystallization stage s are further subdivided into an early stage wherein TPA is selectively crystallized and recovered and isophthalic acid and or other acids are crystallized from the remaining TPA depleted solution in one or more successive crystallization step s . According to an alternative embodiment the mother liquor that is provided by recovering the salt complex as describe above contains terephthalic acid and isophthalic acid. According to one embodiment terephthalic acid can be precipitated from the mother liquor to yield a terephthalic acid depleted stream and then isophthalic acid can be precipitated from the terephthalic acid depleted stream.

The filter cake containing free carboxylic acid from the second crystallization stage s can be washed with a suitable solvent to remove any adhering crystallization solvent and to facilitate drying of the solvent. Suitable solvents for washing include water methanol ethanol and other alcohols acids amines ethers and aromatics. A particularly suitable rinsing solvent is water. The rinsing can involve briefly washing the free acid with the rinsing solvent soaking the free acid or even completely dissolving the free acid in the rinsing solvent and crystallizing the free acid there from.

Conventional TPA manufacturing processes require relatively high p xylene purity 99.7 because these processes typically employ hydrogenation as the main method for purifying the crude TPA. Although the hydrogenation method is very selective to eliminate the major impurity 4 carboxybenzaldehyde 4 CBA by converting it to p toluic acid the method only operates in the presence of a very small amount of 4 CBA preferably less than 3 000 ppm . An embodiment of the present invention provides a method for purifying the oxidation reactor effluent containing minor amounts of 4 carboxybenzaldehyde 4 CBA 3 carboxybenzaldehyde 3 CBA and toluic acid isomers by incorporating a CBA oxidation step in the process stream. According to this embodiment an oxidant is added to the mother liquor or a portion of the mother liquor obtained by filtering the effluent from the salt complex crystallization which typically contains some amount of CBA. The oxidizing step allows a portion of this CBA to be oxidized to the dicarboxylic acid and the mother liquor to be recycled back to the salt complex crystallization stage thereby increasing the overall efficiency of the process. It may be desirable to adjust the concentration of CBA in the mother liquor that is oxidized for example by purging a portion of the mother liquor and recycling a portion of the mother liquor so that the concentration of CBA in the remaining mother liquor remains within a desirable concentration range. According to an embodiment pure solvent can be distilled from the mother liquor to concentrate the impurities. Optionally impurities in the concentrated mother liquor can be precipitated and recycled to the first crystallizer. According to an embodiment of the invention the CBA range in the concentrated mother liquor is maintained between about 100 ppm and about 50 preferably between about 1 and about 10 and most preferably about 5 .

Examples of suitable oxidants include air enriched air pure oxygen hydrogen peroxide aqueous hydrogen peroxide hydrogen peroxide in an organic liquid ozone carbon tetrachloride trichloroacetaldehyde hexamine acetone cyclohexanone benzophenone cinnamaldehyde dimethyl sulfoxide sulfides chiral oxidants glyoxals organic peroxy acids such as performic acid peracetic acid perbenzoic acid perpropionic acid permaleic acid and perphthalic acid. According to one embodiment the pH of the CBA oxidation step is about 2 to about 6 preferably about 1 to about 4 and even more preferably 1 to about 2.1. The pH of the CBA oxidation can be adjusted with an organic or inorganic acid. Examples of suitable acids include chromic acid hydroflouric acid iodic acid hydrochloric acid sulfuric acid nitric acid selenic acid picric acid trinitrophenol 2 4 6 acid napthalenesulfonic acid benzosulfonic acid trichloroacetic acid oxalic acid dichloroacetic acid trihydroxybenzoic 2 4 6 acid cyclopropane 1 1 dicarbozylic acid acetic acid maleic acid dihydroxymalic acid dihydroxytartaric acid dichloroacetylacetic acid lutidinic acid o nitrobenzoic acid cyanobutyric acid cyanopropionic acid cyanoacetic acid o aminobenzosulfonic acid quinolinic acid bromoacetic acid dinicotinic acid chloropropinic acid malonic acid o bromobenzoic acid chloroacetic acid o iodobenzoic acid chlorobutyric acid o phthalic acid flurobenzoic acid o chlorobenzoic acid p cyanophenoxyacetic acid dihydroxybenzoic 2 2 acid formic acid dihydroxybenzoic 2 5 dcid o hydroxybenzoic acid o cyanophenoxyacetic acid and tartaric acid.

An embodiment of the present invention is an apparatus for implementing the process described above. A simplified schematic of such an apparatus is depicted in . It should be understood that pipelines are in fact being designated when streams are identified and that streams are intended if not stated when materials are mentioned. Moreover flow control valves temperature regulator devices pumps compressors and the like are understood as installed and operating in conventional relationships to the major items of equipment which are shown in the drawings and discussed hereinafter with reference to the continuously operating process of this invention. All of these valves devices pumps and compressors as well as heat exchangers accumulators condensers and the like are included in the term auxiliary equipment . It is in the ability of one of ordinary skill in the art to implement such auxiliary equipment as needed in view of the present disclosure.

Referring to a mixture containing crude carboxylic acid is provided to vessel via stream and a selective crystallization solvent is provided via stream . Vessel can be any suitable vessel known in the art. Vessel preferably contains a stage for contacting the mixture containing carboxylic acid with a selective crystallization solvent to form a slurry of the salt complex and a means for separating the salt complex from the mother liquor. Alternatively these two functions can be performed by multiple pieces of equipment. The salt complex is transferred to vessel via stream and the mother liquor is transferred to vessel via stream . The salt complex is rinsed in vessel with saturated selective crystallization solvent that is provided via stream and or pure selective crystallization solvent that is provided via stream . In the depicted embodiment pure solvent is provided as recycled solvent from vessel . Alternatively the solvent could be added from an external source for example as make up solvent.

The salt complex is transferred to vessel via stream where it is dissolved in selective crystallization solvent. Selective crystallization solvent already containing salt complex and optionally other solvents can be provided via stream . Pure selective crystallization solvent is provided via stream . In the depicted embodiment pure solvent is provided as recycled solvent from vessel . Alternatively the solvent could be added from an external source for example as make up solvent. The temperature of the contents of vessel is maintained such that essentially the entire salt complex decomposes or dissolves. According to one embodiment the temperature of the contents of vessel can be about 65 to about 300 C. The temperature of vessel can be decreased and or the volume of solvent present in vessel can be decreased or a non solvent added to vessel to facilitate the crystallization of free carboxylic acid. For example the volume of solvent can be decreased by passing a stream of inert gas e.g. N over the surface or through the solution. Likewise the temperature can be decreased but preferably the temperature remains above the temperature at which the salt complex decomposes. For example the temperature can be reduced to about 60 to about 100 C. According to one embodiment energy is added to vessel for example by stirring or agitation. Preferably the energy is such that the free carboxylic acid crystals that are formed are globular i.e. have desired flow and processability characteristics. Vessel can be any suitable vessel known in the art and preferably provides a means of dissolving the salt complex in the solvent stirring the solution to provide adequate energy to yield the desirable crystal size and shape recovering the solid free acid crystals and optionally providing additional solvents or anti solvents. These functions can all be performed using one piece of equipment or multiple pieces of equipment. depicts an apparatus having one second crystallization vessel but an alternative embodiment is an apparatus having multiple second crystallization stages.

Selective crystallization solvent is recycled to the first crystallization vessel via stream or optionally recycled to first rinse vessel or optionally can be sent to vessel for solvent recovery. The recovered free acid is transferred to vessel where it is rinsed with a one or more rinsing solvents provided via stream . The depicted embodiment shows stream being provided from an external source but solvent can also be provided as recycled solvent from vessel . The free carboxylic acid can be rinsed by briefly contact with the rinsing solvent by more lengthy contact or soaking in the rinsing solvent or by dissolving the free acid in the rinsing solvent and crystallizing the free acid there from. Free acid obtained from the rinsing stage exits the process via stream . Rinsing solvents from vessel may optionally be recovered in vessel or recycled to vessel or optionally recycled to vessel .

Mother liquor from vessel is transferred to vessel via stream and selective crystallization solvent from vessel is transferred to vessel via stream . The contents of vessel therefore contains selective crystallization solvent and likely one or more of crude free acid starting material partial oxidation products and side products from the acid formation process and possibly other contaminants. In an embodiment of the invention used as a purification for TPA prepared from the oxidation of p xylene or mixed xylenes the primary partial oxidation products are 4 carboxybenzaldehyde 4 CBA 3 carboxybenzaldehyde 3 CBA derived from m xylene and toluic acid isomers with 4 CBA likely being dominant. In such an embodiment the concentration of partial oxidation product can be adjusted by varying the amount of pure solvent recovered from vessel as more pure solvent is recovered the impurities become more concentrated in the concentrated mother liquor . To allow for a material balance an amount of concentrated mother liquor from vessel can be purged via purge stream . The remaining concentrated mother liquor is transferred to vessel via stream . According to one embodiment some of the contents of stream may tend to precipitate. According to one embodiment such precipitants can be removed from stream or recycled for example to vessel . The pH of the contents of vessel can optionally be adjusted by adding pH adjusting reagent via stream . Suitable pH adjusting reagents include acids such as organic and inorganic acids for example chromic acid hydroflouric acid iodic acid hydrochloric acid sulfuric acid nitric acid selenic acid picric acid trinitrophenol 2 4 6 acid napthalenesulfonic acid benzosulfonic acid trichloroacetic acid oxalic acid dichloroacetic acid trihydroxybenzoic 2 4 6 acid cyclopropane 1 1 dicarbozylic acid acetic acid maleic acid dihydroxymalic acid dihydroxytartaric acid dichloroacetylacetic acid lutidinic acid o nitrobenzoic acid cyanobutyric acid cyanopropionic acid cyanoacetic acid o aminobenzosulfonic acid quinolinic acid bromoacetic acid dinicotinic acid chloropropinic acid malonic acid o bromobenzoic acid chloroacetic acid o iodobenzoic acid chlorobutyric acid o phthalic acid flurobenzoic acid o chlorobenzoic acid p cyanophenoxyacetic acid dihydroxybenzoic 2 2 acid formic acid dihydroxybenzoic 2 5 acid o hydroxybenzoic acid o cyanophenoxyacetic acid and tartaric acid. Acids used to adjust the pH can optionally be recovered and recycled from stream . The contents of vessel are transferred to vessel via stream . The contents of vessel are oxidized with oxidant provided via stream and then transferred to vessel via stream . Suitable oxidants include air enriched air pure oxygen hydrogen peroxide aqueous hydrogen peroxide hydrogen peroxide in an organic liquid ozone carbon tetrachloride trichloroacetaldehyde hexamine acetone cyclohexanone benzophenone cinnamaldehyde dimethyl sulfoxide sulfides chiral oxidants glyoxals organic peroxy acids such as performic acid peracetic acid perbenzoic acid perpropionic acid permaleic acid and perphthalic acid. Oxidants and oxidation by products can optionally be recovered and recycled from stream .

Slurries were produced by adding 28 g crude TA containing 2.5 4 CBA to 100 g of NMP in three beakers. The three slurries were maintained at about 41 46 C. while mixing. The samples were filtered and rinsed with saturated PTA NMP solution at 40 C. 4 CBA concentrations were determined by Gas Chromatography. The results are shown in Table 1.

Slurries were produced by adding 28 g crude TA containing 2.5 4 CBA to 100 g of NMP in three beakers while mixing for 30 minutes. The three slurries were maintained at constant temperatures while mixing. Each sample was then filtered and rinsed with saturated PTA NMP solution at its temperature. 4 CBA concentrations were determined by Gas Chromatography. The results are shown in Table 2.

This example illustrates the effect of pH on the oxidation process of 4 CBA with HO. Oxidation was conducted at 25 C. for 300 minutes. The results are shown in Table 3. The results indicate that lowering the pH yields significantly greater oxidation.

