---

title: System and method for creating a presentation using natural language
abstract: The invention provides for a system, method, and computer readable medium storing instructions related to controlling a presentation in a multimodal system. The method embodiment of the invention is a method for the retrieval of information on the basis of its content for incorporation into an electronic presentation. The method comprises receiving from a user a content-based request for at least one segment from a first plurality of segments within a media presentation preprocessed to enable natural language content searchability; in response to the request, presenting a subset of the first plurality of segments to the user; receiving a selection indication from the user associated with at least one segment of the subset of the first plurality of segments and adding the selected at least one segment to a deck for use in a presentation.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09026915&OS=09026915&RS=09026915
owner: AT&T Intellectual Property II, L.P.
number: 09026915
owner_city: Atlanta
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051031
---
The present application is related to Ser. No. 11 207 439 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention relates to media presentations and more specifically to a system and method of creating a presentation using natural language.

In the workplace and classroom a common task is the preparation of a sequence of media segments such as slides to an audience as part of a formal presentation. Microsoft s PowerPoint software provides an example of an application that enables users to prepare a presentation of visual images stepping from one slide to another. Such applications provide users with an opportunity to teach sell give briefings and so forth with more substance and power than merely by speaking.

Use of such presentation software over time results in a collection of old presentations each comprising a plurality of segments. While old presentations are not often used in their entirety in the future individual segments pulled from old presentations are useful in composing new presentations. The problem with the current technology is that users have to sort through existing sources of content manually often one by one in order to find the slides or other segments they need.

Furthermore in many cases where a user is working to create a presentation various images pictures text and other information needs to be researched in order to prepare the presentation. This can be a time consuming process in that the specific information desired by the user may not be readily available.

What is needed in the art is an improved method and system for retrieving electronic presentation segments from existing sources to be used in composing a new presentation.

Additional features and advantages of the invention will be set forth in the description which follows and in part will be obvious from description or may be learned by practice of the invention. The features and advantages of the invention may be realized and obtained by means of the instruments and combinations particularly pointed out in the appended claims. These and other features of the present invention will become more fully apparent from the following description and appended claims or may be learned by the practice of the invention as set forth herein.

The present invention addresses the deficiencies in the prior art. The controls available in a typical presentation system do not allow the user to easily and rapidly find the content required to create a presentation without manually sorting through individual slides. The present invention enhances the control of a user over his or her presentation by introducing the capacity to find and incorporate material into a presentation on the basis of its content above and beyond the original location of that material in the context of a particular presentation.

The invention provides for a system method and computer readable medium storing instructions related to creating an electronic slide presentation using a multimodal system. The method embodiment of the invention is a method for the retrieval of information on the basis of its content for incorporation into an electronic presentation. The method comprises receiving from a user a content based request for at least one segment from a first plurality of segments within a media presentation preprocessed to enable natural language content searchability in response to the request presenting a subset of the first plurality of segments to the user receiving a selection indication from the user associated with at least one segment of the subset of the first plurality of segments and adding the selected at least one segment to a deck for use in a presentation.

Various embodiments of the invention are discussed in detail below. While specific implementations are discussed it should be understood that this is done for illustration purposes only. A person skilled in the relevant art will recognize that other components and configurations may be used without parting from the spirit and scope of the invention.

The present invention enables a user to more efficiently prepare an electronic presentation utilizing existing sources of content. The invention contemplates a multimodal interface where the user can interact with a computing device in multiple ways such as a graphic touch sensitive display a motion sensor interactive system and a voice interaction and natural language dialog.

First a known user system is discussed. is an illustration of a presentation system used in preparing a sequence of prepared slides graphical user interface GUI . GUI may include a current slide field next slide button previous slide button scrolling slide tray speaker notes area slide counter bar slideshow timer bar search field SEARCH button RESTORE button search in field file type field and STOP button. Clicking button clears the contents of search field . The user may specify the location of the search using drop down list such as just on hard drive C presentations folder. The user may specify the file types which the system should return in response to the search in field such as Powerpoint and Microsoft Word. Clicking button while a search is in progress stops the search. The search option is shown by way of example as a feature in PowerPoint where a user inputs data in the field to search the computer for titles of files or previously created PowerPoint presentations. The user must select the option to search which presents the fields and options shown in . However the search mechanism is cumbersome and time consuming.

Current slide field continuously displays to the slide which is selected at that time. Clicking on the next slide button proceeds to the next slide in the deck. Clicking on the previous slide button proceeds to the slide shown just prior to the current slide in the deck. The scrolling slide tray displays thumbnail images of all of the slides in the deck in the order arranged by the user. Speaker notes area may display text accompanying a given slide for use by the user in his or her spoken presentation or to describe the contents of each slide. The function of slide counter bar is simply to show the number of the slide currently on display out of the total number of slides in the deck. Slideshow timer bar continuously displays the elapsed time from the beginning of the presentation and can be used by the user to specify the point in time in the slide show at which each slide should be presented.

A system such as that illustrated in simply matches words specified by a user with words appearing in existing files. Slides located by a prior art system such as that illustrated in require the user to open the source presentation of the desired slide and then manually copy and paste desired content to a new slide in a new slide presentation. By contrast the invention described herein utilizes more highly developed methods for understanding user input. Furthermore the invention streamlines the process of adding existing content to a new presentation.

There is a need for the ability to navigate rapidly and easily to the content required to support a presentation without having to manually sort through and copy and paste content from its original source. A system and method is presented herein that comprises a multimodal graphical user interface capable of content based information retrieval for the creation of new multimedia presentations. The present invention improves upon prior systems by enhancing the user display and enabling the user to use a multimodal search and retrieve mechanism to more efficiently access existing information while preparing a new slide segment presentation. With reference to an exemplary system for implementing the invention includes a general purpose computing device including a processing unit CPU a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . It can be appreciated that the invention may operate on a computing device with more than one CPU or on a group or cluster of computing devices networked together to provide greater processing capability. The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. The system may also include other memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output BIOS containing the basic routine that helps to transfer information between elements within the computing device such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . The computing device further includes storage means such as a hard disk drive a magnetic disk drive an optical disk drive tape drive or the like. The storage device is connected to the system bus by a drive interface. The drives and the associated computer readable media provide nonvolatile storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computing device . The basic components are known to those of skill in the art and appropriate variations are contemplated depending on the type of device such as whether the device is a small handheld computing device a desktop computer or a computer server.

Although the exemplary environment described herein employs the hard disk it should be appreciated by those skilled in the art that other types of computer readable media which can store data that are accessible by a computer such as magnetic cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks cartridges random access memories RAMs read only memory ROM a cable or wireless signal containing a bit stream and the like may also be used in the exemplary operating environment.

To enable user interaction with the computing device an input device represents any number of input mechanisms such as a microphone for speech a touch sensitive screen for gesture or graphical input keyboard mouse motion input speech and so forth. The input may be used by the user to indicate the beginning of a speech search query. The device output can also be one or more of a number of output means. Wherein a presenter display and audience display are convenient they may be used. Further other presenter displays may be utilized as well. For example if the invention is used in a conference setting where multiple people may each need an individual presenter view. Multimodal systems such as the invention enable a user to provide multiple types of input to communicate with the computing device . The communications interface generally governs and manages the user input and system output.

The illustration shows the method embodiment of the invention that is practiced by an exemplary computing device. The method preferably is practiced in the context of a user preparing a presentation. The method begins with the exemplary computing device receiving from a user a content based request. The request relates to a search for at least one segment from a first plurality of segments within a media presentation. The searchable data has been preprocessed to enable natural language content searchability . As an example the user may be preparing a PowerPoint slide show about American history and desire to use a particular slide from an old presentation. The user can state please find the slide about Lexington and Concord . The request may be based on the content of the particular slide the user desires to find. The computing device in response to the request presents a subset of the first plurality of segments to the user . There may be several slides having similar or related content such as about Lexington and Concord. Given that the computing device shows a subset of the first plurality of segments in response to the inquiry the user can easily narrow the selection from the second group of segments by another multimodal input such as touching the touch sensitive screen or by speaking and saying slide number 2 . Suppose three slides matched the inquiry and that in their original slide presentations these slides were numbered 10 12 and 25.

The second group of segments may be assigned new numbers such as slide number 1 2 3 etc. such that the user can easily indicate at least one segment of the subset of the first plurality of segments . For example the user may say slide three instead of being required to say slide twenty five to add that slide to his or her new presentation. Once the computing device receives the user selection it adds the selected at least one segment to a presentation deck .

As can be appreciated the present invention provides an improvement over a simple word search method which may or may not retrieve the desired segments for the user to build a new deck for a presentation. The present invention enables a natural language interface to searching preprocessed content to aid the user in generating a new presentation such as a Powerpoint presentation.

The computing device operated by the user may have a communications connection that allows the user access to a variety of decks or segments. The computing device may communicate via a local network secured network wireless network such as a Bluetooth or any type of wireless protocol or any other communication means to other data that may be preprocessed as a searchable deck. For example if the user is a college professor and has on his or her office computer a slide presentation from a previous lecture that has information pertinent to a new presentation and assuming that the office computer is networked to the computing device running the presentation the user can say please pull the slide regarding the battle of Bunker Hill from my office computer September presentation . Other language of course may be used but the computing device can identify from this the computer to check and which preprocessed presentation the September one to search for the appropriate slide. Similarly the user may have a portable computing device having a preprocessed slide that the user was working on while traveling. The user could say please present from my handheld computer the slide about the battle of Bunker Hill. 

The above functionality is enabled by a connectivity and synchronization between the computing device on which the user is preparing his or her presentation and the other computing device that holds the updated document s . The connectivity may be accomplished via a wired connection a wireless connection such as Bluetooth WiFi a cradle connect Ethernet USB serial port and so forth. The synchronization may involve automatically identifying updated content and indexing the content to the server or presentation computing device such that the updated content is incorporated into the grammar and made searchable via the system.

The computing device storing the updated content may declare when it is connected to the computing device used by the user in preparing his or her presentation that it wants a deck to be made available for processing and indexing. The computing device may then transmit a copy of the relevant information such as the corpus and other information over the connection to the computing device on which the user is preparing his or her presentation.

The illustrations entitled and represent several views of an exemplary graphical user interface GUI . GUI module may include a control view A loader view B and selection view C. Features shared in the child views for which GUI is the parent view may include the control tab loader tab user tab and exit tab .

Control tab may be used to change views to control view A and to indicate when the present view is the control view. Loader tab may be used to change views to loader view B and to indicate when the present view is loader view. User tab may be used to change views to user view C and to indicate when the present view is selection view.

Upon initiating the module GUI an exemplary first screen presented to the user is control view A as illustrated in . This view may contain fundamental controls on which controls in the loader view B and user view C are based as well as additional controls. Controls in the control view A may include an EXIT SYSTEM button PRESENT ON A SEPARATE MONITOR button VOICE SELECTION MODE checkbox SELECT SKIN drop down list QUERY OPTIONS checkbox field SPEECH SCORE value field DECK SET drop down list LOAD DECK SET button and DELETE DECK SET button .

Button when clicked or otherwise initiated by an input exits GUI . Button when clicked or otherwise initiated by an input configures the presentation system to work in concert with a slide show system such as GUI to produce an output signal on a separate display. Checkbox functions as a logical switch within GUI to variously activate or deactivate the option through which a user s voice commands may be used to select the segment to be added to a presentation. Items on drop down list may be selected in order to customize the appearance of GUI to the user. Checkbox may be used to control how queries are evaluated against an index of the contents of the slides. Value field may display speech score pertaining to voice recognition in the computing device. The user may specify the directory of a deck set using drop down list . The directory of a deck set may be loaded for use within GUI via button or deleted from GUI via button .

The term deck may have its standard meaning or may refer to a single media presentation such as a PowerPoint presentation or may refer to a group of presentations of one or more types. For example a deck may be loaded of a group of PowerPoint presentations and a group of Microsoft Word documents and WordPerfect documents. In general the deck is a group of searchable documents that are made available to the user during a presentation. A deck may be grouped onto one computing device or may be distributed among interconnected wired or wireless computing devices.

Thus the modules of system A may be used to exit the GUI configure a separate video monitor set the voice selection mode customize the appearance of the GUI to the user control how queries from the user are evaluated against an index of the contents of slides indicate the speech score specify deck sets and load or delete deck sets to be used within the computing device. In this manner the user can control the behavior appearance and other variable settings of the GUI. Those of ordinary skill in the art will understand the programming languages and means for generating the buttons check boxes drop down lists and value fields which may be contained in control view A.

The second level view within the GUI is the loader view B illustrated in . Important controls on the loader view B include an AVAILABLE DECKS pane an ACTIVE DECKS pane an ACTIVATE DECK button as well as a DEACTIVATE DECKS button GET DECKS FROM A DIFFERENT DIRECTORY button a CREATE GRAMMAR button and a START UP SLIDESHOW button .

Pane contains thumbnails showing the first slide of each available deck. Pane contains thumbnails showing the first slide of each active deck. Available decks may be transferred from pane into pane either by dragging and dropping as in by means of a mouse pointer by voice command or by use of button . Conversely active decks may be deactivated by dragging and dropping by voice command or by means of button . Button allows the user to specify material in directories other than that listed in pane . Button initiates the process addressed by whereby active decks are indexed sufficiently to enable content based queries. When clicked or otherwise initiated button starts up the slideshow as it will appear when displayed to an audience.

The available decks when transmitted to the active deck group via button causes the computing device to preprocess the available deck such that a grammar is created based on the content of the deck. Decks may be selected and preprocessed such that a database is created including a grammar that may be used as part of a spoken dialog interface to retrieve portions of each deck. In the example above an available deck may include several slides that refer to the Battle of Lexington and Concord. The preprocessing of these decks processes the content which may include metadata information or user notes information such that an active deck can be searchable via a voice input. Words associated with segments that may be processed and thus searched may include words or text that describes non text content. For instance image dog describes a picture within a slide. This type of data may be automatically or manually added as part of the preprocessing or may be part of the software used to create the deck or presentation. For example in software such as PowerPoint the user may be asked to provide keywords describing an image in a slide See field . The keywords are available to the preprocessor for future searching and retrieval by the user. The slide or segment may also include audio clips video clips or other features that may be searched or made searchable.

While the available decks may be selected and placed in the available deck fields before preprocessing an aspect of the invention discussed further below is a method and system for searching for decks slides or any document already preprocessed to make it searchable via the natural language interface disclosed herein. In this regard there may be minimal or no further preprocessing of the selected deck via button or in that the selected decks have already been preprocessed.

Consider again the example above of the user making changes or generating an additional slide or slides while traveling and then desiring to access the recently changed slides on a portable computing device. In that case the portable device may have software capable of preprocessing the slide s such that they are available for searching at which point the portable device and the computing device used to prepare the presentation may automatically communicate and synchronize such that the grammar on the user computing device is updated to include the changed slides to make those slides searchable. The slides may also be automatically transferred to the computing device or be accessible via a wired or wireless connection for searching.

Utilizing the controls available on view C the user can specify which decks will be included in content based queries which are executed during the course of a presentation get decks from a different directory create a grammar for use as an understanding model for the system and start up the slide show. The loader view plays a significant role in defining the first plurality of segments discussed in system step see . It is generally understood that the preprocessing of the available decks is performed in advance of a presentation. However there may be instances where a user dynamically while in a presentation may select an available deck process the deck and make it available during the presentation. The architecture of the system supporting some of the functions available to the user via loader view C is further illustrated in .

An aspect of the present invention is demonstrated in the selection view C illustrated in . Controls on the user view C may include a view of the CURRENT SLIDE a preview of the NEXT SLIDE a review of the PREVIOUS SLIDE a CLICK TO SPEAK button a SPEECH FEEDBACK window a scrollable list of slides matching a query from the user and a GO BACK button .

View continuously displays the current slide. Whenever a new slide is added to the presentation it appears in the current view and is inserted into the deck at the point between the previous slide and the next slide. If there is no previous slide the current view is of the first in the deck. Likewise if there is no next slide the current view is of the last slide in the deck. Preview is a thumbnail image of the slide immediately succeeding the current slide. Review is a thumbnail image of the slide immediately preceding the current slide. Button when clicked or otherwise initiated indicates to system that the user s vocalizations should be interpreted as commands for use in controlling the system. Other speech initiation controls may exist as well such as a particular trigger word such as computer search for . Window displays to the user text generated by the computing device to show explicitly the manner in which the system has interpreted an input preferably in the form of speech from the user. List displays thumbnail images of segments which the system most closely associates with the text it has received via an input from the user. In the event that the user desires to return to previous material he or she can do so using button .

Thus the user view C provides simple controls allowing the user to view the current slide being displayed preview the next slide in a prepared sequence review the previous slide in a prepared sequence indicate to the system that his or her speech should be interpreted as commands for the multimodal presentation control system verify the accuracy of the system s voice recognition module in the form of text view a second group of media segments retrieved by the system in response to the user inquiry and go back to the previous system state as needed. The architecture of the system supporting the functions available to the user via selection view C is illustrated in .

Again as an example if the user clicks the CLICK TO SPEAK button and says let s go find the slide about Lexington and Concord the system will return and present the group of slides in response to the inquiry in field . They may be numbered or presented in some other fashion such that the user can easily narrow down which slide or slides to insert into the new presentation deck.

The main operation of the system that is relevant for this patent submission occurs in the user view C see also . Once a user has selected presentations using the loader view B he or she may switch to the user view C in order to access the contents of loaded decks. The system supports two kinds of commands basic commands and content based commands. Basic commands may be used for navigating among slides such advancing to the next slide going back to the previous slide jumping to the first or last slide jumping to a slide by number and going back. All of these basic commands can be given in speech. For example next slide please please show the previous slide please show slide five go back. All basic commands apply in like manner to any presentation and without regard to the content of a presentation. Content based commands in contrast allow the user to navigate to slides based on alphanumeric text words themes and phrases that appear in the slides metadata user notes and so forth. The following are examples of content based commands please show slides about internet security can you find me the slide on pension planning do you have a slide about multimodal interfaces These content based commands and the interface around them are the central part of the invention described herein.

Further in user view in a pull down menu associated with a list of key phrases is included. This enables the user to easily access some basic or commonly used phrases within the content. This and other pull down menus may be utilized to improve the speech recognition and to avoid manually sorting through content. For example this pull down menu may be pre populated with phrases that summarize the content of segments such as Lexington Concord and Bunker Hill . The user may then be able to navigate to specific content using this pull down menu instead of the speech interface. The source for the data for the pull down menu is the preprocessed decks and the content analysis performed.

The diagram in shows the interaction flow method when a user gives a content based request during a presentation. The first row of steps illustrate various input means to the system. In step the user says what he or she wants such as give me slides about Service over IP . In step the user types what he or she wants. In step the user uses graffiti to write what he or she wants. Graffiti may include handwritten input. Other means of input may also be used such as motion input or a combination of inputs modalities. In step the system receives the request performs an intelligent search of available data and presents options to the user which may be accomplished graphically. In step the user selects among the options presented in step . Finally in step the system adds the selected slide or segment to the deck being created.

In the first step the user can issue the content based query either by speech typing or writing relevant words using a pen . The inclusion of these three specific means of input is not intended to preclude the use of other means of input capable of conveying meaningful content to the system. In the second step the system makes use of the graphical display section of the user view illustrated in to present options to the user from which to make a selection. The advantage of this for the user is that he or she can view the possibilities during a presentation without necessarily opening each of the existing presentations in which the various segments were originally used. The next step is for the user using voice gesture pen via touch screen or by other means to select the desired slide from the group of slides presented in step . In the final step of method the selected slide is then added to the deck being created.

The system illustrated in is the underlying architecture of the multimodal system for content based control . shows the components of the system. The user interacts with a multimodal GUI . Variations on this GUI are illustrated in B and C. Interface communicates using HTTP or some other protocol with an index server which in response to a content based command returns a list of the slides or segments which are relevant to the query. This step can also be achieved using Xpath queries over an XML version of the slide presentation without an HI IP connection or index server. The interface is connected over TCP IP sockets to a facilitator agent MCUBE which enables system components to communicate with each other. Also connected to MCUBE is a speech client which collects speech from the user when indicated by the user please see button and communicates with the speech recognition engine such as AT T s Watson speech recognizer which draws upon a language model as is known in the art in order to provide a transcription of the command given by the user. The Natural Language Understanding component NLU converts the recognized speech into a semantic representation in XML using a language understanding model which the multimodal UI can execute. The NLU is currently achieved using a finite state transducer such as are known to those of skill in the art. Application Ser. No. 09 904 253 filed Jul. 12 2001 and Ser. No. 10 278 921 filed Oct. 24 2002 and U.S. Pat. No. 6 868 383 represent information related to this technology that is incorporated herein by reference. This step could also be achieved with other kinds of grammar based or trained understanding systems. The multimodal user interface also communicates with the presentation software see . This is used in order to access content on the slides get graphical thumbnails of slides and change what is shown to the audience. Presentation system represents the control of the presenter view and the audience view of the presentation. It is understood that any type of spoken dialog modules for speech recognition language understanding and so forth may be utilized. There is no specific speech technology that is essential to the practice of the invention.

The content of slides within a presentation or presentations is used to create an index a list of key phrases and a grammar. These elements when used in combination allow the slides in presentation to be searched and retrieved on the basis of their contents. As discussed above this process in one aspect of the invention is performed for presentations documents slides segments or other data in advance of the user beginning to generate a new presentation. The preprocessing can be done for this group of data that can then be searched and selected by the user for inclusion in a new presentation.

Embodiments within the scope of the present invention may include computer readable media for carrying or having computer executable instructions or data structures stored thereon. Such computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by a general purpose or special purpose computer. By way of example and not limitation such computer readable media can comprise RAM ROM EEPROM CD ROM or other optical disk storage magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to carry or store desired program code means in the form of computer executable instructions or data structures. When information is transferred or provided over a network or another communications connection either hardwired wireless or a combination thereof to a computer the computer properly views the connection as a computer readable medium. Thus any such connection is properly termed a computer readable medium. Combinations of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

Computer executable instructions include for example instructions and data which cause a general purpose computer special purpose computer or special purpose processing device to perform a certain function or group of functions. Computer executable instructions also include program modules that are executed by computers in stand alone or network environments. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components and data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Computer executable instructions associated data structures and program modules represent examples of the program code means for executing steps of the methods disclosed herein. The particular sequence of such executable instructions or associated data structures represents examples of corresponding acts for implementing the functions described in such steps.

Those of skill in the art will appreciate that other embodiments of the invention may be practices in network computing environments with many types of computer system configurations including personal computers hand held devices multi processor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. Embodiments may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by local and remote processing devices that are linked either by hardwired links wireless links or by a combination thereof through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

Although the above description may contain specific details they should not be construed as limiting the claims in any way. Other configurations of the described embodiments of the invention are part of the scope of this invention. For example while Microsoft s PowerPoint application has been mentioned the invention is not limited to slideshows but is applicable to any presentation where content needs to be accessible and searchable. For example movies may be preprocessed in this way where the subtitle information is processed and a grammar created that associates the content or portion of the text with a scene such that the user can say please take me to the scene where Darth Vader says I am your father . In this regard Ser. No. 11 213 457 is incorporated herein by reference. Applying the video context to the present invention assume a deck comprises both a PowerPoint presentation and a preprocessed movie such as Star Wars episode V. The user could be in the middle of the slideshow and access segments from the movie by saying present the scene where Darth Vader says I am your father . One or more indexed segments of the video presentation may be shown on the user display for selection and presentation to the audience. Similarly such video segments may be available for insertion as video clips into a multimedia presentation that a user is preparing. In this manner it can be seen that any type of segmented multimedia presentation may be preprocessed and included or accessible as a deck. Different types of presentations may also be accessible to enhance the power of the user s presentation. Accordingly the appended claims and their legal equivalents should only define the invention rather than any specific examples given.

