---

title: Security protection apparatus and method for endpoint computing systems
abstract: A unified security management system and related apparatus and methods for protecting endpoint computing systems and managing, providing, and obtaining security functions is described. Various forms of the system, apparatus and methods may be used for improved security, security provisioning, security management, and security infrastructure.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08938799&OS=08938799&RS=08938799
owner: 
number: 08938799
owner_city: Raleigh
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050615
---
The present invention pertains to a unified security management system and related apparatus and methods for protecting endpoint computing systems capable of communications with a network including methods for obtaining operating and paying for multiple security functions via the system apparatus and methods.

The word endpoint will be used here to refer to an endpoint computing system for example a computing systems such as a server a desktop or laptop PC a PDA or a Smartphone or a set top box. The words endpoint host or host hereafter refer to a primary processor based computing system supported by any primary operating system. Conventionally one endpoint often comprises only one host and in such case a host is an endpoint such as a conventional desktop PC typically having a main processor possibly one or more coprocessors and typically running an operating system. Additional subsystems such as various peripherals network interface devices modems etc with or without their own operating systems are sometimes connected to such endpoint hosts for a variety of purposes.

Attacks on computer systems have advanced in variety and sophistication. Security functions work to protect endpoints and can generally be categorized into two groups defense functions and immunization functions.

The functions in this group are provided to computing systems for defending directly against known or unknown attacks. The functions can be implemented outside or inside an endpoint or equivalently as network based or host based respectively. Various implementations of these functions are well known in the art. Brief descriptions of several defense functions are provided in the following.

Cryptography is related to confidentiality for example in using encryption decryption for privacy integrity for example in using a hashing capability to prevent data from being modified during transit and authenticity for preventing identity spoofing for example using digital certificates and in general determining who is a valid user . Cryptography functions are often incorporated in IPSec Internet Protocol Security or SSL Secure Socket Layer for virtual private network VPN deployments as is well known. In applications confidentiality integrity and authenticity function procedures may also be used individually to meet specific needs.

Firewalls are often deployed for example where access control is enforced. Generally a perimeter firewall is deployed as either hardware and or software at the perimeter of a private network whereas an endpoint firewall is often deployed as software within an endpoint.

Antivirus functions protect computers from viruses worms and trojans. We use virus here as a general term to also represent the other two types of such attack phenomena. Antivirus typically acts primarily by scanning files and comparing them against a database describing signatures of known viruses and against sets of characteristics that tend to reflect behaviors of unknown viruses. Files can be scanned at desired times computer wide or upon actions such as opening closing or loading for execution. In addition this function may also scan the traversing traffic stream. The traffic streams such as email web file transfers etc. can contain viruses that may not exist in the form of a file during attempted attacks. Antivirus functions are well known in the art.

IDS utilizes a sensor or sensors to detect and alarm intrusion attempts and the IPS function appropriately prevents the intrusion process from continuing.

An application firewall is typically placed as a standalone apparatus before a server to learn the protected application. It intercepts and analyzes all incoming and outgoing application layer traffic and profiles the content and flow patterns of the application. It may also simultaneously build or modify protection policies. These policies may also be manually adjusted to fit user requirements to provide desired protection behaviors against deviation from normal application behavior.

Application proxy functions in general exist in two forms a forward proxy or a reverse proxy. A reverse proxy coordinates between external clients entering a server for example a web server within a private network. The role of a reverse proxy is to provide a degree of isolation between the server within a private network and external clients thus securing the server and enabling appropriate control over the way the application is presented to the clients. A forward proxy on the other hand is targeted at offloading real time traffic between the private network and the Internet by caching client requests and responses etc. The forward proxy may also provide isolation between a private network and the Internet. The application proxy thoroughly examines the content of each traffic stream before the traffic stream enters or leaves an application proxy apparatus to determine whether the stream conforms to pre specified security policy and whether to allow or deny passage through that apparatus.

Application Filtering filters communications associated with applications that typically have been deemed to pose security or productivity threats. Examples of such applications that may facilitate intrusion attempts are Peer to Peer file sharing applications such as KaZaa instant messenger applications such as AOL and Yahoo Messengers and adware and spyware components.

Content Filtering is a function that filters for example URLs and SPAMs to make efficient use of network and human resources and to balance employee work related Internet use and surfing.

This group includes functions for proactively providing computing systems immunity to known or unknown attacks. Deployment of immunization functions can be agent based where an agent software module is installed in each endpoint computing system or agentless where no agent software is required. Various implementations of these functions are well known in the art. Brief descriptions of several immunization functions are provided in the following.

Patch management includes processes and tools for managing the deployment and maintenance of software and updates. With the increasing number of patches service packs and vulnerability updates from operating system and application vendors keeping them organized informed and up to date is a tedious and ongoing task.

Configuration management helps to monitor a computing system s current configuration and record configuration changes. It strengthens security assurance by enforcing configuration conforming to defined policy.

This function typically determines out of compliance policy security settings based on standardized policy templates and enforces policies to bring computing systems back into compliance thereby proactively mitigating system vulnerabilities.

The goal of running a vulnerability scanner is to identify endpoints that are open to known vulnerabilities. Vulnerability scanning functions typically check vulnerabilities in various categories such as password integrity file attributes system configuration network settings etc.

This function ensures information is used as intended based on policies assigned to users. It manages who can access sensitive information and how the sensitive information can be used such as print copy paste etc.

This function is a process used for collecting computing system asset data such as hardware and software version license and cost information how often they are used trouble records etc. This data can be used in evaluating security concerns total cost of ownership depreciation licensing and maintenance.

This function pertains to password and user ID administration for a part or all of the users within an enterprise. It involves the management of password and user ID issuing changing renewing resetting terminating automation etc.

Background observations will be provided now on aspects of deployment of defense functions and immunization functions in enterprise networks.

Conventionally the deployment of defense functions in enterprise networks can be network based or host based or both. The host based deployment requires multiple defense function software modules to be installed in each host. The deployment of immunization functions is generally host based and requires an agent to be installed in each host for each supported immunization function.

Consequently a deployed security infrastructure consisting of multiple defense and immunization functions may burden the host with multiple defense function software and a number of agents for supporting the corresponding immunization functions. This situation may create software conflict and registry corruption issues in the host and cause end user productivity loss and unnecessary IT labor cost for testing and validation which may be exacerbated as the software upgrade patch incidences for security functions and operating system increase.

It may also create issues such as performance degradation and security vulnerability where security functions may be disabled by malware or human carelessness.

In addition the aforementioned multiple defense and immunization functions are managed by multiple vendors management systems. The resulting heterogeneous environment gives rise to duplicated processes and technical and management complexity leading to high total cost of ownership TCO and low return on investment ROI .

Background observations will now be provided related to acquiring adequate security services for residential Internet users.

The vast majorities of residential internet users generally do not have sufficient knowledge on computer security and thus are unlikely to have adequate security protection. Another observation is that the user may experience disruptions that require retries and or reboots during a security function download and computer behavior changes after the download. Another observation is that it is generally costly to acquire an adequate number of defense and immunization functions.

Background observations will now be provided related to residential Internet user subscription and billing methods for security services.

One practical aspect of security for the residential user is the need to subscribe to and pay for multiple security services. Billing and user payments are largely handled via separate subscriptions separate bills and separate payment processes.

Another observation is that numerous security vendors in the marketplace are available to provide various solutions to counter various security threats. These vendors desire exposure to potential markets. Users desire exposure to information about available security products that may be subscribed to or otherwise obtained. Despite the existence of information sources on the Internet and elsewhere the necessary processes of identifying desirable vendors and products are inconvenient and often time consuming.

Password management is integral to overall endpoint security and is associated with many unmet needs both for residential users and especially for enterprise endpoint users and IT managers. It is difficult for end users to remember numerous and periodically changing sets of passwords user IDs and so end users oftentimes choose not to conform to security policy or practice and instead for example write passwords user IDs information down on a post on or into a computer file. For end users who do conform to good security practice may forget their passwords and or user IDs and they must typically call a helpdesk and request a password reset in order to re enter applications or they must via other means obtain a new password user ID pair. This process reduces end user productivity and adds an extra load and cost to already burdened helpdesk.

The present invention pertains to a unified security management system which in various embodiments may comprise various component systems and methods including for example a management server and associated database system and a hardware and software security subsystem herein called a Security Utility Blade SUB . A SUB in various embodiments may run its own operating system with a dedicated processor and in various embodiments a SUB may reside in a managed endpoint or in close association with an endpoint internally or externally connected with an endpoint as well as to a network.

The unified security management system may be used in various embodiments to form a unified management zone UMZ for managed endpoints. At the edge of the zone controls from various security management systems from any combination of vendors may be terminated interpreted and translated into a set of predetermined formats for communicating with managed endpoints within the UMZ without direct access to the endpoints by vendors security management systems. Any new software may be stored in a repository database before deployment. As such the security functions from various vendors security management systems can be added to or removed from the zone without the vendors security management systems having direct access to the endpoints in the zone.

The abovementioned SUB a subsystem to an endpoint may be used to support a unified security management system and may comprise for example a security function software module repository and execution unit and an immunization functions related unified agent. Related methods for integrated security will also be described including methods for password management using a SUB for obtaining multiple defense function software modules via a unified security management system and methods for unified subscription billing and payment handling related to obtaining those software modules.

A unified security management system may be used to form a unified management zone for managed endpoints the system comprising typically a management server and associated database system and a SUB subsystem in each member endpoint in the UMZ. With the provisioning of the management server security management systems from any combination of vendors can be added to or removed from the UMZ on demand without involving any direct access from vendors security management systems to the managed endpoints in the UMZ. Thus operations within this zone may be made more homogeneous automated and accurate. Little or no extra IT labor is required for validating and diagnosing in the case of some embodiments and applications. In addition the UMZ approach may also enable standardized procedures for deployment of security functions to the endpoints lowering IT operations costs among numerous other potential advantages of various particular embodiments and applications.

A unified security management system may also be configured in some embodiments to enable methods that implement network access control and identity management.

A unified security management system may also be configured in some embodiments to enable mechanisms that unify and automate security subscriptions and enable single bill consolidated billing methods.

A unified security management system may also be configured in some embodiments to enable mechanisms that allow Internet service providers and IT service providers to offer managed security services for enterprise and residential end users.

The management server on one side may connect in some embodiments to a management server operator s console multiple vendors security management systems and if any other security management systems via either proprietary or standard communication channels or both. A unified interface converter which may be for example a software module at the front end of the management server or a standalone hardware and software system may be provided to convert communication formats into a unified format known to the management server. Various vendors security management systems may thus be able to connect centrally to a management server and the administrator of the management server may change security functions and or vendors on demand. The other side of the management server may communicate with a SUB in each of the managed endpoints via either proprietary or standard channels.

The management server may function in some embodiments as an action enforcer by using a proxy. A proxy may terminate and authenticate requests from one or multiple security vendors management systems then interpret and translate them into a predetermined format and send them via a connecting network to a target SUB for desired actions. The responses from the target SUB traverse back to the senders of the requests via the management server.

The management server may also function as a data collector collecting endpoint information emanating from SUBs of the managed endpoints and as a software distribution coordinator coordinating software downloads.

The management of management servers can be structured in hierarchical manner comprising such entities as head end management server or tail end management server.

We now turn to the SUB subsystem. The SUB functions in some embodiments as an open platform for repository of defense function software modules and optionally immunization agent software modules from any participating vendors and such embodiments also provide resources for execution of the modules. A SUB may in some embodiments comprise a dedicated embedded unified agent for supporting all immunization functions and optionally one or more agent functions to support defense function modules. The SUB may be placed at the network interface point wireline or wireless in various form factors in various types of endpoints. Different types of endpoints may typically use different subsets of available defense and immunization functions. The SUB may include processing resources that may be allocated or partitioned in various ways for example as circuitry in the form of a single chip or multiple chips and peripheral circuitry. The circuitry may include one or more processors. This circuitry may also incorporate a general purpose CPU. Some embodiments of the SUB may incorporate special circuitry in the form of a Data Stream Inspection Treatment DSI T optionally in chip form. These and other optional circuits may be designed for appropriate power consumption and throughput for use with various types of endpoints such as desktop PCs laptops servers and wireless devices. In various embodiments a SUB runs an operating system OS separate from any host operating system and which may be a security OS or security centric OS referred to herein as a SUBOS. Such a SUBOS may be qualified under extensive security tests and certified by various government or independent testing labs to be also described as a security hardened OS.

One or more database systems may be attached to the management server as a repository for endpoint information activity log software patch updates etc. for management auditing forensic purposes etc.

Password management may be configured as a SUB enabled service in some embodiments allowing an end user to securely store and retrieve password and user ID pairs locally at the SUB of the end user s endpoint. Through implementation via a SUB previously provided services may be provided far more efficiently such that for example in an enterprise environment helpdesk calls for password user ID assistance can be largely avoided. The SUB may also support in some embodiments various other log on capabilities such as Single Sign On SSO .

A unified security management system and several apparatus and associated methods for providing endpoint computing system security are described. In the following description for purposes of explanation numerous details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the claimed subject matter. However it will be apparent to one skilled in the art that these specific details are not required in order to practice the claimed subject matter.

The Unified Security Management System as embodied in may be used to form a Unified Management Zone for the managed endpoints within which the security operations are more homogeneous automated and accurate. For example within such a zone little or no extra IT labor may be required for validating and troubleshooting certain security functionalities. For example Unified Interface Converter may allow an administrator of Management Server to change security functions and vendors on demand without involving direct access from vendors security management systems to the managed endpoints. A description of example embodiments of functional elements in this zone is given below.

The SUB may function in some embodiments as an open platform on which some or all of host based defense function software modules and optionally immunization agent software modules from various vendors can be downloaded and executed in a Repository and Execution Unit . The software modules may be downloaded from defense function vendors security management systems and may then be stored in database system by way of Management Server . Those modules may then be downloaded into a SUB based on the target endpoint s security needs provisioned in the Management Server . In some cases the modules may be downloaded from various vendors security management systems directly to SUB .

Numerous other alternative embodiments are envisioned both functionally and in terms of forms of specific means for providing those functions. For example SUB may provide multiple immunization functions without defense function capabilities or any combination of immunization and defense functions may be provided for in various embodiments.

A Unified Agent may be natively embedded in some embodiments of SUB to support immunization agent functions and optionally to support defense functions. The supported functions of Unified Agent may include functions such as ones to provide information to the host get information from the host monitor host activities upload and download coordination between SUB and Management Server over a channel and others related to security functions. Unified Agent may be managed by a Management Server .

Management Server may be used as a managing entity of a unified security management system. Its functions may include but are not limited to the following. It may function as a data collector that collects endpoint information such as configuration event log etc. from SUB for example in a predefined time interval and stores the information into database . It may also function as an action enforcer where Management Server may use a proxy function to terminate and authenticate requests from various management systems and for applications such as vulnerability scan password reset or policy enforcement etc. Then proxy may interpret or translate the requests into a set of predetermined formats used only within zone and send the requests to the target SUB . Conversely responses from target SUB may traverse back to Management Server and be passed under control of Management Server to management systems originating the requests.

Database system may be used as a repository for endpoint information auditing and forensic data and defense function software modules patches and updates through the coordination of Management Server via a secure channel . As such management systems and are in effect able to fetch information from an endpoint or deposit data to an endpoint via Database System without directly accessing the endpoint. Database System may serve one or multiple zones in various embodiments envisioned.

A control and feedback mechanism between Management Server and connecting network may be provided over connection to support functions such that security decisions of Management Server can be disseminated into connecting network for further security related actions such as access control etc. The connecting network may be for example a private network or public network or both.

In an embodiment such as represented in a SUB is installed in a slot of motherboard of an endpoint such as in this example a server or desktop PC. The SUB may comprise at least a Repository and Execution Unit and a Unified Agent . The Repository and Execution Unit may perform at least the repository and execution tasks for security function software modules which may be obtained for example via a unified security management system as will be described. The Unified Agent may perform tasks at least to support immunization agent functions. The Repository and Execution Unit and a Unified Agent may comprise any appropriate combination of and partitioning of computational resources capable of carrying out and supporting their described functions including resources such as processor and program logic as well as other forms of circuitry and additional processing support. They may be partially separate physically in some embodiments or realized partially using a common set of physical resources.

The SUB is located between the network and the host in order to be in position to intercept all traffic to and from the host and provide security isolation between host and the network. By acting in appropriate ways according to its defense function components it may protect the host against attacks coming from the network side whether from external public or internal private networks and it may also in some embodiments prevent the network from receiving attacks or other undesired traffic emanating from the host.

In embodiments such as the one depicted in the SUB function may be implemented in for example chip or chipset form or printed circuit module mounted on or embedded in a motherboard with Network Interface Circuitry provided separately within the endpoint or as shown in integrated within a SUB .

Another example embodiment is depicted in where for supporting a laptop PC or intelligent device such as PDA Personal Data Assistant or Smartphone SUB may be inserted as a plug in or slide in or build in unit in appropriate standard or non standard form factors.

The functionality of various embodiments in different form factors as depicted in the example drawings showing SUB SUB and SUB need not differ simply due to the use of one of the possible form factors. Of course embodiments in some form factors may tend to differ in ways well known in the art as appropriate according to host characteristics. For example a laptop or other battery powered or mobile unit may appropriately incorporate power saving design options features supporting wireless communications or other such variations appropriate to for example the host computer s low power or mobile computing environment. To reduce duplication in the following functional descriptions functional descriptions of SUB embodiments should be understood to apply as well to embodiments in any of the variety of appropriate form factors.

A more detailed exemplary embodiment of a SUB will now be described. A SUB as depicted in comprises a Network Interface Part Network Interface Circuitry Inter circuitry Interface ICI Security Utility Unit SUU and an operating system for example a Security Utility Blade Operating System SUBOS .

The Network Interface Part may be a hardware interface such as a connector in the case of wired network connections or an antenna for wireless connection located to form a connection between the Network Interface Circuitry and a transmission medium such as twisted pair wire coaxial cable fiber optic cable or wireless link. When in the form of a connector it may be either electronic or optical. The Network Interface Circuitry performs functions similar to those of the well known Network Interface Card NIC in a computer system such that the computer can be in communications with a network. The Network Interface Circuitry may include either wireline or wireless network interface functions. As with a typical NIC the Network Interface Part and the Network Interface Circuitry and in some cases other elements of the SUB may be designed to work with a particular type of network such as Ethernet or ATM Asynchronous Transfer Mode .

The ICI is an interface between the Network Interface Circuitry and Security Utility Unit SUU . The ICI may incorporate specific circuitry to handle proprietary or standard based interconnecting functions.

The SUU may comprise a set of circuitry including one or more processors to perform the processing typically required to support an extensive set of security functions. A more detailed description of an exemplary embodiment of an SUU is provided below. The high performance nature of the SUU may be significantly enhanced by pairing with an appropriate embodiment of a real time operating system. The operating system may comprise a standard operating system of types commonly available or may instead comprise an OS specifically appropriate for security applications such as a Security Utility Blade Operating System SUBOS .

In a more detailed representative embodiment as shown in the SUU may be comprised of several major functional blocks including a Data Stream Inspection and Treatment unit a General Purpose Processor multiple memory systems and a bus interface . Other partitionings of computing resources in various forms of hardware and software may also be used in various embodiments.

Data Stream Inspection and Treatment DSI T unit generally carries out tasks related to real time examination of the incoming and outgoing traffic and treatment based on security policy. The DSI T unit may include an embedded inspection engine to accelerate the performance of content inspection. Such unit may be called upon to perform functions including IP defragmentation and TCP reassembly TCP IP protocol decode application protocol decode and application payload inspections and other operations to support defense function processes incorporated in the SUB system.

General Purpose Processor along with DSI T unit may be used to provide the required computing power to support an extensive set of security functions. The Memory Systems such as ROM SRAM and DRAM provide required storage. The bus interface to local bus may allow the SUU to connect to the host . The resources of SUB may not be accessible by host so as to form isolation in the direction from host to SUB . The local bus may for example comprise a standard PCI Peripheral Component Interconnect bus based on a local bus standard developed by Intel Corporation or other variations of such interconnect systems.

In the embodiment as depicted in Traffic Distributor Data Collector Action Enforcer Control and Management Plane etc. are common elements in Unified Agent for supporting the sub agents through for the corresponding immunization functions. Some or all of the sub agents through may be used depending on the degree of immunization for which the endpoint is configured. The Unified Agent also may support the required agent function to perform subscription and billing management .

Patch Management sub agent may periodically or otherwise communicate with the endpoint host through Data Collector for software version and patch signature information and may store it in an on board memory or database. When polled by Unified Agent Manager sub agent relays host s software and patch information to the Unified Agent Manager which may take any of several actions such as deciding whether a new patch is needed. When Unified Agent Manager initiates a new patch delivery sub agent may use Action Enforcer to coordinate with the host for a download. SUU provides an isolated controlled and security hardened environment for patch management sub agent to handle patch management procedures automatically or manually if desired. The patch management sub agent may comprise a software module residing and executing in Unified Agent .

Under configuration policy for an endpoint configuration management sub agent may use Data Collector to periodically examine the host s configuration database for example a registry and coordinate with Unified Agent Manager to record report or alarm a change in one embodiment. Through Action Enforcer the sub agent may correct any misconfiguration that for example may give write access improperly to system directories too much read access or sharing of sensitive data with weak or no passwords etc. In addition sub agent also may help to turn off through Action Enforcer unneeded services provided in the host operating system such as telnet remote registry etc. In addition sub agent also may include other configuration related capabilities such as registry maintenance etc. The SUU provides an isolated controlled and security hardened environment for configuration management sub agent to handle configuration management procedures automatically or manually if desired. The configuration management sub agent may comprise a software module residing and executing in Unified Agent .

Policy compliance and enforcement sub agent may be used to check with an endpoint host through Data Collector for configuration and security profile data and store it in an on board memory or database. When polled for example by Unified Agent Manager the sub agent may respond with appropriate host profile information to Unified Agent Manager which may take any of several appropriate actions such as generate alarms or report an out of compliance event. If an out of compliance event occurred the Unified Agent Manager may then coordinate automatically or via manual assistance with sub agent to download an update or take other proper measures through Action Enforcer . The SUU provides an isolated controlled and security hardened environment for policy compliance and enforcement sub agent to handle policy compliance and enforcement procedures automatically or manually if desired. The policy compliance and enforcement sub agent may comprise a software module residing and executing in Unified Agent .

Vulnerability Scanning sub agent may hold an on board database that stores required vulnerability checks in various categories such as password integrity file attributes system configuration network settings etc which may be updated by Unified Agent Manager . Thus when Unified Agent Manager initiates a request for vulnerability scan on one or multiple categories sub agent will feed packet streams into the host through Data Collector and collect the response from the host. The sub agent may then send response information back to Unified Agent Manager where the response information may be compared with a database of known vulnerabilities to identify vulnerabilities at the host. Unified Agent Manager may initiate a fix to the identified vulnerabilities via sub agent using Action Enforcer . The SUU provides an isolated controlled and security hardened environment for Vulnerability Scanning sub agent to handle vulnerability scanning procedures automatically or manually if desired. The Vulnerability Scanning sub agent may comprise a software module residing and executing in Unified Agent .

The information collected via Data Collector for supporting the aforementioned immunization functions may also be used for supporting Asset Management to improve the utilization of endpoint hardware and software assets to minimize total cost of ownership and maximize return on investment. The Asset Management sub agent may be used to check endpoint assets such as hardware and software version license and cost information how often they are used trouble records etc. and feed the results to Unified Agent Manager for further use. The SUU provides an isolated controlled and security hardened environment for Asset Management sub agent to handle asset management procedures automatically or manually if desired. The Asset Management sub agent may comprise a software module residing and executing in Unified Agent .

The Sensitive Data Management sub agent may utilize a policy database which may be on board to store the clearance of an authenticated end user furnished by a system administrator via Unified Agent Manager . The sub agent may ensure information is used as intended through access and usage control. Based on a policy database sub agent may control which sensitive information in external file servers can be accessed by the end user and how the accessible data is to be used such as via screen capture printing being operated on by valid applications copying to a portable media drive etc. The SUU provides an isolated controlled and security hardened environment for Sensitive Data Management sub agent to handle sensitive data management procedures automatically or manually if desired. The Sensitive Data Management sub agent may comprise a software module residing and executing in Unified Agent .

Various embodiments of the SUB may be used in providing methods of Password Management PM . In carrying out some of the PM methods the SUB may for example examine two way traffic and in a secure manner collect and store PM related data in memory. The following is one example a PM method using an embodiment of a SUB at an endpoint.

Password recovery may be enabled using embodiments of SUB based on the provided isolated controlled and security hardened environment and ability to examine two way traffic and store data in memory. The following is an example.

During an enrollment process when a user is first time registering to servers or applications Password Management sub agent in SUU may examine the two way data stream via Data Collector . The Data Collector may then capture and store securely each user s encrypted single or multiple Password and ID pairs and Challenge Response user profile in an on board database. In the meantime similar Password and ID and Challenge Response information is saved in the target server s management system for authentication use.

When a user forgets his her password ID the following or similar procedures may be carried out to resolve the situation 

For a manual approach the user for example calls a helpdesk to make a password ID recovery request. Then the helpdesk authenticates the user with his her Challenge Response user profile. Once authenticated the helpdesk may use Unified Agent Manager to access user s sub agent to reveal desired Password ID pair s through Action Enforcer on the user s monitor. The displayed information will then be erased after a pre defined time. No resetting of password ID is required because the original information is securely held and supplied to the user by the SUB .

For an automatic approach the user may interact and authenticate with sub agent through Action Enforcer biometrically or with Challenge Response user profile answers. Once authenticated sub agent reveals the desired Password ID set on the user s monitor. The displayed information will then be erased after a pre defined time. No process of resetting password ID via helpdesk is required. This approach may or may not involve Unified Agent Manager .

Once the user is signed on with the host the sub agent may conduct sign on procedures on behalf of the user for desired servers and applications. This procedure is called Single Sign On and well known in the art.

The Unified Agent Manager may disable the host sign on process by sending a command to sub agent to avoid unwanted sign on due to Human Resource or other issues that may cause a potential internal attack hazard thus giving time for IT personnel to reconfigure systems.

Another example PM method using an embodiment of a SUB at an endpoint allows users to store their single or multiple Password and ID pairs and Challenge Response user profiles directly into a sub agent . To retrieve the Password ID a user may interact and authenticate with sub agent through Action Enforcer biometrically or with Challenge Response user profile answers. Once authenticated sub agent may be used to reveal the desired Password ID set on the user s monitor. The displayed information may then be erased after a pre defined time.

SUU may provide an isolated controlled and security hardened environment for Password Management sub agent to handle password management procedures automatically or manually if desired. The Password Management sub agent may comprise a software module residing and executing in Unified Agent .

The control and management plane a resident entity in a SUB that may be used to carry out SUB level management functionality such as one or more of configuration resource allocation status monitoring alarm reporting event logging performance indication error control etc.

The control and management plane also may carry out management tasks over Repository and Execution Unit and Unified Agent .

The Management Server may work in concert with control and management plane of one or more SUB units to form a Unified Management Zone .

The control and management plane also may carry out communications with Management Server for SUB enabling disabling and status reporting etc.

Management Server may function as a centralized management entity of the Unified Security Management System as shown in . Management Server may comprise software that may be loaded into a server system for managing deployed SUB units in a network.

The Management Server on one side may connect to Management Server Operator s Console multiple vendors security management systems and and if any other security management systems via proprietary or standard or both communication channels . A Unified Interface Converter which may comprise a software module at the front end of the Management Server or a standalone hardware and software system attached to Management Server may be used to convert communication channels into a unified format known to Management Server . As such various vendors security management systems may be able to connect centrally to Management Server and the administrator of the Management Server may be able to change security functions and or vendors on demand. The other side of the Management Server may communicate with a SUB in each managed endpoint via either proprietary or standard channel .

After any process of Unified Interface Converter Management Server may function as an action enforcer by using a Proxy which may terminate and authenticate requests from one or multiple security vendors management systems and then interpret and translate them into a predetermined format then send them via a Connecting Network to a target SUB for desired actions. Responses from target SUB may traverse back to senders of the requests via Management Server in reversed process.

Management Server may also function as a data collector collecting endpoint information emanating from each SUB of the managed endpoints and as a software distribution coordinator coordinating software downloads.

The management of Management Servers may be structured in hierarchical manner comprising such entities as a head end management server or a tail end management server.

One or more sets of Database System may be attached to a Management Server as repository for endpoint information activity log software patch updates etc. for management auditing forensic purposes etc. One Database System may support multiple Unified Management Zones .

Control and feedback mechanisms between Management Server and Connecting Network may be provided over connection to support functions such that security decisions of Management Server can be disseminated into Connecting Network for further security related actions such as access control etc. Connecting Network can be of private network or public network or both.

As shown in Management Server may comprise other functions such as Unified Agent Manager and other basic management functions such as alarm analysis and reporting file and download management etc.

Some embodiments may incorporate an operating system specifically designed for a SUB . SUBOS may be a real time operating system purposely built for security purposes and specifically for use in an apparatus such as SUB in order to support an extensive set of defense and immunization functions and provide the performance required for such processing at wirespeed data rates for example in a range up to 1 Gbps or higher. Some or all of the security function vendors software modules may be able to run on SUBOS by conforming to the SUBOS message format and interpretation rules etc. with the use of SUBOS application programming interfaces API .

As shown in Unified Agent Manager may also carry out communications with entities in a Billing and Vendor Info Repository Center for subscription and billing management. In various embodiments the Billing and Vendor Info Repository Center functions may be integrated with and reside in Management Server .

SUB in various embodiments may allow desired software modules such as the described defense functions in to be loaded and run on the apparatus and target software modules may be subscribed manually or automatically. Typically a module may be downloaded from a module vendor over a connection. In order to achieve unified subscription and billing a centralized repository and business operation site such as shown in may be used.

Site may store vendor product and support information comprising for example lists of vendors and products in various security product categories. The creation and use of such a repository may enable participating vendors to have a desired level of exposure to large sets of end users. Similarly it may provide end users access to large sets of defense and immunization function software vendors and helpful information about vendor products services and pricing facilitating objectives of both end users and vendors as desired.

In a representative embodiment of the methods to be further described here a SUB Unified Agent Manager and resources of a site may be used to support unified subscription and billing process steps. We now explain an embodiment as shown in . The details of the procedures may differ for standalone users and managed users.

An open selection mode example for standalone users is described in the following. Referring to the Subscription and Billing Management sub Agent SBA of Unified Agent in a SUB may first set up a secure connection to a Subscription and Billing Server SBS and Database at a Billing and Vendor Info Repository Center . Then SBA may initiate a download of participating vendor s product and pricing information from SBS and Database . SBA may then guide the user to make selections for defense and or immunization functions and inform the Subscription and Billing Coordinator SBC an entity within SBS of the selection results and also may act to initiate and ensure completion of a single billing payment process. SBC may then set up a secure connection to each selected vendor to download defense function product or products and relay them to Repository and Execution Unit REU via SBA until selected products are fully downloaded. SBA may then start and complete any provisioning tasks. SBA may also activate defense functions in Repository and Execution Unit and selected sub agents in Unified Agent for corresponding immunization functions inform SBC of completion of the subscription and billing procedure and tear down the connection with SBC . SBC also may tear down connection s with vendor s .

In a pre assigned mode block in case at least one or more vendors typically will have been previously assigned and assignment information including vendor and product identification data as well as any other useful data may be stored in SUB . In other aspects its function may be similar to the previously described example for the open selection mode block in .

In a managed environment as shown in an example of a subscription and billing procedure for managed users is described in the following.

A system administrator of the managed users specifies a configuration of defense and immunization functions for each managed SUB and stores such specification information in a database that may reside in UAM or Database System . UAM may set up a secure connection to SBS and Database at Repository Center . UAM may download participating vendors product and pricing information from SBS and Database . UAM may guide the administrator in making product selections coordinate with SBC for downloads and initiate and confirm completion of a single billing payment process. SBC may set up a secure connection to each selected vendor to download one or more defense products and store them in Database System via UAM until selected software modules are fully downloaded. Over a secure connection UAM may push desired software modules to each managed SUB through SBA according to administrator configuration data stored in a database residing in UAM or Database System . SBA may start and complete any provisioning tasks activate defense functions in Repository and Execution Unit and sub agents in Unified Agent for the selected immunization functions and inform UAM of completion of activation after which it may tear down connection.

Thus a set of apparatus and methods for a security system are provided. One skilled in the art will appreciate that the present invention can be practiced by other than the described embodiments which are presented for purposes of illustration and not limitation and the present invention is limited only by the claims that follow.

