---

title: Ordered nanoenergetic composites and synthesis method
abstract: A structured, self-assembled nanoenergetic material is disclosed that includes a nanostructure comprising at least one of the group consisting of a fuel and an oxidizer and a plurality of substantially spherical nanoparticles comprising at least the other of the group consisting of a fuel and an oxidizer. The spherical particles are arranged around the exterior surface area of said nanorod. This structured particle assures that the oxidizer and the fuel have a high interfacial surface area between them. Preferably, the nanostructure is at least one of a nanorod, nanowire and a nanowell, and the second shaped nanoparticle is a nanosphere.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07927437&OS=07927437&RS=07927437
owner: The Curators of the University of Missouri
number: 07927437
owner_city: Columbia
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051028
---
This application was supported by the Government assistance under U.S. Army Grant No. DAAE30 02 C 1132. The Government has certain rights in this invention.

This application is related to U.S. Ser. No. 11 261 831 entitled On Chip Igniter and Method of Manufacture filed concurrently herewith and herein incorporated by reference.

This invention relates the use of nanotechnology to make metastable intermolecular composites MICs with tunable combustion characteristics. More specifically nanoparticles of fuel and oxidizer are shaped and self assembled to create ordered nanoenergetic composites to achieve higher burn rates resulting in creation of shock waves.

Energetic materials are those that rapidly convert chemical enthalpy to thermal enthalpy. These materials are commonly known as explosives propulsion fuels and pyrotechnics. Thermite is a well known subgroup of pyrotechnics. It is a combination of a fuel and an oxidizer that combusts in a self propagating reaction producing temperatures of several thousand degrees. Either alone or in combination with other high energy materials thermites are used for various applications that include military mining demolition precision cutting explosive welding surface treatment and hardening of materials pulse power applications sintering aid biomedical applications microaerospace and satellite platforms. In solid form thermite is often a first metal and the oxide of a second metal such as aluminum and iron oxide.

Self propagating high temperature synthesis SHS relates to the synthesis of compounds that combust in a wave of chemical reaction that propagates over the reactants producing a layer by layer heat transfer. Properties such as burn rate reaction temperature and energy release are very important. In powder based SHS materials solid fuel and oxidizer are ground into fine micron sized particles and combined. In these systems reactions depend strongly on the interfacial surface area between the fuel and the oxidizer which is affected by the size impurity level and packing density of the constituent powders. Since the particle size predominates in determining particle surface area use of smaller particles is desirable to increase the burn rate of the SHS and metastable intermolecular composites MIC material.

Even if smaller particle size is achieved mere mixing of the fuel and the oxidizer is not sufficient to guarantee an increase in the interfacial surface area. Mixing of the powders results in a random particle distribution. In such a distribution many of the fuel particles will be surrounded by other fuel particles. There will be many places where the oxidizer has little contact with fuel particles. To significantly increase the interfacial surface area the particles must be specifically arranged so that a large number of fuel particles contact oxidizer particles and vice versa.

The propagation rate or energy release rate is increased by homogeneous distribution of the oxidizer and the fuel in the composite. This provides high interfacial area for fuel and oxidizer as well as reduced interfacial diffusional resistance. Thus on initiating a thermite reaction the combustion wavefront assumes maximum hot spot density resulting in a high rate of energy release. In other words such materials would show a higher burn rate or flame propagation rates. To have homogeneous distribution of the oxidizer and fuel a self assembly process can be very useful. Although a similar process has been demonstrated in several different research areas preparation of ordered nanoenergetic structures has not been shown. In the self assembly process fuel particles are arranged in an orderly manner around oxidizer or vice versa.

Although solid spherical nanoparticles of both the oxidizer and fuel can be assembled to create a nanoenergetic composite the surface area in spherical nanoparticles is generally smaller than cylindrical shaped nanoparticles. In cylindrical oxidizer nanoparticles such as nanorods it is possible to assemble a greater number of fuel nanoparticles than spherical oxidizer nanoparticles. Such composites result in higher energy density than spherical particle assembly and releases energy through conduction mechanism. In the case of porous oxidizer such as a sol gel oxidizer convection generally improves the performance. Recent inventions by others provide a technique of mixing of fuel nanoparticles during gelation of oxidizers but in these reports the microstructures do not show homogenous distribution of fuel nanoparticles inside porous oxidizers.

Manufacture of ordered nanoparticles is a technique known for the preparation of catalysts. This technique allows two different types of particles to be arranged into nanoparticles in an orderly fashion.

These and other needs in the art are met or exceeded by the present invention which generates structured particles having a high interfacial surface area between a fuel and an oxidizer. More specifically this invention relates to a MIC or SHS material that is assembled for good oxidizer fuel contact.

In a first embodiment of the invention a structured self propagating high temperature synthesis material that includes a nanostructure comprising at least one of the group consisting of a fuel and an oxidizer and a plurality of substantially spherical nanoparticles comprising at least the other of the group consisting of a fuel and an oxidizer. The spherical particles are arranged around the exterior surface area of said nanorod. This structured particle assures that the oxidizer and the fuel have a high interfacial surface area between them. Preferably the nanostructure is at least one of a nanorod and a nanowell and the second shaped nanoparticle is a nanosphere.

Production of fuel and oxidizer particles in the nanopartical size range increases the potential for high interfacial surface area. Smaller particle size increases the amount of available surface area. As greater surface area is generated more it is likely to interface with the surface of different particles even in random mixtures of particles. Thus reduction of particle size has the potential to increase the interfacial surface area between the fuel and the oxidizer. Creating a nanorod in place of a nanosphere for at least one particle type also leads to an increase in surface area of about 40 .

Structuring of the particles further adds to increases in the interfacial surface area. Placement of nanospheres of one material around nanorods of the other material assures at least some interfacial contact with the other material for each particle. This structure results in additional increases in interfacial surface area leading to faster burn rates and increases in energy expended.

There is therefore a need in the art for a composite material having a high interfacial surface area. There is also a need for a combustible material having a burn rate that exceeds the speed of sound in that material.

Turning to a preferred embodiment is shown wherein a nanoenergetic particle generally designated includes a nanostructure of oxidizer material self assembled with a fuel in the shape of nanoparticles . The nanoenergetic particle is preferably a thermite composition utilizing a metal fuel and an oxidizer for the metal. Other preferred nanoenergetic particles include metastable intermolecular composites and SHS composites. The efficacy of the nanoenergetic particle increases as the purity of the components increases so the preferred oxidizer and fuel are both relatively high purity. In the discussion that follows the fuel nanoparticle is described as being shaped into a nanosphere and the oxidizer is shaped into a nanostructure such as a nanorod nanowire not shown or nanowell . These are preferred embodiments of the invention but are not intended to be limiting in any way. Use of the fuel as a nanorod or nanowell and spherical oxidizer particles is also contemplated. The fuel and the oxidizer are suitably formed into any shapes that are complimentary to each other and that increase the interfacial surface area compared to a random particle distribution.

A wide variety of fuels are useful in this invention. Where the nanoenergetic material is a thermite the preferred fuel is a metal. Preferred metals include aluminum boron beryllium hafnium lanthanum lithium magnesium neodymium tantalum thorium titanium yttrium and zirconium. The use of two or more metals either physically mixed or alloyed is contemplated. Referring to the fuel is formed into a shape such as a nanosphere that provides a homogeneous dispersion and a high surface area compared to the fuel volume. Sonication is the preferred method for shaping the fuel particles. The fuel is placed in a solvent such as 2 propanol and positioned within the sonic field . When activated the sound waves disperse the fuel creating extremely small particles that are often substantially monoparticles comprising few single atoms or molecules of fuel. The high degree of dispersion creates an extremely high fuel surface area. Other shapes or larger particles are useful in applications where the extremely fast burn rate is not required.

The oxidizer should be selected to have a high exothermic heat of reaction with the chosen fuel . The fuel and the oxidizer are chosen to assure that a self propagating reaction takes place. As long as the fuel has a higher free energy for oxide formation than the oxidizer an exothermic replacement reaction will spontaneously occur. Preferred oxidizers include copper oxide CuO or CuO silver oxide AgO or AgO boron oxide BO bismuth oxide BiO Cobalt oxide CoO chromium oxide CrO iron oxide FeO mercuric oxide HgO iodine oxide IO manganese oxide MnO molybdenum oxide MoO niobium oxide NbO nickel oxide NiO or NiO lead oxide PbO or PbO palladium oxide PdO silicone oxide SiO tin oxide SnO or SnO tantalum oxide TaO titanium dioxide TiO uranium oxide UO vanadium oxide VO and tungsten oxide WO .

Optimally the amounts of fuel and oxidizer present in the thermite are in a stoichiometric ratio for combustion of the fuel with the oxidizer. Preferred equivalence ratio 

Preferably the oxidizer is shaped into a nanorod nanowire or a nanowell . In a preferred embodiment the oxidizer particle is shaped by providing a polymeric surfactant having a micelle forming of a crystalline structure inside the micelle of a surfactant . One preferred method of creating the crystals is by filling the micelle with oxidizer precursors that react to form the oxidizer in situ. Synthesis of copper oxide nanorods as shown in for example includes grinding copper chloride dihydrate and sodium hydroxide into fine powders then added to a polyethylene glycol such as PEG 400 Alfa Aesar Ward Hill Mass. .

The nanorods are preferably synthesized inside and take the shape of the micelles of the polymeric surfactant . Nanowires are long thin nanorods . Diblock copolymers are known as surfactants having micelles . Polyethylene glycol such as PEG 400 is preferred for this task. PEG 400 produces nanorods of substantially uniform size. As the molecular weight of the polyethylene glycol increases the diameter of the nanorod changes which leads to the nanowire type structure. For example PEG 200 produces nanospheres PEG 400 produces nanorods and PEG 2000 produces nanowires. The surfactant is selected by the size of its micelles to produce nanorods or nanowires of a particular diameter. Addition of water to the surfactant yields a mixture of nanorods of varying length and having a longer average length.

In a preferred embodiment the oxidizer is formed by depositing the reaction product of the oxidizer precursors in situ within the micelles of the surfactant to form the nanorods . In a preferred embodiment copper chloride dihydrate and sodium hydroxide are combined to produce 35 copper oxide within the micelles of PEG 400. Other suitable precursors include copper nitrate copper carbonate copper acetate copper sulfate copper hydroxide and copper ethoxide. The ratio of copper chloride dihydrate to sodium hydroxide is from about 1.66 to about 2.1. The copper chloride dihydrate sodium hydroxide and PEG 400 are pulverized with a mortar and pestle for 30 minutes. Preferred grinding times are from about 10 to about 45 minutes. Other methods of combining these ingredients include stirring mixing milling and attrition. The copper chloride dihydrate and sodium hydroxide react to form copper oxide in the PEG based template. Upon washing with one or more solvents such as water and ethanol the polyethylene glycol is removed yielding free standing copper hydroxide and oxide nanorods . Calcination at a suitable temperature produces the finished nanorods made up of the copper oxide oxidizer . For copper oxide calcinations at 450 C. for 4 hours is sufficient.

At least one of the oxidizer and the fuel is coated with a molecular linking substance that attracts the particles to each other. Preferably the molecular linker is a polymer having two different binding sites each of which chemically or physically bonds with either the fuel or the oxidizer . Preferably the binding sites are not random but are spaced to closely fit the nanospheres against the nanorods for good interfacial surface area.

The presence of material other than fuel and oxidizer tends to slow the burn rate of the nanoenergetic material . Cross linking or bonding of the molecular linker with itself makes it difficult or impossible to remove excess polymer thus reducing the burn rate. Thus another preferred feature of the molecular linker is that it does not bond with itself allowing excess polymer to be removed until essentially a monolayer of molecular linker remains. Excess molecular linker is preferably removed by sonication of the particles after its application.

Suitable molecular linker polymers include polyvinyl pyrrolidone poly 4 vinyl pyridine poly 2 vinyl pyridine poly ethylene imine carboxylated poly ethylene imine cationic poly ethylene glycol grafted copolymers polyaminde polyether block amide poly acrylic acid cross linked polystyrene poly vinyl alcohol poly n isopropylacrylamide copolymer of n acryloxysuccinimide poly acrylontrile fluorinated polyacarylate poly acrylamide polystyrene poly 4 vinyl pyridine and polyisoprene poly 4 vinyl pyridine. The use of the molecular linker with binding sites is a good method for self assembly because each polymer molecule has numerous binding sites. Therefore when a molecular linker is adsorbed on a surface it has many more binding sites for binding other nanoparticles. Poly 4 vinyl pyridine and its analogues are attractive to create self assembled structures. The pyridyl group in its neutral form has a lone pair of electrons which can be donated to form covalent bonds with metals undergo hydrogen bonding with the polar species and interact with charged surfaces. The various ways in which molecular linker polymer can interact with surfaces makes it universal binding agent for nanostructural assemblies. The use of this polymer is not yet demonstrated to create self assembled ordered structure of energetic material.

Metal nanoparticles such as aluminum nanoparticles are sonicated in alcohol for a time sufficient to achieve homogenous dispersion. The preferred alcohol is 2 propanol however the use of other solvents that allow dispersion of the fuel. The ratio of fuel to solvent of about 0.0875 to 0.75 is preferred though other ratios are useful for other applications.

Sonication is conducted with any type of sonication equipment . Preferably for synthesis purposes a sonic bath Cole Parmer Model 8839 is used. The output sound frequency used is in the range of about 50 60 Hz. Duration of the sonication treatment is any time sufficient to remove all of the molecular linker except the layer that is bound to the fuel or the oxidizer . Preferably it is at least 3 hours and is preferably from about 3 hours to about 16 hours. Centrifugation is preferably combined with sonication to more rapidly remove the excess molecular linker .

The steps of sonication followed by centrifugation may be repeated several times to remove excess molecular linker polymer from the fuel or oxidizer particles. The process is repeated as many times as needed. Polymer coated fuel particles generally result that have a very thin coating of polymer . Preferably the coating is so thin as to form essentially a polymer monolayer. As a result of this process the resulting coated fuel particles are preferably from about 50 to about 120 nanometers in diameter. Particle diameters of about 50 to about 80 nanometers are more preferred. Reduction of coated fuel particle diameter below about 18 nanometers results in a particle that has a ratio of fuel to polymer that is too low to burn efficiently.

Self assembly of the oxidizer nanorods and the coated fuel particles preferably takes place by sonication. Oxidizer 14 nanorods are added to a solvent for several hours. The preferred solvent is 2 propanol but other solvents for sonication as listed above are also useful. Duration for the sonication treatment is preferably from about 3 hours to about 4 hours. The well dispersed coated fuel particles were then added 51 to the dispersion of the oxidizer nanorods . An additional sonication step was carried out from about 3 hours to about 0.4 hours. While in the sonicator the oxidizer and the fuel are thoroughly dispersed. To disperse the fuel and oxidizer a sonic wand with an output frequency of about 55 kHz is used. The time for sonication is about 9 minutes but longer sonication times are used depending on the specific application. During the dispersion the fuel particles coated with the molecular linker are likely to encounter and bind with an oxidizer nanorod . Since the molecular linker has bonding sites specific for the oxidizer the oxidizer nanorods will bind to the linker on the coated fuel particle holding them in a position to generate a product with a high interfacial surface area. The final solution is then dried to obtain the complete nanocomposite .

Oxidizer nanowires can also be synthesized and used to make nanoparticle composite . The nanowires were preferably formed by precipitation of the oxidizer from a precipitate of two or more oxidizer precursors from a solution that includes the surfactant . In one embodiment copper oxide nanowires were synthesized using surfactant templating method. Preferably polyethylene glycol was mixed with water 2.5 1.5 under continuous stirring to make an emulsion. About 0.5 g of copper chloride was dissolved in that emulsion. Another emulsion was prepared using same ratio of PEG and water and then 0.5 g of NaOH was added into it under continuous stirring. The emulsion with copper chloride oxidation precursor is then mixed with the emulsion with NaOH oxidation precursor and stirred slowly for several minutes. In the final solution an excess amount of ethanol was added to form a grey precipitate. The grey precipitate was then sonicated for 3 hours then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 minutes to collect precipitates. This cycle was repeated at least three times to remove the excess surfactant . The sample is then dried in air at 60 C. for four hours. The dried powder is then calcined at 450 C. for 4 hours to get crystalline copper oxide nanowire.

Turning to as another alternative to making nanorods the oxidizer can be formed into nanowells using the technique of templating assisted nucleation. Nanowells are shaped to have holes or openings in the oxidizer structures into which the fuel particles are placed. In this technique the nanowells are formed around the exterior of the micelles of the polymeric surfactant . Growth of mesopores is controlled on a length of 1 1.5 microns leading to nanowell structures. This process can be used for any metal metal oxide and metal ligands. The size and shape of the nanowells depends on the characteristic shape of the micelles in the specific surfactant selected. As with nanorods the surfactant is removed from the nanowell prior to forming the nanoenergentic material .

Pluronic 123 BASF Mt. Olive N.J. is a preferred block co polymer surfactant for making nanowells . Preferably the surfactant is added to a solvent such as ethylene glycol methyl ether methoxyethanol however other solvents such as ethoxyethanol methoxyethanol acetate can also be used. The concentration of the surfactant is in the range of 1 60 wt based on metal alkoxide. Higher concentrations are generally limited by the solubility which can be improved if a mild heating up to about 40 C. with stirring is provided. To this block polymer solution copper ethoxide in amounts of about 2 10 g 100 ml is added. Following this a mild acid such as 0.01 25 M acetic acid is added to generate a copper complex. This complex undergoes olation in the presence of water and hydrochloric acid.

The fuel is preferably input to the nanowells by means of impregnation. Fuel particles coated with a monolayer of the molecular linker are prepared as described above. The sonicated and centrifuged particles are then dispersed in methoxyethanol and the second reaction component to form the oxidizer. Fuel particles are held within the nanowells by the monolayer of molecular linker present on the surface of the fuel.

Acetic acid and water were added to achieve the nanowell gel structure. Following impregnation with the fuel the gel was heat processed to drive off organic impurities and templating agents. Preferably the heat treatment occurs at temperatures of about 200 C. to about 800 C. The duration of the heat treatment should be sufficient to drive off the unwanted components at the temperature selected. Pressure reduction also aids in driving off volatile components. During preparation of copper oxide oxidizer the gels were heat treated for 24 hours at 200 C. under a vacuum. Dried gels were sonicated in n hexane in presence of a surfactant and sonicated for few hours. After this the gels were washed with ethanol and dried at 200 C. for 2 h to obtain free flowing porous gel particles.

In addition to oxidizer and fuel nanoparticles explosive nanoparticles are optionally added to some embodiments of the nanoenergetic materials . These explosive nanoparticles can be added to any of the above nanoenergetic composites to improve the performance in terms of higher pressures and detonation. In synthesizing explosive nanoparticles a process is used similar to that described above with respect to formation of the fuel nanoparticles . An explosive material such as ammonium nitrate is formed into nanoparticles by dispersion in one or more solvents then sonicated to obtain a homogeneous material. The solvents are removed by centrifugation and heating.

Stabilization of explosive nanoparticles is performed by forming a core shell structure with metal oxides. For example a coating of copper oxide is formed on the ammonium nitrate nanoparticles . The process is suitable to produce the core shell structure with several other metal oxides.

We have observed that the burn rate for FeO Al combination is significantly less compared to CuO Al. The addition of nano ammonium nitrate to the iron oxide thermite increases the pressure and burn rate velocity due to gas generation. With the choice of a nanocomposite of CuO Al and nano ammonium nitrate the properties of the combined material can be tuned to achieve a green primer. However the nanoenergetic material has the properties of a propellant by replacing CuO by FeO. shows the graph of pressure over time confirming formation of the shock wave.

Burn rates exceeding the speed of sound are attainable using the nanoenergetic materials of this invention. Table 1 shows the burn rates of copper oxide and aluminum where the materials differ only in configuration and copper oxide and aluminum added with polymer and explosive nanoparticles. As shown in this table the copper oxide nanorods self assembled with aluminum nanoparticles and the copper oxide nanowells impregnated with aluminum nanoparticles have the highest burn rates.

Many uses are contemplated for the nanoenergetic materials described here. They may be used in applications where it is useful to generate a shock wave that is not pressure based. Such an application is in the medical field where shock waves without detonation are used to crush stones in the kidney or gall bladder without the need for an invasive surgical procedure. Nanoenergetic materials are also useful as explosives as detonators and other munitions applications. Because the nanoenergetic material burns so quickly the heat from the flame can be dissipated rapidly. Thus the nanoenergetic materials are useful in the vicinity of some materials or with some substrates without sustaining heat damage.

A particularly advantageous way of utilizing the nanoenergetic materials disclosed herein is described in copending U.S. Ser. No. 11 261 831 entitled On Chip Igniter and Method of Manufacture previously incorporated by reference. The nanoenergetic material is patterned onto a chip having an igniter and a detector. An electrical impulse heats the igniter initiating combustion of the nanoenergetic material . When configured on the chip the nanoenergetic material is useful as an igniter for combustible materials a detonator a heat or power source or any apparatus that produces heat or a sonic shock wave.

For the synthesis of 5.045 g of copper chloride dihydrate CuCl.2 HO 99.5 Sigma Aldrich was pulverized to a fine powder by grinding it in a mortar with a pestle. The finely powdered CuCl.2HO and 3.0 g NaOH were mixed together and 6.0 ml of PEG 400 Polyethylene glycol 400 Alfa Aesar was added into the mixture. This mixture was vigorously pulverized in a mortar for 45 minutes. During grinding the copper chloride and sodium hydroxide were forced into the micelles of the PEG 400. The CuCland NaOH then reacted to form CuO nanorods inside the micelles. The PEG 400 coating was removed by washing with water and ethanol.

Aluminum nanoparticles were made by sonicating 0.42 g of aluminum in 300 ml of 2 propanol for 5 hours to achieve homogenous dispersion. To this solution 1 ml of 0.1 solution of poly 4 vinylpyridine in 2 propanol was added and the resultant solution was sonicated for an additional 2 hours. This solution was centrifuged until a clear supernatant was obtained. The solid recovered from the centrifuge was added to fresh 2 propanol and the process of sonication followed by centrifugation was repeated 4 5 times to remove excess polymer. The coating that remained on the nanoparticles was substantially a monolayer.

One gram of copper oxide nanorods was sonicated in 200 ml of 2 propanol for 4 hours. The well dispersed aluminum nanoparticles were then added into the nanorod dispersion. After sonicating for 3 hours the final solution was dried at 120 C. to obtain the self assembled nanocomposite.

The burn rate of the energetic material was evaluated using a Tektronix TDS460A 4 channel digital oscilloscope. For each experiment a Lexan tube with 0.8 cmvolume was filled up with energetic material and inserted into an aluminum block instrumented with fiber optic photo detectors and piezo crystal pressure sensors to facilitate the burn rate and pressure measurement. The two pressure sensors PCB 112A22 were installed at 2 cm spacing on one side of the block and optical fibers Thorlabs M21L01 leading to photo detectors Thorlabs DET210 on the other side of the block at 1 cm interval. Each tube has two pre drilled 1 mm ports in the tubing wall which were aligned with the pressure sensors. As energetic reaction triggers oscilloscope records voltage signal with respect to time for photo detectors and pressure sensors. The burn rate of energetic material was determined based on the rise time of signal for the two photo detectors and pressure was evaluated using voltage response of pressure sensors that multiplied by the standard conversion factor. The results of burn rate testing are as follows 

Explosive nanoparticles were prepared by dissolving 25 gm of ammonium nitrate in 2 methoxyethanol to make 100 ml solution 25 weight volume . The solution was then kept under vigorous stirring at 60 C. for 4 hours. To this solution 2 propanol was added as approximately 100 ml min under vigorous stirring. The suspension was thoroughly washed with either ethanol or 2 propanol to remove 2 methoxy ethanol. The sediment was separated by centrifugation at 2500 rpm for 10 minutes. The sediment was heated at 120 C. in order to obtain ammonium nitrate nanoparticles. This process is also useful to obtain nanoparticles of traditional explosives or propellants.

Nanoenergetic material including FeO Al and nanoammonium nitrate was prepared. To 10 ml of a solution containing 1 g of ammonium nitrate in 2 methoxyethanol 0.3 g of iron oxide gel was added. The mixture was kept under vigorous stirring with a magnetic stirrer for 4 hours. The suspension was washed thoroughly with 2 propanol to remove excess ammonium nitrate from iron oxide. The sediment separated by centrifugation at 2500 rpm for 10 minutes was then dried in oven at 120 C. for 2 hours. Ammonium nitrate infiltrated iron oxide was mixed with aluminum nanoparticles to prepare a nanocomposite.

While particular embodiments of the nanoenergetic composites have been shown and described it will be appreciated by those skilled in the art that changes and modifications may be made thereto without departing from the invention in its broader aspects and as set forth in the following claims.

