---

title: Fuel cell membranes and crossover prevention
abstract: 


where Cis the formic acid fuel concentration over the anode, Dis the effective diffusivity of the fuel in the solid polymer electrolyte, Kis the equilibrium constant for partition coefficient for the fuel into the solid polymer electrolyte membrane, ℑ is Faraday's constant nis the number of electrons released when  molecule of the fuel is oxidized, and jis an empirically determined crossover rate of fuel above which the fuel cell does not operate.

url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07569297&OS=07569297&RS=07569297
owner: The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
number: 07569297
owner_city: Urbana
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051216
---
This application is a divisional of application Ser. No. 10 407 385 filed Apr. 4 2003 now issued U.S. Pat. No. 7 132 188 which claims priority of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 369 992 filed Apr. 4 2002.

This invention was made with Government assistance under Department of Energy Grant No. DEGF 02 99ER14993. The Government has certain rights in the invention.

Fuel cells are electrochemical cells in which a free energy change resulting from a fuel oxidation reaction is converted into electrical energy. Applications for fuel cells include battery replacement mini and microelectronics car engines power plants and many others. One advantage of fuel cells is that they are substantially pollution free.

In hydrogen fuel cells hydrogen gas is oxidized to form water with a useful electrical current produced as a byproduct of the oxidation reaction. A solid polymer membrane electrolyte layer may be used to separate the hydrogen fuel from the oxygen. The anode and cathode are arranged on opposite faces of the membrane. Electron flow between the anode and cathode layers of the membrane electrode assembly may be exploited to provide electrical power. Hydrogen fuel cells are impractical for many applications however because of difficulties related to storing and handling hydrogen gas.

Organic fuel cells may prove useful in many applications as an alternative to hydrogen fuel cells. In an organic fuel cell an organic fuel such as methanol is oxidized to carbon dioxide at an anode while air or oxygen is simultaneously reduced to water at a cathode. One advantage over hydrogen fuel cells is that organic air fuel cells may be operated with a liquid organic fuel. This eliminates problems associated with hydrogen gas handling and storage. Some organic fuel cells require initial conversion of the organic fuel to hydrogen gas by a reformer. These are referred to as indirect fuel cells. The need for a reformer increases cell size cost complexity and start up time. Other types of organic fuel cells called direct eliminate these disadvantages by directly oxidizing the organic fuel without conversion to hydrogen gas. To date direct organic fuel cell development has focused on the use of methanol and other alcohols as fuel.

Conventional direct methanol fuel cells have unresolved problems associated with them. For example methanol and other alcohols have high osmotic and diffusion crossover rates across commercial polymer membrane electrode assemblies. Fuel that crosses over avoids reaction at the anode and thus cannot be exploited for electrical energy. This limits cell efficiency. An additional problem related to crossover is poisoning of the anode. As methanol or another alcohol fuel crosses over the polymer membrane to the cathode side it adsorbs onto the cathode catalyst and thereby blocks reaction sites. Efficiency of the cell is thereby reduced. A proposed solution to this problem has been to provide additional catalyst. This adds expense however particularly when considering that costly precious and semi precious metal catalysts such as platinum are often employed.

Because of this high crossover methanol and other alcohol fuel cells typically operate with a fuel concentration of no more than about 3 8 . The use of those dilute solutions creates additional problems however. This low fuel concentration requires relatively large amounts of ultra pure water typically provided through recycling systems including pumps and filters. Also the concentration of the fuel needs to be closely monitored and controlled with the result that sensors and controllers may be required. All of this peripheral equipment adds cost complexity weight and size to direct organic fuel cells.

In addition this required peripheral water management equipment substantially limits the usefulness of direct methanol fuel cells for applications where size and weight become critical. For portable miniature and microelectronics applications for example the size weight and complexity of the required peripheral equipment makes use of direct methanol fuel cells impractical.

Further the dilute solutions freeze and expand at temperatures potentially encountered in many fuel cell applications with portable devices for use outside as an example. The expansion can lead to device failure. Conduit et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 528 194 teaches that the freezing can be avoided by circulating heated fluid through the fuel tank when the fuel cell is not operating. However that wastes power and adds complexity.

Still other problems with existing direct methanol fuel cells relate to the electro oxidation reaction promoted by the anode. For example an intermediate produced during the oxidation reduction reaction from the methanol in many direct methanol fuel cells is poisonous carbon monoxide gas. Thus hazards are presented. Also CO is known to poison catalysts such as Pt and to thereby decrease cell efficiency.

A membrane electrode assembly for use with a direct organic fuel cell containing a formic acid fuel includes a solid polymer electrolyte having first and second surfaces an anode on the first surface and a cathode on the second surface and electrically linked to the anode. The solid polymer electrolyte has a thickness t 

An embodiment of the present invention is directed to a direct organic fuel cell that includes an anode linked to a cathode an anode enclosure and a cathode enclosure. The fuel cell further includes a liquid fuel solution containing at least 10 by weight of an organic fuel. In a preferred embodiment of the present invention the organic fuel is formic acid and an anode catalyst is present that includes Pt and Pd.

Another invention embodiment is directed to a membrane electrode assembly that includes a solid polymer electrolyte with an anode on one surface and a cathode on a second surface. The anode is configured to promote the direct decomposition of an organic fuel without the formation of a CO intermediate.

An additional invention embodiment is directed to a method for making an anode catalyst and includes steps of preparing a suspension of nanoparticles applying the suspension to a support drying the suspension to form a thin film on the support and immersing the support in a metallic solution to spontaneously deposit metal islands on the Pt nanoparticles.

An additional invention embodiment is directed to an anode catalyst for use with a direct formic acid fuel cell. An exemplary anode catalyst comprises metal nanoparticles that have at least a second metal coated thereon the catalyst being operative to promote the dehydrogenation of formic acid to COand H along a reaction path that does not include formation of a CO intermediate.

The schematic of shows an exemplary direct organic fuel cell of the invention generally at . The fuel cell includes an anode a solid polymer proton conducting electrolyte and a gas diffusion cathode . The anode is enclosed in an anode enclosure while the cathode is enclosed in a cathode enclosure . When an electrical load not shown is connected between the anode and cathode via an electrical linkage electro oxidation of an organic fuel occurs at the anode and electro reduction of an oxidizer occurs at the cathode .

The occurrence of different reactions at the anode and cathode gives rise to a voltage difference between the two electrodes. Electrons generated by electro oxidation at the anode are conducted through the linkage and are ultimately captured at the cathode . Hydrogen ions or protons generated at the anode are transported across the membrane electrolyte to the cathode . Thus a flow of current is sustained by a flow of ions through the cell and electrons through the linkage . This current may be exploited to power an electrical device for instance.

The anode solid polymer electrolyte and cathode are preferably a single multi layer composite structure that may be referred to as a membrane electrode assembly MEA . Preferably the solid polymer electrolyte is a proton conducting cation exchange membrane that contains an anionic sulfate such as the perfluorinated sulfonic acid polymer membrane commercially available under the registered trademark NAFION from DuPont Chemical Co. Delaware. NAFION is a copolymer of tetrafluoroethylene and perfluorovinylether sulfonic acid. Other membrane materials can also be used with examples including membranes of modified perfluorinated sulfonic acid polymer polyhydrocarbon sulfonic acid membranes containing other acidic ligands and composites of two or more kinds of proton exchange membranes.

Each of the anode and the cathode may include a catalyst layer with an example being fine Pt particles either supported or unsupported. When using a preferred unitary MEA the anode and cathode may consist of catalyst layers directly applied to opposite sides of the NAFION membrane. NAFION is available in standard thicknesses that include 0.002 in. and 0.007 in. A unitary MEA may be fabricated by directly painting anode and cathode catalyst inks onto opposing surfaces of the membrane . When the catalyst ink dries solid catalyst particles adhere to the membrane to form the anode and the cathode .

If the catalyst is to be supported a suitable support includes fine carbon particles or high surface area carbon sheeting that makes electrical contact with the particles of the electrocatalyst. By way of particular example the anode may be formed by mixing electrocatalyst materials such as a metal with a binder such as NAFION and spread on carbon backing paper at an exemplary loading of between about 0.5 5 mg cm. The backing paper can then be attached to a surface of the NAFION membrane . The cathode electrocatalyst alloy and the carbon fiber backing may contain about 10 50 by weight TEFLON to provide hydrophobicity to create a three phase boundary and to achieve efficient removal of water produced by electro reduction of oxygen. The cathode catalyst backing is attached to the surface of the NAFION electrolyte membrane opposite of the anode .

The exemplary fuel cell operates using a formic acid fuel solution although other fuels are contemplated. The formic acid fuel solution is supplied to the anode enclosure while an oxidizer such as air or higher concentrated Ois supplied to the cathode enclosure . At the anode the formic acid fuel is oxidized HCOOH 2H CO 2 Rctn. 1. The COproduct flows out of the chamber via a gas removal port . It has been discovered that a generally tubular gas removal port having an inside diameter less than about 1 32 in. and preferably about 1 32 in. or less and a length of at least about 1 32 in. allows passage of the COgas while substantially preventing passage of formic acid. Preferably the removal port has a length to diameter ratio of at least about 0.5. Also the port is preferably made of a hydrophobic material with an exemplary material including the fluorocarbon based polymer commercially available from 3M Corporation MN under their registered trademark as KEL F.

The H product of Rctn. 1 passes through the polymer electrolyte layer to the cathode and the free electron e product flows through the electrical linkage to the cathode . At the cathode the reduction reaction O 2 2H 2HO Rctn. 2. occurs. The HO product flows out of the cathode enclosure via a removal port . Pumps or other means may be provided to drive the flow of the formic acid fuel solution and of the air O.

It has been discovered that use of a formic acid fuel solution for oxidation at the anode provides many advantages. Formic acid is a relatively strong electrolyte and thus facilitates good proton transport within the anode enclosure . It has a relatively low vapor pressure and remains in liquid state at room temperature. Also formic acid oxygen fuel cells of the invention have a high theoretical open circuit potential or emf of about 1.45 V.

It has also been discovered that formic acid enjoys very low diffusion and drag crossover rates across the solid polymer electrolyte membrane . This provides additional valuable benefits for formic acid fuel cells of the present invention. Formic acid partially dissociates when dissolved in water to form an anion. It is believed that the anion is attracted by the anode and is repelled by the anionic sulfate groups in the preferred polymer electrolyte membrane thereby hindering osmotic drag and diffusion through the electrolyte membrane . This results in a substantial reduction or elimination of fuel crossover through the electrolyte membrane .

Low fuel crossover is beneficial for a number of reasons. For example low crossover allows the fuel cell to be run at high fuel concentrations. It is believed that formic acid concentrations of from about 10 by weight to about 95 will provide reasonable performance. High fuel concentrations provide high current densities and high power output per unit area and also reduce or eliminate water management problems of the prior art. Low fuel crossover rates also greatly reduce or eliminate poisoning of the cathode . This likewise significantly improves performance of the fuel cell . Still an additional benefit of the formic acid fuel solution is that it is believed only negligible amounts of CO gas are produced when a 25 140 C. platinum catalyst is exposed to gaseous formic acid. Methanol on the other hand is believed to yield substantial carbon monoxide product under similar conditions.

The present invention is not limited to formic acid fuel cells. Other invention embodiments include direct organic fuel cells with an organic fuel solution including at least about 10 by wt. and preferably greater than about 25 organic fuel with an electrolyte membrane operative to achieve a low fuel solution crossover rate. Expressed in units of current membranes of exemplary fuel cells of the invention are operative to limit fuel solution crossover to an amount less than that required to produce about 30 ma cmelectrolyte membrane at about 25 C. Although formic acid is a preferred organic fuel other organics may include methanol and other alcohols formaldehyde and other aldehydes ketones di and tri methoxy methane and other oxygenates.

It has been discovered that high fuel concentrations may be achieved using organics other than formic acid through careful design of the electrolyte to provide little or no fuel crossover. For example it has been discovered that by selecting a suitable electrolyte polymer membrane thickness fuel crossover can be kept below some critical value jbelow which the fuel cell continues to operate. To a reasonable approximation the crossover rate of fuel j amps cm is given by 

Another aspect of the present invention is directed to anode catalysts for use with direct organic fuel cells. Catalysts of the invention include nanoparticles of metals with coatings of at least one additional metal on their surface. The coatings can be continuous films with a thickness of about 2 nm or less or the coatings can be discrete formations or islands. As used herein the terms discrete formations and islands as used in this context are intended to broadly refer to substantially discontinuous groupings of the second metal on the first metal surface. Preferably the discrete formations or islands are no more than 3 nm thick and are mono or two layer.

Metals believed useful for the metal particles and the coating layers or islands in catalysts of the invention include Pt Pd Ru Re Ir Au Ag Co Fe Ni Y and Mn. Preferred examples include Pt particles with one or more of Pd or Ru coated thereon and most preferably Pt with Pd. Also the material for the metal particles and the coating can be interchanged. By way of example Pt islands could be applied to a Pd particle. In an exemplary preferred Pt Pd catalyst between about 10 and about 90 of the catalyst surface is covered with Pd. Most preferably about 60 is covered with Pd. Islands of Pt could likewise be applied to particles of Pd or Ru. It has also been discovered that catalysts of the invention provide most beneficial results when the surface composition differs from the bulk composition. This may be achieved for example by making a catalyst of the invention through spontaneous deposition. Catalysts of the invention are believed to be useful when used with any of several direct organic fuel cells with examples including formaldehyde and alcohols including methanol.

Exemplary catalyst loadings of the invention when used with formic acid fuel cells of the invention are between about 0.1 mg cmand about 12 mg cm. With air feed a preferred loading is about 4 mg cm. Increases do not appear to substantially change current production. Loadings above about 12 gm msubstantially slow current output. Air breathing cells generally require less catalyst on the anode. Levels of down to about 0.1 mg cmare believed useful.

The catalysts of the invention have been discovered to be particularly advantageous when used with formic acid fuel cells of the invention although use with other organics will also be advantageous. For example it has been discovered that current and power density from the formic acid fuel cell is significantly enhanced through use of catalysts of the invention. The preferred Pt Pd catalyst has been discovered to increase formic acid fuel cell current density by a factor of up to about 80 as compared to a Pt catalyst.

Another benefit of the preferred Pt Pd catalyst relates to the formic acid oxidation reaction mechanisms it is believed to promote. Formic acid electrooxidation is believed to occur primarily via two parallel reaction pathways in the presence of a metal catalyst such as Pt. One is via a dehydration mechanism that forms CO as an intermediate HCOOH Pt Pt CO HO Rctn. 3. HO Pt Pt OH H Rctn. 4. Pt CO Pt OH 2Pt CO H Rctn. 5. Formic acid adsorbs onto the Pt surface forming an intermediate adsorbed CO species Rctn. 3 . An adsorbed OH group formed in Rctn. 4 is then required to further oxidize the adsorbed CO intermediate into gaseous CO Rctn. 5 .

The second reaction pathway is more direct and follows a dehydrogenation mechanism HCOOH M CO M 2H 2 Rctn. 6. This reaction path forms the product COdirectly and circumvents the adsorbed CO intermediate poisoning step with the result that substantially no CO intermediate is formed. This direct pathway has the advantage that less of the catalyst is poisoned by CO so less platinum is needed in the fuel cell and high current densities can be obtained. This direct reaction path also enhances the overall reaction rate especially at lower anode potentials where surface OH s are not available on Pt. Finally in addition to poisoning the catalyst CO formation is generally undesirable due to its poisonous nature. It is believed that the preferred Pt nanoparticle catalyst with Pd islands on its surface promotes Rctn. 6 without promoting Rctn. 3. Thus use of the preferred catalyst solves many problems of the prior art related to CO formation.

Still another aspect of the invention is directed to a method for making anode catalysts of the invention. The flowchart of illustrates the steps of an exemplary method for making a catalyst of the invention. Pt nanoparticles are suspended in a liquid block . The suspension is then applied to a support such as a carbon backing gold disk or the like block . The suspension is then dried to form a thin film of the Pt nanoparticles on the support block . Finally the support is immersed in an ionic metallic solution to cause spontaneous deposition of islands of the metal onto the surface of the Pt nanoparticles block .

Yet another aspect of the present invention is directed to fuels cells having a fuel solution with a freezing point below about 0 C. preferably below about 5 C. and more preferably below about 10 C. Fuel cells of the invention having a sufficiently high organic fuel concentration will provide these advantages. A formic acid fuel cell of the invention having a concentration of at least about 20 by wt. for example will have a freezing point below about 10 C. By way of additional example Table 1 shows the minimum fuel concentration needed for different exemplary organic fuels contemplated for use in fuel cells of the invention to reduce the freezing point to the water fuel mixture to below about 10 C.

In an additional aspect of the invention an anti freeze agent may be added to a fuel cell fuel solution to lower the freezing temperature of the solution. Exemplary anti freeze agents include inorganic acids such as sulfuric acid hydrochloric acid nitric acid phosphoric acid and perchloric acid. These agents may be added either alone or in combination to lower the fuel solution freezing temperature to below about 0 C. preferably below about 5 C. and more preferably to below about 10 C. Table 2 illustrates exemplary anti freeze agents and required concentrations to lower a 1 methanol fuel solution freezing temperature to below about 10 C.

In order to best illustrate various aspects of the invention several exemplary fuel cells of the invention were operated using varying fuel concentrations and different catalysts of the invention. The performance of these exemplary cells and catalysts is discussed below.

The first exemplary fuel cell is generally consistent with the fuel cell shown in . Element numbers from that fuel cell will be used where appropriate for convenience. The exemplary fuel cell s membrane electrode assembly MEA including an anode a NAFION electrolyte membrane and a cathode was fabricated using a direct paint technique to apply catalyst layers and to the NAFION membrane . The NAFION membrane used in each of the exemplary fuel cells had a thickness of about 0.007 in. The active cell area was 5 cm. Catalyst inks were prepared by dispersing catalyst nanoparticles into appropriate amounts of Millipore purified water and 5 recast NAFION solution 1100EW Solution Technology Inc. . Both the anode and cathode catalyst inks were directly painted onto either side of a NAFION 117 membrane. The resulting multi layer MEA forms the anode the electrolyte membrane and the cathode .

The cathode catalyst used was unsupported platinum black 27 m g Johnson Matthey at a standard loading of about 7 mg cm. A preferred Pt Pd catalyst was used for the anode with a loading of about 4 mg cm. This catalyst was prepared by loading Johnson Matthey Hispec 1000 palladium black into a gold boat. The boat was next immersed in a palladium II nitrate solution 5 mM Pd NO 0.1 M HSO for about five minutes. The catalyst was rinsed with Millipore water then cyclic voltammetry was used to remove the nitrate. The boat was again immersed in a palladium II nitrate solution 5 mM Pd NO 0.1 M HSO for about five minutes. The catalyst was rinsed with Millipore water then cyclic voltammetry was used to remove the nitrate. The catalyst particles were then dried.

The first exemplary fuel cell included an anode enclosure and a cathode enclosure machined into conductive graphite blocks. A carbon cloth diffusion layer commercially available from E Tek Somerset N.J. was placed on top of both the cathode and anode catalyst layers. The formic acid fuel solution entered the anode enclosure through plastic Swagelock fittings. The MEA and carbon cloth forming the layers and are sandwiched between the two enclosures and and sealed with 35 durometer Si gasketing. The graphite block enclosures and were housed between two heated stainless steel blocks. Single sided PC boards placed in between the stainless steel blocks and the backsides of the machined graphite blocks acted as current collectors.

The MEA layers and were initially conditioned within the fuel cell at 60 C. with H O anode cathode fuel cell mode for 1 2 hours while holding the cell potential at 0.6 V using a fuel cell testing station Fuel Cell Technologies Inc. . The Hflow rate was set to 200 scc min the gas stream was humidified to 75 C. prior to entering the cell and a backpressure of 30 psig was applied. The Oflow rate was 100 scc min the gas stream was humidified to 70 C. and a backpressure of 30 psig was applied. After conditioning with H O cell polarization curves were obtained at 60 C. For the cell polarization measurements the anode fuel used was formic acid Aldrich 96 A.C.S. grade . On the cathode Owas supplied at a flow rate of 100 scc min without any backpressure humidified to 70 C.

Anode polarization curves were acquired by replacing the cathode Ogas stream with H. The anode potential was controlled with a galvanostat potentiostat model 273 EG G at a scan rate of 1 mV s. The platinum Hcombination on the cathode side of the fuel cell fixture acted as a dynamic hydrogen reference electrode DHE as well as a high surface area counter electrode. The Hflow rate was maintained at a rate of 100 scc min under a constant backpressure of 10 psig humidified to 75 C. prior to entering the cell. Formic acid was supplied to the anode side of the fuel cell MEA at a flow rate of 1 mL min acting as the working electrode for the electrochemical cell.

It is noted that herein formic acid concentrations may be referenced in units of molar concentration and or weight percent concentration. Those skilled in the art will appreciate that conversion between the two units is fairly straightforward. For convenience an approximate conversion in ranges of interest is provided in Table 3 

As illustrated by cell activity increases with feed concentration. There is little activity for 2 M formic acid. At fuel feed concentrations at and below 10 M it is believed that a mass transport limitation in the supply of formic acid to the anode limits activity. Much better results are obtained using formic acid concentrations of between about 10 M and about 20 M. For the exemplary cell a maximum current was observed at 12 M formic acid with a value of about 134 mA cmat 60 C. At formic acid concentrations of 20 M and above the cell polarization curve profile drops.

The relatively high open circuit potential OCP of the exemplary formic acid fuel cell of about 0.72 V illustrated in is a surprising and beneficial result. The typical OCP for a direct methanol fuel cell DMFC under similar conditions for instance is only around 0.6 V. The higher OCP of the fuel cell of the invention translates into a high power density and enhanced cell efficiency at lower applied loads. Within the optimal feed concentration range between 10 M and 20 M formic acid there is significant cell activity at high cell potentials 0.72 V to 0.50 V unlike that found for DMFCs.

In the data of have been further processed and plotted in units of power density verses current density for the various formic acid concentrations. For concentrations below 10 M the power density curves show an initial increase with current density reaching a maximum value followed by a sharp decrease. The decrease is believed to be due to mass transport limitations that cause fuel supply depletion. As the formic acid feed concentration is increased from 2 M to 12 M the initial power density slopes follow the same general trend prior to fuel supply depletion. For 2 M formic acid feed concentrations a power density of about 5 mW cmis attained. The maximum power density in occurs with a formic acid fuel solution concentration of about 12 M at about 48.8 mW cm. The 20 M formic acid power density profile shows an overall loss in cell performance with a decrease in overall power density vs. current density.

It is noted that the maximum power density found for 12 M formic acid of about 48.8 mW cmat about 0.4 V compares favorably to a measured maximum power density for a DMFC under similar conditions 1 M methanol 60 C. Pt based catalyst of about 51.2 mW cmat about 0.27 V. Comparing the exemplary fuel at 0.4 V the 12 M formic acid outperforms a typical 1 M methanol fuel cell 48.8 mW cmvs. 32.0 mW cm respectively.

It is believed that fuel cells of the invention will be practical using fuel solutions having a formic acid concentration of between about 5 and about 95 by weight with water concentrations between about 5 and about 95 by weight . Formic acid concentrations between about 25 and about 65 by weight and water concentrations of at least about 30 by weight are generally more preferred. This water concentration is believed to maintain good ion conductivity through the electrolyte membrane . Whether the fuel cell is run with dry or humidified air will effect the most beneficial formic acid fuel concentrations. For example when running with humidified air a formic acid concentration of between about 50 and 70 by weight is believed most beneficial. When running with dry air and no agents are provided to promote water retention by the cathode concentrations of between about 20 and 40 weight are believed most beneficial.

From about 1 to about 15 by weight alcohols and preferably between about 5 and 15 by weight alcohols with an example being ethylene glycol may also be present. The alcohols may be useful as a medium for dissipating reaction heat to allow the fuel cell to operate at relatively low temperatures as well as for other reasons.

In effects of formic acid concentration on current density at 0.4 V cell potential are illustrated for the exemplary fuel cell. The formic acid fuel solution concentration range studied was between about 1 M and about 22 M at a flow rate of about 1 mL min. The current density was attained from cell polarization curves at 0.4 V. There is little activity at the lower fuel feed concentrations. Activity increases with increasing formic acid concentration with maximum activity observed for fuel solutions between about 10 M and about 20 M. A maximum current of about 120 mA cmof electrolyte membrane is observed for a fuel solution of about 15 M. The cell activity begins to decrease for feed concentrations of greater than about 15 M and appears to drop sharply at concentrations of about 20 M and higher. It is noted that in this first and third exemplary fuel cells discussed herein the area of the anode and cathode are substantially the same and are substantially equal to the area of the electrolyte membrane. Also unless noted otherwise current and power densities discussed herein will be expressed in units of area of the electrolyte membrane for the exemplary fuel cells and current and power density values will be expressed in units of area of Pt surface for exemplary fuel cell two.

 1 a decrease in OCP at formic acid feed fuel solution concentrations above about 10 M 2 a decrease in cell polarization current densities at formic acid fuel solution concentrations at and above about 20 M and 3 an approximately linear increase in fuel cell resistance with formic acid fuel solution concentration. It is believed that common phenomenon is behind all of these trends. In particular it is believed that dehydration of the polymer electrolyte membrane as the water concentration in the formic acid fuel solution drops causes these trends. The preferred fuel solution concentration range that include formic acid at between about 40 65 by weight and water at least about 30 by weight are believed to lead to favorable performance.

An exemplary formic acid equivalent cell was operated to further illustrate performance of catalysts of the invention. In this equivalent cell catalysts of the invention include Pt nanoparticles decorated with discrete deposits or islands of a second metal such as Pd or Ru. Other catalysts of the invention include Pt nanoparticles having deposits of both Ru and Pd Pt Pd Ru . These two catalysts were illustrated using the third exemplary fuel cell.

A three electrode electrochemical cell was used with a coiled platinized Pt wire as a counter electrode and Ag AgCl in 3 M NaCl as the reference electrode. All potentials are reported vs. reversible hydrogen electrode RHE. The working electrode was made of a Pt nanoparticle catalyst platinum black Johnson Matthey physically immobilized on the surface of a gold disk 12 mm in diameter 7 mm in height . 0.1 M HSOsupporting electrolyte was prepared from concentrated sulfuric acid double distilled from Vycor GFS Chemicals and the Millipore water. An 88 solution of formic acid in water double distilled DFS chemicals was used and ultra high purity argon was used to deaerate all electrochemical cells used in this experiment. CO adsorption stripping measurements were employed using ultra high purity CO S J Smith Matheson . EG G Instruments PAR 283 Potentiostat Galvanostat interfaced with a computer and CorrWare software Scribner Associates was used to power the cell.

An exemplary Pt Pd catalyst of the invention was prepared through a method for making the catalyst of the invention that includes spontaneous deposition. A known amount of Pt black nanoparticles were suspended in Millipore water 4 mg ml of the catalyst . As used herein the term nanoparticle is intended to broadly refer to particles having diameter from a few tenths of a nanometer to tens of nanometers. A 100 l aliquot of the suspension was applied to a clean Au disk surface and allowed to air dry to form a uniform thin film of the catalyst. The Au disk is inactive to formic acid and serves as a convenient conducting support for the catalyst. No organic polymer was used to bind the catalyst to the Au disk so that a pristine catalyst surface is available for exposure to electrolytic media.

This Pt coated Au disk electrode was then cleaned by cyclic voltammetry with the potential ending at about the beginning of the platinum oxide range. The electrode was next immersed in a palladium II nitrate solution 5 mM Pd NO 0.1 M HSO for about five minutes. After the deposition the electrode was rinsed with Millipore water and treated by cyclic voltammetry to remove remnants of nitrate anions from the surface as well as to reduce any palladium oxides that may have formed on the surface during deposition.

An exemplary ternary Pt Pd Ru and an exemplary Pt Ru catalyst of the invention were also prepared by similar methods that use ruthenium in addition to or as an alternative to Pd. Namely electrodes made of Pt Pd nanoparticles prepared as described above or Pt nanoparticles on the Au disk were again voltammetrically cleaned and immersed in a ruthenium iii chloride solution 5 mm RuCl 0.1 m HClO for about five minutes. After the deposition the electrode was rinsed and treated by voltammetry to remove remnants of chloride as well as to reduce ruthenium oxides. The final cyclic voltammogram CV for the Pt Pd Ru electrode is shown in as the dotted line.

It has been discovered that when preparing catalysts of the invention it may be advantageous to repeat the spontaneous deposition step 2 3 times. This repetition is believed to create layers having a thickness of between about 0.3 and about 3 nm. This thickness has been discovered to increase the service life of the catalysts. Repeating the step more than 3 times is believed to cause formations to be deposited that are thicker than about 3 nm. Layers of this thickness have been discovered to be subject to degradation by oxidation.

The real electrode surface area was determined from the hydrogen adsorption desorption charge of the Pt surface before the Pd and or Ru deposition. Despite distinct differences in the CV features between the clean Pd decorated and Pd and Ru decorated Pt nanoparticles the total charge of the hydrogen adsorption desorption on Pt Pd and Pt Pd Ru was equal to that on clean Pt. This shows that there is a roughly 1 1 correlation between the number of adsorbed hydrogen atoms and the number of metal sites in all cases studied which facilitates the real surface area determination.

The solid line curve of represents voltammetric properties of the exemplary Pt Pd catalyst of the invention. Current potential peaks in the hydrogen adsorption desorption region are broader and less defined than on clean Pt. These new voltammetric features compared to Pt are even more pronounced on the exemplary Pt Pd Ru catalyst dotted line . Surprisingly the formation of surface oxides on the exemplary Pt Pd catalyst starts at a potential about 50 mV lower than for clean Pt and apparently less surface oxides are formed in the traditional oxide range. Also the double layer charging current is smaller for the exemplary Pt Pd and Pt Pd Ru catalysts.

It is also noted that it has been discovered that the preferred Pt Pd catalyst when used with a formic acid fuel cell of the invention facilitates formic acid oxidation at much lower potentials than is expected for methanol oxidation in known direct methanol fuel cells. For instance for formic acid oxidation on Pt Pd current density of about 0.84 a cmPt at 0.27 V was measured while methanol with a Pt Ru catalyst had a reported current density of about 0.94 a cmPt at 0.4 v vs. RHE.

To test the poisoning effects of CO ultra high purity CO was admitted to the exemplary fuel cell for 40 min followed by purging CO out of the cell using high purity argon for 20 min. at 0.13 V . shows stripping voltammetry for the Pt catalyst electrode dashed line for an electrode with a Pt Pd catalyst of the invention solid line for an electrode with a Pt Pd Ru catalyst of the invention dotted line and for an electrode with a Pt Ru catalyst of the invention dashed dotted line .

On the clean Pt nanoparticle electrode a pre wave is observed starting at a potential as low as about 0.3 V followed by the main peak appearance at 0.66 V. On Pt Pd catalyst of the invention the same pattern is seen but the pre wave is smaller and flatter while the main peak is larger and sharper than on Pt. The pre wave on Pt Pd starts at a potential about 0.05 V more positive than on Pt the potential of the main CO stripping peak increases from 0.66 V to 0.69 V for Pt and Pt Pd nanoparticles respectively. The total charge of the CO stripping is the same on Pt and Pt Pd and equal to about 330 C cm. Addition of Ru to the Pt Pd nanoparticles produces about 0.15 V shift in the peak position and the peak of surface CO oxidation current changed to about 0.55 V. The peak is broad and displays a clear fine structure as if consisting of a number of overlapping peaks dotted line . The CO stripping peak appears at an even lower potential for the Pt Ru nanoparticles. It is believed that a clear peak splitting occurs in this case due to the oxidation of CO from two different surface phases Pt Ru islands and the unmodified clean Pt parts of the surface. In summary the data of suggests that the Pt Pd catalyst of the invention shows higher potential for the CO stripping which may be interpreted as a lower CO tolerance than does Pt.

The Pt Pd catalyst of the invention appears to be particularly advantageous when used with formic acid fuel solutions of the invention. For example shows that the Pt Pd surface shows higher steady state current while shows that the Pt Pd catalyst has a lower CO tolerance as evidenced by the higher potential for the CO stripping. This is another surprising and beneficial result or the preferred Pt Pd catalyst. It is believed that this and other benefits are achieved because the Pt Pd catalyst promotes the formic acid direct dehydrogenation reaction pathway of Rctn. 6 and not the dehydration pathway of Rctns. 3 5.

A third exemplary formic acid direct fuel cell was fabricated to further illustrate fuel cells of the invention as well as catalysts of the invention. The third exemplary fuel cell was generally consistent with the fuel cell schematically shown in . Consistent element numbers will be used for convenience. Unitary membrane electrode assemblies MEA including the anode the polymer electrolyte and the cathode were fabricated by directly painting catalyst inks onto opposing sides of a NAFION membrane. The active cell area was about 5 cm.

Catalyst inks were prepared by dispersing catalyst nanoparticles into appropriate amounts of Millipore water and 5 recast NAFION solution 1100EW Solution Technology Inc. . For all the exemplary MEAs prepared the cathode consisted of unsupported platinum black nanoparticles about 27 m g Johnson Matthey at a standard loading of about 7 mg cm. Two different exemplary anode catalysts were compared with a standard Pt black catalyst Johnson Matthey . The two exemplary catalysts were Pt black modified by a submonolayer of spontaneously deposited Ru Pt Ru and Pt black modified by a submonolayer of spontaneously deposited Pd Pt Pd . The exemplary catalysts were prepared in the manner similar to that described above with reference to the exemplary fuel cell equivalent electrochemical cell but without applying the suspension to a support and drying the suspension to form a thin film on the support. Instead catalyst powder was used as a self standing catalyst and was exposed to the solution of the metal salt to spontaneously deposit metal islands. All three catalysts had a loading to 4 mg cm. A carbon cloth diffusion layer E Tek was placed on top of both the cathode and anode catalyst layers and both sides were TEFLON coated for water management.

The MEAs were initially conditioned at room temperature within the test cell with methanol humidified H 10 C. above cell temperature fuel cell anode cathode by running several anode polarization curves while slowly increasing to a final cell temperature of 80 C. The fuel cell cathode acted as a dynamic hydrogen reference electrode DHE as well as a high surface area counter electrode during this conditioning process. The Hflow rate was 100 scc min under a 10 psig backpressure and the gas stream was humidified to 10 C. above cell temperature. Methanol 1M was supplied to the anode side of the fuel cell MEA at a flow rate of 0.5 mL min and acted as the working electrode for an electrochemical cell. The anode potential was controlled with a power supply Hewlett Packard model 6033A the potential was step in 10 mV increments at 5 sec intervals.

The MEA was further conditioned at 80 C. while supplying H O anode cathode in fuel cell mode while holding the cell potential at 0.6 V for 1 2 hours. The cell potential was controlled with a fuel cell testing station Fuel Cell Technologies Inc . The Hflow rate was set to 200 scc min the gas stream was humidified to 95 C. prior to entering the cell and a backpressure of 30 psig was applied. The Oflow rate was 100 scc min the gas stream was humidified to 90 C. and a backpressure of 30 psig was applied. After conditioning with H Othe cell temperature was lowered to 30 C. A cell polarization curve with 4 M methanol 0.5 mL min O 100 scc min 40 C. was acquired as the final conditioning step.

Cell polarization curves were obtained on each of the three anode catalyst MEAs at 30 C. with 5 M formic acid Aldrich 96 A.C.S. grade at a flow rate of 0.5 mL min. Owas supplied to the cathode at a flow rate of 100 scc min under 30 psi of backpressure humidified to 40 C. Life tests were acquired at 0.6 V 0.5 V 0.4 V and 0.3 V in 5 M formic acid at a flow rate of 0.2 mL min. Owas supplied to the cathode at a flow rate of 100 scc min under 30 psi of backpressure humidified to 40 C. The potential load was initially applied by stepping from the open circuit potential to 0.1 V and then to the desired applied potential.

Carbon monoxide CO stripping cyclic voltammograms were acquired at 30 C. The anode functioned as a working electrode during the measurements the potential was controlled with a potentiostat galvanostat Solartron model SI 1287 at a scan rate of 1 mV sec. Hwas fed to the fuel cell cathode compartment the platinum Hcombination acted as a dynamic reference electrode DHE and a counter electrode. The Hflow rate was 100 scc min under a constant backpressure of 10 psig humidified to 40 C. During CO adsorption the anode potential was held at 0.15 V vs. DHE. Initially argon Ar was supplied to the fuel cell anode at 400 scc min at a backpressure of 30 psig and was humidified to 40 C. CO was adsorbed onto the surface from 0.1 CO in Ar at 400 scc min backpressure 30 psig humidified to 40 C. for 30 min. The anode enclosure was then flushed for 10 min with Ar. The surface area for each anode was determined from the CO stripping peak assuming a packing density equal to 1.0.

In the data of are further processed in terms of power density vs. the applied cell potential at room temperature 25 C. . The maximum power density attained on each of the three catalysts was Pt 43 mW cm 0.26 V Pt Ru 70 mW cm 0.26 V and Pt Pd 41 mW cm 0.27 V . The exemplary Pt Pd catalyst approached its maximum power density at the desired applied potential to run the fuel cell at cell potentials above 0.5 V . Pt Ru has the highest power density output but only at low cell potential 0.27 V . It is again noteworthy to compare the performance of this exemplary fuel cell and catalysts of the invention to a DMFC under substantially identical conditions that measured a maximum power density of only about 12 mW cm.

The anode polarization results generally mirror those found from the cell polarization curves in . There is greater than a 0.1 V difference in the on set of formic acid oxidation on the exemplary Pt Pd catalyst as compared to the Pt catalyst partially accounting for the 0.2 V difference in the OCP. On the Pt Ru anode catalyst there was substantially no current density at potentials below 0.4 V vs. DHE followed by a sharp increase in activity above 0.45 V. Table 4 tabulates the current density at several anode potentials for the exemplary catalysts 

It is noted with respect to and Table 2 that the preferred Pt Pd catalyst achieved an increase in activity of about four times over a Pt catalyst at a potential of about 0.2 V. While this is an appreciable and beneficial increase it is significantly different from the approximate increase of eighty times measured when using the second exemplary fuel cell and discussed above with reference to . It is believed that the difference is due to a difference in the cathode configuration in the two experiments. In particular it is believed that the second exemplary cell was anode limited reaction rate limited by the anode reaction . Anode improvements were therefore directly reflected in the cell output. It is believed that this third exemplary cell on the other hand was cathode dominated reaction rate limited by the cathode reaction so improvements in the anode reaction were not as directly reflected in the cell output as they were in the second exemplary cell. Life tests were also performed using the exemplary formic acid fuel cell running with oxygen and using exemplary catalysts at applied cell potentials ranging from 0.6 V to 0.3 V. Results are summarized in . In the applied cell potential was 0.6 V. Only the Pt and Pt Pd catalyst showed appreciable current densities at this applied potential. illustrates life test data at a cell potential of 0.5 V. Both the Pt Pd and the Pt Ru catalysts of the invention led to superior performance over the Pt catalyst with the Pt Pd catalyst being most favorable at this potential. The final approximate steady state current densities after holding the cell potential at 0.5 V for 2 hours were Pt 22.02 mA cm 10.30 mW cm Pt Ru 35.14 mA cm 16.44 mW cm Pt Pd 46.39 mA cm 21.71 mW cm .

The final life test was obtained at a cell potential at 0.3 V with results shown in . The catalyst of the invention again proved advantageous over Pt. At this applied potential the Pt Ru catalyst was superior to the Pt Pd. The final current densities after holding the cell potential at 0.3 V for 2 hours were Pt 62.53 mA cm 19.36 mW cm Pt Ru 166.72 mA cm 51.35 mW cm Pt Pd 125.98 mA cm 39.14 mW cm .

The performance results of the exemplary fuel cells show that the formic acid fuel solution and the catalysts of the invention show great promise for use in power applications. Many advantages are offered over DMFC s and other organic fuel cells of the prior art. These advantages may be of particular utility in mini or micro electronic device applications. For example because a formic acid fuel cell running with a high fuel concentration is not subject to the water management issues of a DMFC bulky and complicated water management systems that include pumps sensors and the like are not required. Thus a formic acid fuel cell of the invention may be advantageously provided in a more compact size than a DMFC. Also the open cell voltage of a formic acid fuel cell is 0.2 V higher than that of a DMFC so the power management is easier. A few exemplary applications for use of formic acid fuel cells of the invention include portable batteries portable electronic devices such as sensors communication devices control devices and the like. It will be appreciated that because of the relatively low potential of a single formic acid fuel cell these and other applications may include a plurality of fuel cells such as the fuel cell in series.

It is intended that the specific embodiments and configurations herein disclosed are illustrative of the preferred and best modes for practicing the invention and should not be interpreted as limitations on the scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims.

