---

title: Opening price process for trading system
abstract: A system for determining an opening price for products traded over a distributed, networked computer system is described. The system includes a plurality of workstations for entering orders for financial products into the distributed, networked computer system, said orders specifying a quantity of the financial product. A plurality of workstations for entering orders and a server computer coupled to the workstations, said server computer executing a server process that determines an opening price for the product. The opening price process posting an allocation message to market maker participants to communicate an expected allocation of the imbalance for execution at an initial opening of the market in the event that the imbalance exists at the opening.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07424454&OS=07424454&RS=07424454
owner: Primex Holdings, LLC
number: 07424454
owner_city: New York
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051004
---
This application is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 392 018 filed Sep. 8 1999 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 099 839 the contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety.

This invention relates to determining an opening price in an automated trading system for trading products such as equity securities.

In any trading system or market there exists the possibility that at the opening of trading the volume of buy orders will not balance the volume of sell orders. This could occur for many reasons or for no apparent reason. For example events may trigger buying or selling pressure in a particular security or the market in general. Also simple fluctuations in supply demand could produce an imbalance at the opening.

According to an aspect of the invention a method of determining an opening price for a product traded in a trading system includes receiving orders for the product each order specifying a quantity and whether the order is a buy or sell order determining an imbalance condition between received buy orders and received sell orders for the product and posting an allocation message to market maker participants to communicate an expected allocation of the imbalance for execution at an initial opening of the market in the event that the imbalance exists at the opening.

According to an additional aspect of the invention a computer program product for determining an opening price for a product resides on a computer readable medium. The computer program includes instructions for causing a computer to receive orders for a product each order specifying a quantity and whether the order is a buy or sell order at a market price determine an imbalance condition between received buy orders and received sell orders and post an allocation message to market maker participants to communicate an expected allocation of an imbalance for execution at an initial opening of the market in the event that the imbalance exists at the opening.

According to an additional aspect of the invention a system for determining an opening price for products traded over a distributed networked computer system includes a plurality of workstations for entering orders for financial products the orders specifying a quantity of the financial product. The system including a server computer coupled to the workstations. The server computer executing a server process that determines an opening price for the product the server process comprising instructions that cause the server to receive orders for the product each order specifying a quantity and whether the order is a buy or sell order at a market price determine an imbalance condition between received buy orders and received sell orders and post an allocation message to market maker participants to communicate an expected allocation of the imbalance for execution at an initial opening of the market in the event that the imbalance exists at the opening.

One or more of the following advantages may be provided by aspects of the invention. The opening price process provides more transparency to the forces that impact price at the opening by disseminating Imbalance Messages and Anticipated Share Allocation Messages to the public and market participants respectively which assist in reducing potential for excess volatility and help bring a market to an equilibrium price more smoothly as a market opening approaches. This process thus provides several advantages for investors and other participants. It results in a single price for all who participate at the open and the price that is provided is rationally related to market forces that may exist at that point in time since the price itself can be based on the opening quote on the side of the imbalance or alternatively at the midpoint of the opening quote. The price on the side of the imbalance is a price which is at the offer price if there is a buy side imbalance or a bid price if there is a sell side imbalance. Thus the process provides a price that is fair for all participants and is an efficient mechanism for bringing together buyers and sellers. The process removes currently existing execution price variations owing to where and when orders are sent while it mutualizes any imbalances amongst various market makers. The process facilitates the primary market quotation finding an equilibrium and expands the liquidity pool by drawing on different sources of available capital which includes orders as well as the capital that dealers in the market ate willing to provide. The process can be used with other markets or exchange mechanisms other than an auction system. For example it can be used where prices are electronically calculated and orders are electronically matched or crossed.

Referring now to a networked auction system designed to facilitate trading of products such as real property personal property and financial property such as equity securities and or other financial instruments such as bonds options futures and so forth is shown. The networked auction system will be described in terms of a system and process in which financial instruments such as stocks are auctioned. Any product could be auctioned particularly if the product has a value or price that can vary over short periods of time.

The networked auction system includes an order entry side comprised of any all of broker dealer systems electronic communication network ECN systems and public participant systems that enable members of the public to participate in the networked auction system either directly via a network or indirectly via the Internet or another communication medium through a sponsor such as a broker dealer. Each of the systems allow the various participants to enter orders into an automated auction system . The order entry portion of the networked auction system can also include day trader systems institutional systems exchange specialists and options market makers

The networked auction system also includes an order response side . The order response side can include the same participants including broker dealer systems ECN systems Internet based participant systems either direct or sponsored day trader systems and institutional systems and exchange specialists and options market makers . The responders can use the same physical system as is used to enter orders except the responders would use an order response process. These systems may be referred to herein as the crowd. With these order response systems when an order is presented via the order entry systems any one or more of the order response systems can respond to the order. Whichever order response system responds first to the order and meets or exceeds the terms of the order will result in a match for execution. The response systems can also have an entry flow of pre defined relative indications described below that express a participant s willingness to trade. Each of the order entry systems and order response systems are representative of types of trader systems and in fact in any practical example of such a system there could be many hundreds thousands etc. of any one type or other types of order entry and order response systems.

The order entry systems or the order response systems can be workstations. The workstations can have an interface to communicate with the automated auction system . Alternatively the workstations can have an application program interface that is developed to interface with the automated auction system or the Financial Information Exchange protocol customized to the auction system .

The automated auction system includes at least one server system including a process that is coupled to the order systems and response systems via a network not shown parts of which can be proprietary networks and parts of which can be the Internet. The server system executes a server process that is stored on a storage medium and which is executed in computer main memory that is part of the server . The auction system also is coupled to an exchange clearing submission system and an exchange trade reporting system . The automated auction system submits exchange clearing submissions to the clearing system and reports execution of trades to the reporting system . Trade reporting is accomplished for every execution e.g. within 90 seconds of the execution of the trade so that the trade can be reported for dissemination to vendors of market news i.e. financial information distributors news outlets and so forth. The reporting system is a Securities and Exchange Commission SEC or other regulatory approved or authorized process through which all trade reports in public securities are disseminated i.e. the Consolidated Tape Association CTA for exchange listed stocks and through the NASD Nasdaq for Nasdaq listed stocks.

The automated auction system can be a facility of a stock exchange a market or a self regulatory organization SRO . As a facility of an SRO which may include an exchange or market every trade that is executed in the automated auction system is given to the SRO so that the SRO can report the trade and perform other regulatory and clerical operations.

The automated auction system matches orders with responses other orders and pre defined relative indications of a willingness to trade. Once an order is matched to a response another order or pre defined relative indication the match is considered a preliminary execution in the automated auction system . The preliminary execution is given to the market or exchange as appropriate so that the preliminary execution can be validated. If the preliminary execution is a good execution it is validated and forwarded to a clearing corporation for clearance and settlement. For example the exchange can validate that it is a good execution consistent with the rules of the SRO and the Securities Exchange Commission SEC or equivalent regulatory authority and that there are no existing orders that could have been executed or that none of the parties are suspended from trading and so forth. The exchange trade clearing and reporting are in general conventional the manner that the automated auction system would interface to the exchange trade clearing and reporting could be specified by the those systems.

Each order in the automated auction system has a life span. The maximum life span of an order is determined by the order entry side of the auction . The life span can be variable and can be any set time period. Fixed time periods are preferred for trading financial securities such as stocks. Exemplary fixed time periods are a 15 second order a 30 second order or a 0 second order. The fixed time periods can be chosen taking into consideration the nature of the product that is being traded any regulatory rules that are imposed on trading the product as well as the nature of the market activity. For a financial instrument such as stocks regulatory rules are generally very important in determining time periods. Other times may be used even for financial instruments based on changes in regulatory rules. At the instant of order entry an order is exposed to the crowd for the exposure time specified in the order. However an execution can always end the auction sooner as will be described below.

Aspects of the auction system rely upon relative prices. These prices are relative to a standard variable market price. One standard pricing mechanism used in the auction system when auctioning stocks is The National Best Bid offer NBBO . The NBBO is a standardized quote in the securities industry for the national market systems best consolidated quotation. The National Best Bid Offer is a quantifiable price to buy and sell. The NBBO is always changing and could change during the life of an order having an impact on the final price.

The process can incorporate a relative pricing mechanism referred to as a Predefined Relative Indication PRI as described in co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 272 542 filed Mar. 19 1999 entitled. Auction Market With Price Improvement Mechanism by Peter B. Madoff et al. and assigned to the assignee of the present invention and incorporated herein by reference. A PRI uses the NBBO and a price improvement pi to produce relative prices. The PRI enables an order to achieve the best price in the market at the current time. The provision of the price improvement relative to the NBBO or other standard market quote would tend to improve the execution price relative to the spread i.e. the difference between bid and offer prices for any product or security. It also facilitates decimal denominated trading by enabling small price improvements of one 1 cent or even less. Auction examples as well as an example of a preferred auction system are described in the above mentioned application

Responses in the auction system can include fixed price relative price and predefined relative indications. Responses can have a life span but preferably responses have no life span. That is they are either immediately matched or canceled. The responses can be permitted to choose what types of orders they respond to. For example participants can respond to either or both of two broad types of orders public agency orders e.g. a retail customer or institutional customer. The second type is professional orders e.g. professional traders or broker dealers trading for their own account.

A participant may enter pre defined relative indications at any time during the day. During the day depending on market activity the participant may have a remaining pre defined relative indication for future auctions. The remaining pre defined relative indication will still be available for future auctions until the auction parameters that are set for all pre defined relative indications are exhausted. Two auction parameters are used to manage exposure but may also have the effect of governing the relative position of the pre defined relative indications after exhaustion of one of the parameters and can completely exhaust the predefined relative indication for the other parameter. These parameters are used to give a participant an ability to manage financial exposure. These parameters also guarantee that no one participant or indication would maintain preferential position in the auction. One parameter is a maximum share amount per indication and the other is a maximum share amount per auction.

If a participant has not exceeded the maximum share amount per auction it can in a current auction in which case its pre defined relative indication retains its time priority and therefore can match with another order. If the maximum share amount per auction for a participant s pre defined relative indication had been exhausted then that pre defined relative indication maintains its price priority but is lowered in time priority to the end of a queue for that price grouping. If the maximum share amount per indication has been exhausted then the pre defined relative indication is extinguished completely.

A pre defined relative indication therefore is a willingness or an expression to trade that resides in the system and remains dormant and unknown by other participants. This mechanism also allows trading interest to remain anonymous as to price size and identity. A pre defined relative indication when activated becomes a response that is priced relative to the National Best Bid offer NBBO . The automated auction system will forward the executions to the exchange for validation trade reporting and clearance.

Referring now to an exemplary format for an order entry for the auction system is shown. The order entry includes information entered by the order entry side of the auction. The information can include a security symbol an indication of whether the order is to buy or sell a quantity an exposure period and price either fixed market or with conditions such as a requirement for price improvement relative to the NBBO or other conditions such as all or none etc. The order entry is transmitted to the auction system . Orders with a fixed price may be treated differently executed immediately i.e. a zero second order or canceled depending on regulatory requirements.

Referring now to a format for a response is also shown. The response includes information including a security symbol a price or a price improvement a quantity of shares and a buy sell indication. The response information is also transmitted to the auction system and is placed in a queue not shown .

Referring now to a format for a pre defined relative indication is shown to include an information portion which includes a security symbol a relative price improvement a quantity and an indication type either buy or sell. The information is also transmitted to the auction system . In the auction system the pre defined relative indication is sorted by type e.g. buy or sell and by price and time received.

Referring now to a process for determining an opening price for a product such as a security is shown. The process can be used in any automated trading system that receives orders and responses prior to the opening of trading for the day. The process will be described with respect to the auction system of .

The opening price process receives market orders and determines from the received market orders whether there is an imbalance. Prior to the auction open the auction system receives market orders only from auction market makers and crowd participants that are entering their respective customer orders including customer orders for another broker dealer acting as an agent. As these orders are received the process determines whether there is an imbalance that exists between the two sides of the orders i.e. buy orders vs. sell orders. If an imbalance exists the existence of this imbalance is disseminated to all auction participants and the public generally via an Imbalance Message. The Imbalance Message includes the size of the total imbalance for a security at that time.

In one embodiment of the invention broker dealers market makers trading for their own account do not participate by submitting their own proprietary orders in the opening price process until just before the actual opening as will be described below. According to this embodiment the participation of proprietary orders is limited to reducing any potential imbalances that exist just prior to the opening. This limitation is desirable in order to avoid requiring a market maker or broker dealer to satisfy a competitor s proprietary orders.

After any imbalance has been determined the opening price process determines an anticipated share allocation and transmits a Anticipated Share Allocation Message ASAM to each one of the market makers. In one embodiment each market maker receives its own different ASAM. The anticipated share allocation represents a quantity of shares that a particular market maker may expect to be allocated for execution at the opening of the auction process . The number of shares is based on the size of the imbalance that exists at the time the Anticipated Share Allocation Message is sent. The share allocation is derived by dividing the imbalance that exists at that point on a pro rata basis based on each market maker s gross contribution that is both buy and sell sides of the market as a percentage of the sum of the gross contributions of all market makers at the opening.

Market makers are free to act to adjust their quotes and effect trades prior to the opening consistent with applicable rules of that market to establish a position or hedge a risk. Thus the opening price process issues Imbalance Messages and Anticipated Share Allocation Messages that assist in reducing potential for excess volatility. These messages can help bring a market to an equilibrium price by drawing in contra site interest as the opening approaches.

The opening price determining process can periodically determine a share imbalance based on received market orders and likewise determine an anticipated share allocation for each individual market maker at various points in time prior to the opening. A preferred chronology of events will be described below in . At some point in time just prior to the opening of the auction market the process will determine whether a lock in period has expired. Up to the expiration of a lock in period market makers may choose to lock in their last received anticipated share allocation amount communicated via the Anticipated Share Allocation Messages to insure that the amount will not be further reduced. If a market maker does not lock in the anticipated share allocation amount the market maker can still be obliged to fill the allocation if no contra side interest is generated to reduce the order imbalance. The actual share allocation that is locked in is the amount calculated at the end of the lock in period which should correspond as closely as possible to the ASAM generated contemporaneous with the closing of the lock in period.

Once the lock in period has expired an election to lock in an amount cannot be changed. Subsequent to the expiration of the lock in period the opening price process may accept 216 additional orders. This order acceptance process as will be further described in conjunction with is designed to reduce or eliminate any imbalance that may exist just prior to the opening of the auction. From the period of time subsequent to the lock in period until the actual start of the post opening auction the process seeks to reduce the imbalance as much as possible or to otherwise allocate any imbalance to market makers. If after the expiration of the lock in period and acceptance of orders an imbalance is eliminated the process will refuse new orders for participation in the opening and will prevent any additional orders from entering the system until after the market or auction opens for normal daily trading. The opening price process determines the opening price based on the opening quotes in the market and whether the imbalance was eliminated. In the case that the imbalance was reduced to zero the price for all securities is a single price which is at the midpoint of the opening quote i.e. the opening NBBO which represents the highest bid and lowest offer that is not locked or closed the first free opening quote .

If the imbalance is not eliminated as determined at just prior to the market open embodiments of the opening price process that include predefined relative indications apply any predefined relative indications that are resident in the auction process that would reduce or eliminate the imbalance. As described above predefined relative indications have relative prices associated with them during normal market hours. The predefined relative indications are priced at the NBBO plus a price improvement value. For the purposes of the opening however the predefined relative indications are treated as market orders on the side that would reduce the imbalance and the specified relative price e.g. NBBO pi does not impact the price at the opening or the price at which the predefined relative indication is fulfilled.

Rather the relative price and price improvement establishes a priority amongst all predefined relative indications as to their participation in the opening process when there is more predefined relative indication interest that is necessary to eliminate the imbalance. Those predefined relative indications that go towards eliminating the balance thus participate in the opening and execute at a price which is the quote on the side of the imbalance.

After all predefined relative indications have been applied to reduce the imbalance the process determines whether the imbalance has been eliminated. If there is no imbalance remaining the process determines the opening price based on the side of imbalance existing before the PRIs are applied. If there is an imbalance remaining after PRIs are applied however the opening process allocates the remaining imbalance among the market makers. The process will allocate the remaining imbalance amongst the market makers once there is a free opening quote. The remaining imbalance allocated amongst the market makers is allocated pursuant to each market maker s gross pro rata contribution among all market makers who contribute to the opening. The opening process determines the opening price taking into consideration the imbalance. Thus determining the opening price in the presence of an imbalance produces a price that is at the opening quote on the side of the imbalance.

Referring to an alternative arrangement is possible. This alternative can take into consideration limit orders that are sent to the system . That is the system can also receive limit orders prior to the opening. The alternative arrangement determines if the imbalance was eliminated after expiration of lock in period as in . If the imbalance was not eliminated at the market open the process applies predefined relative indications as above and determines whether the imbalance has been eliminated. If there is no imbalance remaining the alternative process determines the opening price based on the side of imbalance existing before the PRIs are applied. If there is an imbalance remaining after PRIs are applied however the opening process applies marketable limit orders that are marketable at the opening price. The process determines if the imbalance was eliminated and if so determines the opening price. If there is still an imbalance after applying marketable limit orders the process allocates the remaining imbalance among the market makers and determines opening price as in .

Once concluded the process executes a single block trade that represents all shares that crossed executed against predefined relative indications marketable limit orders or allocated to market makers. The price is the price determined by opening price determining process or . Execution reports are generated and can be distributed to each participant and the auction system can disseminate a block print as well as individual trade reports to the tape that make up the opening block print.

Referring now to an order acceptance process for the start of the process separates out orders that are received prior to the opening that do not correspond to customer market orders. In one embodiment the customer market orders are the only orders which initially participate in the opening process. These orders are communicated to the received market order process and the opening price process . According to another embodiment other orders can be accepted including limit orders as mentioned above.

Referring now to after a lock in period has expired order acceptance process modifies the types of orders that can be received by the opening price process . The order acceptance process accepts only those orders predefined relative indications and cancellations that minimize an order imbalance including marketable limit orders if the system applies such and broker dealer proprietary orders. Thus the opening price process can receive customer market orders predefined relative indications and order cancellations . These orders or cancellations are filtered to provide only orders that will reduce a potential imbalance. The accepted orders from process are used in the opening price process B to reduce the imbalance as described above.

The opening price process can be used in a market such as the auction system mentioned above in order to communicate and equitably allocate any pre opening imbalance. Pre opening imbalances can exist for many reasons such as the occurrence of a triggering event or simple normal fluctuations in supply and demand for a particular product such as a security. The process pools at the open all market orders from all participants and publicizes via the Imbalance Message any imbalance that may exist prior to the opening in order to draw in contra side interest that is to draw in orders on the opposite side of the imbalance. The process also allocates remaining imbalance among the market makers for the particular security so that they can be absorbed at an equilibrium price.

The process frequently calculates and delivers to each market maker its respective anticipated share allocation provided by the Anticipated Share Allocation Message ASAM This message is different than public postings of total imbalances that all participants see in that the Anticipated Share Allocation Message indicates an amount of shares that a particular market maker may be called upon to buy or sell at the opening price established with the first free open quote of the day as discussed above. The market makers have the option up to a point in time just prior to the opening to electronically lock in their expected allocation. Market makers that do not lock in may have their allocation reduced to the extent that contra side interest is drawn in between the lock in time and the opening of the market or resident predefined relative indications and limit orders are applied to reduce the imbalance. Market makers can use the ASAM to manage risk adjust quotations and help maintain an orderly market and thus help the market find an equilibrium at the opening.

This process provides several advantages for pricing products such as securities at the opening. The process results in a single price for all participants at the open. The price that is provided is rationally related to market forces that may exist at the time of the opening since it is based on the opening quote on the side of the imbalance if there is an imbalance or at the midpoint of the opening quote if the pre opening orders can all be matched. The process provides a price that is fair for all participants who choose to participate while providing an efficient mechanism for bringing together buyers and sellers and facilitating a fair and orderly process of introducing pre opening orders. The process removes execution price variations based upon where and when orders are sent while it mutualizes any imbalances amongst various market makers. The process facilitates the primary market quotation helps to find equilibrium for the product and expands the liquidity pool by drawing on the different sources of capital that seek to participate in the opening.

The process when used in the auction system described above leverages the auction business and systems model. The process can be used with other market or exchange mechanisms other than the auction system described above. For example it can be used with other trading systems where buyers and sellers come together to have their orders electronically executed.

Referring now to a typical example of a chronology of the opening price process is shown. In this example the auction market is scheduled to open at 9 30 A.M. and accepts orders starting at 8 00 A.M. The system accepts an order at 8 00 A.M. and continues to receive market orders from customers between 8 00 and 9 00. At 9 00 A.M. the process sends a first public dissemination of current imbalance information the Imbalance Message and also generates and disseminates the first of a set of Anticipated Share Allocations Message to individual dealers in the market. Each dealer receives its own anticipated share allocation message and does not see anticipated share allocations of other dealers.

The process at 9 05 A.M. five minutes after the first dissemination of the Anticipated Share Allocation Message sends a second Anticipated Share Allocation Message. The process sends a third Anticipated Share Allocation Message out at 9 10 A.M. At 9 15 A.M. the process sends its second public dissemination of current imbalance position the Imbalance Message and a fourth Anticipated Share Allocation Message. At 9 20 A.M. the process sends its third public dissemination of current imbalance information the Imbalance Message and from 9 20 A.M. to approximately 9 24 59 A.M. the system sends out an Anticipated Share Allocation Message more frequently e.g. every minute.

At 9 24 59 A.M. the process cuts off a market makers ability to lock in their final share allocation and at 9 25 A.M. the process sends out its fourth and final dissemination of imbalance i.e. the Imbalance Message. From 9 25 A.M. to 9 29 30 A.M. the process only accepts new orders that would reduce any portion of the imbalance that was not locked in by the market makers including for the first time proprietary orders by brokers dealers that reduce the imbalance. The process ends if the locked in imbalance goes to zero any time after 9 25 AM. If the balance is eliminated any additional orders will be rejected.

The system also continues to disseminate Anticipated Share Allocation Messages at each minute interval. At 9 29 30 A.M. that is 30 seconds before the actual opening all inputs to the system are closed. Approximately at 9 29 30 any predefined relative indications that exist in the system are applied on the side of the order to reduce any remaining imbalance and in some embodiments marketable limit orders are applied. Thereafter a final anticipated share allocation update is sent out if there is still an imbalance remaining that must be allocated among market maker participants.

At 9 30 A.M. the auction system or market opens seeking its first free open quote. At sometime after the opening at 9 30 A.M. the auction system executes the entire amount of accumulated shares as a single block at one price. The price for all the shares is determined on the opening quote on the side of the imbalance unless the imbalance was completely negated by the crowd and or by market maker trading for their own account and or predefined relative indications that were applied to reduce the imbalance and marketable limit orders that were used. The opening block is executed at a single price and share amount. The block is disseminated to all participants and printed on the public tape. Each participant also receives its execution reports to the extent it or its customers participated in the opening block. At some point for example 10 00 AM half hour after the opening the auction system can print to the tape individual trades that comprise the opening block trade.

Referring now to a pre defined indication ranking process is shown for ranking pre defined indications by price improvement and time received. The pre defined indication ranking process receives a pre defined relative indication and assigns it a time stamp. The process determines whether the pre defined relative indication is for a buy or a sell. If the pre defined relative indication is for a buy the process parses the pre defined relative indication to extract the price improvement pi as specified in the pre defined relative indication. This price improvement pi is compared to previously received price improvements pi. The compare process tries to find a previously received price improvement grouping that is equal to greater than or less than the current price improvement. If the process finds a price grouping that is equal to a current price improvement pi the process places the received pre defined relative indication at the end of that price improvement grouping. Otherwise a new grouping at the highest lowest or at an intermediate price improvement level is produced for the received pre defined relative indication.

The process will perform a similar ranking process including comparing and placing the received pre defined relative indication into a price improvement grouping if the received pre defined relative indication is determined to be a sell indication. After the process sorts the received pre defined relative indication it returns . The process can keep track of the pre defined relative indication by use of a queue not shown .

In the opening process the price improvement is only used to rank predefined relative indications for participation in reducing a pre opening share imbalance.

It is to be understood that while the invention has been described in conjunction with the detailed description thereof the foregoing description is intended to illustrate and not limit the scope of the invention which is defined by the scope of the appended claims. Other aspects advantages and modifications are within the scope of the following claims. For example the auction process can be used with other products such as goods commodities works of art etc. It is especially suitable for items that have a value that can change over time in accordance with fluctuations in market conditions. One particular use is for a system and method to price initial public offerings in stocks and other securities where there often an imbalance exists.

