---

title: Method and system for enhancing engineering information
abstract: A system and method for adding features to an electronic file is provided. The electronic file can be automatically examined to identify information that relates to features such as navigational aids or enhanced content. Certain information is defined to represent the navigational aids or enhanced content. When the information representing the navigational aid or enhanced content is located in the electronic file, the navigational aid or enhanced content is added to the electronic file. Bookmarks, internal links, web links, attachments, digital signatures and multimedia files are some examples of navigational aids and enhanced content that may be added to the electronic file, although other items may also be included.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08086950&OS=08086950&RS=08086950
owner: Bentley Systems, Inc.
number: 08086950
owner_city: Exton
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050825
---
This application claims priority from U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 604 083 filed Aug. 25 2004 the entire contents of which are incorporated herein.

The invention relates to automatic generation of additional content that allow users of electronic information such as electronic plots to navigate find and understand information.

Computer Aided design and drafting tools CAD such as CAD software is well known and used by architects engineers designers planners and the like to create precision models and technical illustrations. It is used to create two dimensional 2 D drawings maps and three dimensional 3 D models. CAD software may be used to design buildings highways and the like. Applications such as MicroStation products which are developed by Bentley Systems Inc. Exton Pa. U.S.A. and AutoCAD products which are developed by Autodesk Inc. San Rafael Calif. U.S.A. are typical of such CAD software which may be used in the engineering construction and operations ECO marketplace.

Engineering information generated by CAD software consists of large format engineering plans engineering drawings and specifications. is an example of an engineering plan sheet . The plan sheet includes a title block that includes identifying information for the plan sheet and one or more drawings . Engineering plan sets are collections of plan sheets. There are established methods used in the engineering community for reading plan sets. Typically plan sets contain an index sheet that serves as a table of contents for the set. is an example of a sheet index . The sheet index includes a title block and an index of all plan sheets in the plan set.

An example of a graphic is shown in . indicates that a detailed illustration of the information contained in the circle can be found on sheet number and the detail name on that sheet is Y. The above are examples of the types of graphical navigation aids that are often found in engineering plan sets. Techniques like the ones described above have been used on engineering drawings for decades prior to the use of computers to create engineering drawings.

With the advent of CAD tools the collection of graphics that represent the index table or drawing detail references have been constructed using the basic features of the CAD tool. Although each organization using a particular CAD tool may represent detail references using different CAD primitives most organizations are consistent within its members. In other words all draftsmen within an organization using the CAD tool represent the detail reference the same way. To ensure consistency most organizations issue CAD standards that their draftsmen are required to comply with.

When the CAD data is published these navigational aids may be used by a reader to navigate among the plan set. In this context publishing refers to taking the information in a CAD file and presenting the information to a reader in a paper or electronic paper form. The information in an e paper form may be enhanced by added electronic navigational aids and enhanced content. There are two established methods to enhance the content of published engineering information in e paper forms.

The first method is to manually edit the published content. This method is offered and prescribed by Adobe. After creating the electronic paper the publisher would use Adobe Acrobat s editing tool to add navigational aids such as bookmarks etc. For example the publisher would use features of Acrobat to establish areas of interest for the Notes Disclaimer etc. Bookmarks may be created using other commands in the Acrobat environment. Digital Signature fields and file attachments could also be created using interactive editing features of Acrobat. The disadvantage of this method is that the editing steps must be repeated every time a new version of the plans and specifications are created. The user creates plans and specifications in PDF form. The PDF is then edited to enhance its content. As the design evolves through the project life cycle the same edits would have to be reapplied over and over again each time the CAD data is published. For the life cycle of an asset this could be hundreds or even thousands of times. Consequently this method is very expensive and time consuming. Other vendors provide solutions similar to Adobe s using other industry standard e paper formats like Cals and Tiff image data.

The second method is to extend the concepts in the CAD tool to encompass navigational aids and enhance content for publishing purposes. This approach has been deployed by AutoDesk in their 2005 release of AutoCAD. This method avoids the labor intensive redundant editing that is required using the first method. However this method has its disadvantages. One such disadvantage is that this method cannot be used to enhance published content on older CAD files. The engineering design must be done using AutoCAD 2005. This means that all assets that have been designed using CAD over the last several decades and that are now being renovated cannot realize the benefits of today s publishing technology during their renovation without recreating all of the CAD data using the extended CAD tool.

Navigation and information are easy for professional engineers to determine on visual inspection of a plan set but difficult to describe programmatically. It is necessary to describe the relationships and associations between selected graphics within and across multiple sheets in a plan set. Accordingly there is a need for a system and method that can overcome the disadvantages of previous systems.

Embodiments of the invention provide a method for adding intelligence to a computer file comprising receiving a computer file including data receiving definition information that defines a feature identifying data in the file that represents the feature based on the definition information causing the feature to be created in the computer file.

Further embodiments of the invention provide a method comprising receiving a CAD file including data in a first format identifying at least one of graphics or text in the CAD file that corresponds to a feature extracting the identified graphics or text interpreting the extracting graphics or text to identify the feature and obtain feature information and creating a second file including the data in a second format and the identified feature.

Further embodiments of the invention provide A computer readable medium including computer code for causing a computer to perform the steps of identifying at least one of graphics or text in a first computer file that correspond to preselected graphics and text and determining a navigational aid that corresponds to the identified graphics or text based on a definition of the navigational aid. Additional embodiments create a second computer file corresponding to the first computer file in a second format and cause the navigational aid to be created in the second computer file.

Embodiments of the invention are discussed in detail below. In describing embodiments specific terminology is employed for the sake of clarity. However the invention is not intended to be limited to the specific terminology so selected. While specific exemplary embodiments are discussed it should be understood that this is done for illustration purposes only. A person skilled in the relevant art will recognize that other components and configurations can be used without parting from the spirit and scope of the invention.

Embodiments of the present invention provide a system and method for adding features to an electronic file. The electronic file can be automatically examined to identify information that relates to features such as navigational aids or enhanced content. Certain information is defined to represent the navigational aids or enhanced content. One example of this is the drafting standards discussed above. When the information representing the navigational aid or enhanced content is located in the electronic file the navigational aid or enhanced content is added to the electronic file. Bookmarks internal links web links attachments digital signatures and multimedia files are some examples of navigational aids and enhanced content that may be added to the electronic file although other items may also be included. An embodiment of the invention is described below in the context of CAD files and electronic plots however the invention can also be applied to many other fields.

As described above a CAD file may be created based on standards. Information can be identified extracted and interpreted from the CAD file based on the definition of the graphics and text in the CAD design. For example the detail reference shown in may be represented in MicroStation or AutoCAD as a cell or block that contains a shape two lines and two pieces of text. The drafting standard defines such a cell or block as a detail reference. CAD standards may be used to identify relevant graphics in the CAD design. The CAD file is examined to identify cells or blocks that contains a shape two lines and two pieces of text as a detail reference. The CAD file can also be examined to identify other graphics and text that identify other navigational aids and enhanced content.

Once the information regarding the graphics and text is identified the information is extracted and interpreted. In this example a cell or block that contains a shape two lines and two pieces of text has been identified. The graphics and text for the detail reference are extracted and interpreted. This may be done based on the properties of the information identified. Based on the applicable definition for example for the CAD standard such a cell is identified as a detail reference. Based on the definition of a detail reference it is known that a detail reference includes a sheet number and detail name. A detail reference includes a sheet number in the bottom portion of the square and the detail name in the top portion of the square. The graphics and text of the detail reference are interpreted to obtain the sheet number and detail name based on the location of the text. Here the detail reference indicates that the sheet number is and the detail name on that sheet is Y.

Based on the interpretation of the information the next step may be to cause the identified feature to be added to the electronic file. In the case of a detail reference a link from the detail reference to the detail Y on sheet is caused to be created. The source of the link is the detail reference. In order for a link to be created the target for the link must be identified based on the interpretation of the detail reference. It is known that the target is detail Y on sheet . Therefore the CAD file is examined to identify detail Y on sheet . Once the target is located the link is created.

One method of providing the definitions of CAD data that represent the additional features is a scripting language. A scripting language is provided that enables organizations to describe their CAD standards and describe how to automatically create electronic navigation aids and enhance the information to assist the reader in navigating and understanding the collective engineering information plans and specifications .

An example of a scripting language is provided below. The example scripting language is provided with Bentley Systems Microstation PDF Composer. Other scripting languages may be used and would be apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. MicroStation PDF Composer is a Windows application for publishing PDF documents from plots and plot sets. The method of the present invention may be applied when a CAD design is published. This typically involves taking the CAD file which is in a first format such as .DGN or .DWG and converting the CAD file to a second format such as .PDF Autodesk s DWF Microsoft s XPS XML Paper Specification or some other format. The method for identifying and adding features may be performed as part of the application authoring the CAD file or part of the publishing software. In either case the navigational aids and enhanced content should become part of the published plan set.

The CAD design may be published as a PDF document that contains audio or video instructions bookmarks internal PDF document links Web URL Links attachments that contain project specifications and other files. The example scripting language includes keywords. The keywords are predefined and are used to assign an attribute to an element or to compare an elements existing attributes to values defined in the script.

The following keyword descriptions include a brief description of the keyword function the types of elements the keyword affects if applicable the valid data type s if applicable and an example of how to use the keyword.

In this example the first action  keyword is action item followed by action name. The remaining action keywords action type action spec action range and action instance can be listed in any order.

Specifies the type of action you want to create. This is a required field when defining an action item in an active rendition. The first action keyword in a design script is ACTION ITEM followed by ACTION NAME. The following constants are valid for the ACTION ITEM keyword 

Specifies that type of action associated with the previous ACTION ITEM assignment. This is a required field when defining an ACTION ITEM. The following constants are valid for the ACTION TYPE keyword 

There are many electronic navigation aids available in e paper electronic paper plots technologies available today. As an example Adobe offers in Adobe Acrobat and Adobe Reader many navigational aids. They include bookmarks internal document links and attachments. These are the navigational aids that would be constructed by for example the scripting language described above that exploits an organization s CAD standards.

Bookmarks are a hierarchal collection of text labels. Selecting one of the text labels using the computers input device would cause the e paper plot viewer to navigate to specific information.

The following is an example of a design script that exploits a CAD standard to create bookmark navigational aids. The CAD standard would insure that the design script could be used on any index sheet created for any project by the organization. The design script would apply to all index pages created for any project that complied with the CAD standard.

An electronic plot in PDF format is shown in . The plots were created from a CAD file drafted with the above drafting standards using the above script. Each successive screen shot of Acrobat shows the action of the viewer when navigating the bookmarks.

Bookmarks and inter document links are just a few of the features that can be created exploiting CAD standards and a scripting language. Many others are possible. For example the following extension to the CAD standard and script would provide a method for navigating between engineering plans and specification.

Embodiments of the invention provide a system and method that is easy to setup administer and execute that also provides reproducible results that are easy for the consumer of the published document to use effectively by applying their discipline specific knowledge for plan set navigation without significant training. Existing CAD files may be examined and features added thereto based on drafting standards. The embodiments illustrated and discussed in this specification are intended only to teach those skilled in the art the best way known to the inventors to make and use the invention. Nothing in this specification should be considered as limiting the scope of the present invention. The above described embodiments of the invention may be modified or varied and elements added or omitted without departing from the invention as appreciated by those skilled in the art in light of the above teachings. For example the order in which the steps are performed may be varied as long as the above described dependencies are maintained. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the claims and their equivalents the invention may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described.

