---

title: Cascaded organic rankine cycles for waste heat utilization
abstract: A pair of organic Rankine cycle systems () are combined and their respective organic working fluids are chosen such that the organic working fluid of the first organic Rankine cycle is condensed at a condensation temperature that is well above the boiling point of the organic working fluid of the second organic Rankine style system, and a single common heat exchanger () is used for both the condenser of the first organic Rankine cycle system and the evaporator of the second organic Rankine cycle system. A preferred organic working fluid of the first system is toluene and that of the second organic working fluid is R245fa.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07942001&OS=07942001&RS=07942001
owner: UTC Power, LLC
number: 07942001
owner_city: South Windsor
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050329
---
The United States Government has certain rights in this invention pursuant to Contract No. DE FC02 00CH11060 between the Department of Energy and United Technologies Corporation.

Power generation systems that provide low cost energy with minimum environmental impact and that can be readily integrated into the existing power grids or rapidly sited as stand alone units can help solve critical power needs in many areas. Combustion engines such as microturbines or reciprocating engines can generate electricity at low cost with efficiencies of 25 to 40 using commonly available fuels such as gasoline natural gas and diesel fuel. However atmospheric emissions such as nitrogen oxides NOx and particulates can be a problem with reciprocating engines.

One method to generate electricity from the waste heat of a combustion engine without increasing the output of emissions is to apply a bottoming cycle. Bottoming cycles use waste heat from such an engine and convert that thermal energy into electricity. Rankine cycles are often applied as the bottoming cycle for combustion engines. A fundamental organic Rankine cycle consists of a turbogenerator a preheater boiler a condenser and a liquid pump. Such a cycle can accept waste heat at temperatures somewhat above the boiling point of the organic working fluid chosen and typically rejects heat to the ambient air or water at a temperature somewhat below the boiling point of the organic working fluid chosen. The choice of working fluid determines the temperature range thermal efficiency characteristics of the cycle.

Simple ORC Systems using one fluid are efficient and cost effective when transferring low temperature waste heat sources into electrical power using hardware and working fluids similar to those used in the air conditioning refrigeration industry. Examples are ORC systems using radial turbines derived from existing centrifugal compressors and working fluids such as refrigerant R245fa.

For higher temperature waste heat streams the most cost effective ORC systems still operate at relatively low working fluid temperatures allowing the continued use of HVAC derived equipment and common refrigerant. However these systems although very cost effective do not take full advantage of the thermodynamic potential of the waste heat stream.

Briefly in accordance with one aspect of the invention a pair of organic Rankine cycle ORC systems are combined and a single common heat exchanger is used as both the condenser for the first ORC system and as the evaporator for the second ORC system.

By another aspect of the invention the refrigerants of the two systems are chosen such that the condensation temperature of the first higher temperature system is a useable temperature for boiling the refrigerant of the second lower temperature system. In this way greater efficiencies may be obtained and the waste heat loss to the atmosphere is substantially reduced.

In accordance with another aspect of the invention the single common heat exchanger is used to both desuperheat and condense the working fluid of the first ORC system.

By another aspect of the invention if a second heat exchanger is provided in the first ORC system with the common heat exchanger acting to desuperheat the working fluid of the first ORC system and the second condenser acting to condense the working fluid in the first ORC system.

By yet another aspect of the invention a preheater using waste heat is provided to preheat the working fluid in the second ORC system prior to its entry into the common heat exchanger.

In the drawings as hereinafter described preferred and modified embodiments are depicted however various other modifications and alternate constructions can be made thereto without departing from the true spirit and scope of the invention.

Referring now to a conventional type of organic Rankine cycle system is shown to include an evaporator boiler which receives waste heat from a source as described hereinabove. The heated working fluid passes to the turbine where it is converted to motive power to drive a generator . The resulting lower temperature and pressure working fluid then passes to a condenser where it is converted to a liquid which is then pumped by the pump back to the evaporator boiler .

In such a typical system a common working fluid is toluene. In the vapor generator the working fluid has its temperature raised to around 525 F. after which it is passed to the turbine . After passing through the turbine the temperature of the vapor drops down to about 300 F. before it is condensed and then pumped back to the evaporator boiler .

Shown in is a TS diagram of the organic rankine cycle system illustrated in using toluene as the working fluid. As will be seen because of the relatively high critical temperature the toluene is thermodynamically more efficient than systems with working fluids having lower critical temperatures. However it is less cost effective and still leaves much to be desired in terms of efficiency. The reason for the higher cost of these higher temperature ORC systems is twofold First working fluids such as toluene with high critical temperatures allow operation at a higher evaporation temperature which is relatively good for efficiency but exhibit a very low density at ambient conditions thus requiring large and expensive condensation equipment. Secondly the nature of such high critical temperature organic fluids is that the higher the turbine pressure ratio typically larger than 25 1 in such a system the more superheated the vapor that leaves the turbine. The thermal energy represented by the superheat of the vapor leaving the turbine is therefore not used for power generation and requires additional condenser surface for rejection to ambient. Accordingly there is a substantial amount of lower temperature waste heat i.e. the heat of the superheated low pressure vapor leaving the turbine which is not converted into power thereby limiting the turbine efficiency.

Referring now to a modified arrangement is shown to include a pair of organic Rankine cycle systems and that are combined in a manner which will now be described. An evaporator boiler or vapor generator receives heat from a heat source to produce relatively high pressure high temperature vapor which is passed to a turbine to drive a generator . After passing through the turbine the lower pressure lower temperature vapor passes to the condenser evaporator where it is condensed into a liquid which is then pumped by the pump to the vapor generator to again be vaporized.

Typically an unrecuperated microturbine has an exit temperature of its exhaust gases of about 1200 F. This hot gas can be used to boil a high temperature organic fluid such as pentane toluene or acetone in an ORC. If toluene is the working fluid the leaving temperature from the vapor generator would be about 500 F. and the temperature of the vapor leaving the turbine and entering the condenser would be about 300 F. After being condensed the liquid toluene is at a temperature of about 275 F. as it leaves the condenser and passes to the vapor generator by way of the pump . These temperatures and related entropies are shown in the TS diagram of .

In this cascaded ORC arrangement the first ORC system i.e. the toluene loop is a high temperature system that extracts all the heat either sensible such as from a hot gas or hot liquid or latent such as from a condensing fluid such as steam in a refrigerant boiler evaporator creating high pressure and high temperature vapor. This high pressure vapor expands through the turbine to a lower pressure with a saturation temperature corresponding to a level where a low cost low temperature ORC system can be used to efficiently and cost effectively convert the lower temperature waste heat to power. By doing this the high temperature refrigerant still has positive pressure and a corresponding larger density in the condenser . This results in a condenser with less pressure drop better heat transfer and smaller size all of which result in a more cost effective ORC system. The high pressure and larger density of the vapor exiting the turbine also allows a smaller turbine design. A substantial reduction in cost can be obtained by these modifications. Further the lower pressure ratio i.e. 5 1 at the turbine allows for higher turbine efficiencies.

Considering now that the temperature of the toluene vapor entering the condenser evaporator is relatively high its energy can now be used as a heat source for a vapor generator of a second ORC system with the condenser evaporator acting both as the condenser for the first ORC system and as the evaporator or boiler of the second ORC system. The second ORC system therefore has a turbine a generator a condenser and a pump . The organic working fluid for the second ORC must have relatively low boiling and condensation temperatures. Examples of organic working fluids that would be suitable for such a cycle are R245fa or isobutane.

In the second ORC system with R245fa as the organic working fluid the temperature of the working fluid passing to the turbine would be around 250 F. and that of the vapor passing to the condenser would be about 90 F. After condensation of the vapor the refrigerant would be pumped to the condenser evaporator by the pump .

Referring to an alternate nested arrangement is shown wherein within the toluene circuit the working fluid again passes from the boiler or vapor generator to the turbine and then to a common heat exchanger . Again the heat exchanger acts as an evaporator or boiler for the R245fa circuit with the R245fa refrigerant passing from the boiler to the turbine to a condenser the pump and back to the boiler . However unlike the condenser evaporator of the embodiment the heat exchanger acts as a desuperheater only within the toluene circuit with a condenser then being applied to complete the condensation process before the working fluid is passed by way of the pump back to the boiler . The TS diagram for such a nested ORC cycle system is shown in .

In this nested arrangement a cost reduction is obtained by adding the low temperature R245fa ORC system in such a way that the overall system efficiency is increased. The major irreversibility thermodynamic loss of the simple cycle high temperature ORC system is the so called desuperheat loss in the condenser. Organic fluids leave the turbine more superheated than they enter it. The larger the pressure ratio at the turbine the stronger this effect. High temperature simple cycle ORC systems although thermodynamically more efficient than the simple cycle low temperature ORC systems reject a lot of moderate temperature waste heat that has to be rejected in the desuperheater condenser. As a result a relatively large condenser is required. In the nested ORC system desuperheating is done in the low temperature ORC evaporator . This increases the overall power output since this heat was previously rejected to ambient and is now used in a low temperature ORC system to generate power. A further advantage is that the size of the high temperature ORC condenser may be reduced.

Thus the overall result of the nested ORC system is a more cost effective overall ORC system for high temperature waste heat sources. The increased cost effectiveness is obtained by increased power output and by reducing the size of the original desuperheater condenser unit.

Although the embodiment has been described in terms of use with two different refrigerants it should be understood that the same refrigerant could be used in the two circuits.

A further embodiment of the present invention is shown in wherein the embodiment is modified by the addition of a preheater in the R245fa cycle as shown. Here the working fluid after passing through the condenser and the pump passes through the liquid preheater using the waste heat source at lower temperatures from 400 F. to 200 F. . The corresponding TS diagram is shown in .

While the present invention has been particularly shown and described with reference to preferred and alternate embodiments as illustrated in the drawings it will be understood by one skilled in the art that various changes in detail may be effected therein without departing from the true spirit and scope of the invention as defined by the claims.

