---

title: Collaboration spaces
abstract: A computer implemented method and system enable users to create a social network providing access to other users. By providing access to such networks via a visual presentation, the system renders content available for access by other network members. Access is sometimes provided through propagation of metadata or other uniquely identifying indicia associated with the social network to all or at least certain other network members.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07620902&OS=07620902&RS=07620902
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07620902
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050420
---
This invention relates to communication and interaction over a computer network. More particularly the invention is directed to a system and method for defining a social network user interface to facilitate interactions and data availability among defined groups of two or more communicating entities.

The popularity of the Internet and other networks has caused a migration of various interactions and tasks from the physical world to the digital world. For example documents and files that would in years past have been shared by sharing physical copies to other members in a group are now often handled electronically and transmitted digitally over a network. In such exchanges between members of a group it is important to maintain a degree of control over access by various group members particularly when the group is collaborating with each other.

With the coming of the digital age one activity that has not migrated strongly from the physical world to the digital one has been group interaction. In our daily lives we interact with people on a regular basis and form social groups that we engage with on a variety of activities over time. However within any social group information is sometimes shared with less than all of the group members or even maintained in private. Everyone in the social group knows about every one else and these groups grow and change over time. This metaphor that exists in our daily lives has not translated into the digital world.

While a number of mechanisms and forums for digital communication between remote parties now exist none of these has provided a compelling solution that can lead to widespread use. The existing communications mechanisms fail to now provide a user interface that is intuitive and easy to use. For example these technologies do not provide a true group space within which group members may readily know whether other group members are present access shared files and engage in other group activities. Instead many existing technologies tend to focus on a single activity or endeavor such as gaming or file sharing rather than on the group and its activities and communication. Other technologies allow group chatting but have no true sense of groups requiring setup of the group each time a group chat is attempted and providing no mechanism for transitioning the group to an activity other than pure chatting without again manually setting the group up at the next activity.

Accordingly there remains a need to facilitate group interaction through which a desired group of users can interact with each other in a secured environment and through which users can access and maintain control with respect to files shared in their shared relationships with one another.

The present invention is directed to a method and system for presenting a social network to a user through a graphical interface. The invention presents group activities associated with the social network that may be implemented across network topologies to facilitate group interaction within the social network.

The invention provides a system and method for visually presenting a social network such that user may activate management tasks and items. Such action includes various operations that are performed with respect to group activities within the network among other things. Upon creation of the social network other users can access and or receive notifications concerning group activities and perform other social interactions such as join in interactive sessions or collaborate on shared data files. This provides a clear sense of user operations that are available for group activities to thereby create an ease of use of group spaces.

With the use of a browser interface items within a social network may be managed quickly and effectively. In this way other applications can readily access content within the social networks defined by the user.

Generally the present invention relates to a shared social network that enables secure interactions among defined members in a group. In one aspect the invention provides a user interface that exposes entry points to other applications to permit among other things instant text voice and or audio visual communication shared file system operations or notification of a change in status of group members or activities. The invention permits enhanced functionality with respect to the formation and maintenance of relationships within the social network.

An embodiment of the invention is described below in the context of a social network or shared space comprising multiple individual users that communicate via a computer network. Typically such users may form a Social Network in a social environment or a shared work environment. However the invention is not so limited. To the contrary a Social Network or Shared Space may refer to a device space such as a home network. Also a Social Network or Shared Space may refer to a personal space such as an individual user that defines a Social Network or Shared Space to enable access to shared data resources or other items from multiple devices and or locations.

Although it is not required for practicing the invention the invention is described as it is implemented by computer executable instructions such as program modules or objects executable by a computing device. Generally program modules or objects may be implemented as routines programs components data structures and the like that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types.

The invention may be implemented in various computing device configurations. For example the invention may be realized in hand held devices mobile phones multi processor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like wearable computing or communication devices and any other device capable of both visual display and direct or indirect communication with another device. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote memory storage devices. Thus it will be understood that the invention is preferably incorporated into many types of computing environments as suggested above. Exemplary computing environments in which the invention may operate are described in the identified patent application Ser. No. 10 692 501 entitled System And Method For File Sharing In Peer To Peer Group Shared Spaces and Ser. No. 10 693 228 entitled Group Shared Spaces both of which were filed in the Patent and Trademark Office on Oct. 24 2003 and are incorporated herein by reference.

In the description that follows the invention will be described with reference to acts and symbolic representations of operations that are performed by one or more computing devices unless indicated otherwise. Such acts and operations which are referred to as being computer executed include the manipulation by the processing unit of the computing device of electrical signals representing data in a structured form. This manipulation transforms the data or maintains it at locations in the memory system of the computing device which reconfigures or otherwise alters the operation of the computing device in a manner well understood by those skilled in the art. The data structures are physical locations of memory with particular properties defined by the format of the data. However while the invention is being described in the foregoing context it is not meant to be limiting. Those of skill in the art will appreciate that various acts and operations described herein may also be implemented in hardware.

One or more user machines used in the illustrated environment of an embodiment of the invention are implemented as the computing devices described in the applications referred to above although there is no such limitation inherent in the invention. The invention may additionally or alternatively be used with any of a number of other communication device types including but not limited to wearable communication devices cell phones and PDAs.

In accordance with the invention a social network is presented through a graphical user interface with the look and feel of existing operating system user interface features. For example the invention may use browser window that allows the user to browse the social network or networks to which they belong. In one embodiment the invention is implemented by presenting iconic representations of the social networks in a social space portion of the window. The browser enables various applications and other items to be accessed with respect to data residing in the social network.

For facilitating interaction and communication among group members an embodiment of the invention utilizes existing operating system infrastructure that allows for a large number of applications and or scenarios to be delivered in a distributed environment. Such infrastructure may provide functionality including without limitation distributed connectivity name resolution efficient multipoint communication and collaboration secure groups and distributed data management as will be appreciated by those skilled in the art.

While it may be done in many ways one embodiment of the invention is implemented as part of a collaboration architecture that includes various collaboration objects described in greater detail below. These collaboration objects generally define various elements in a user interface. In a preferred embodiment they are included in a presentation layer that accesses appropriate collaboration services and controls through defined application programming interfaces.

Preferably the presentation layer accesses controls exposed through a framework of collaboration controls. By way of example the framework may include real time communication controls that provide access to time sensitive activities such as instant messaging or text activity voice communication activity and video communication activity. Other controls permit collaborative editing and creation as well as access to other shared activities. In a preferred embodiment an infrastructure layer provides an abstraction to collaboration services accessible through one or more defined interfaces. For example interfaces may be defined to permit applications and members to negotiate what activities other members can engage in and provide a structured mechanism for starting accessing and or synchronizing activities. In addition various transport interfaces and interfaces to connectivity services enable communication either through a single or a multi party communication channel.

A social network explorer is represented by graphical user interface presentations and controls that may be included as part of an operating system or at least an intuitive extension of operating system operations. Much like the real world a social network is created in order to form a relationship among one or more entities. The social networks created or used by the same entity are preferably displayed in a single shell folder that defines a social space. The browser provides an entry point for applications and other items that can be utilized in coordination with the social network.

In an illustrated embodiment various activities that are accessible by members in a Social Network are implemented as activity objects. Such objects typically provide a user interface having a description of an associated activity and an entry point to the associated activity. Informational activity objects are used to present an overview of current persistent and transient activities being conducted within a particular Social Network. Persistent activity objects present activities with associated data that does not change over time and that is relevant to members in the Social Network. Transient activity objects present activities and associated data that is being conducted at a given point in time.

Because interactions in a social network in the real world are both synchronous and asynchronous the activities likewise may support synchronous and asynchronous interactions. For example some interactions may only involve one individual or involve instances where the presence of an individual is not revealed to other members.

One overall user interface presentation according to an embodiment of the invention is shown in . A screen display for a My Social Networks browser window comprises one or more of a number of elements designed to ease the ability to access create and manage a social network. The browser window has an intuitive layout with various sections such as a folder area within which one or more social networks reside. In addition the window includes a top section that presents a list of certain actions that are selectable by the user.

By way of example the folder presents one or more items identifying the social networks available to the user. In this case a College Friends icon provides a link to a Social Space associated with the defined Social Network including on or more college friends of the user. Other icons corresponding to other social networks created by the user are also contained in the folder space .

The folder space has other sections such as an Other Contact Places list that includes data associated with the Social Networks presented in the folder display area . Also a Filter By menu permits the user to search for social network items based on various search criteria.

A particular user may have more than one group to which he or she belongs and each member of a group may belong to a group or groups to which one or more other members do not belong. Thus although the relevant Social Network icon appears to each group member and appears identically on each machine there may be portions of a Social Space corresponding to the icon that are not shared with other group members.

In one embodiment a social network status is provided to the user in a Side Bar user interface part such as may be displayed on a Windows Shell. illustrates an exemplary implementation of a Side Bar for presenting information concerning the status of social networks. For representing a hub of information at a user s fingertips the Side Bar includes a Social Network Side Bar part that is preferably accessible through common dialogs that are used in conjunction with the Side Bar . In the illustrated embodiment one or more user selectable icons present information concerning the status of associated Social Networks. For example three of the eight group members are presently active in the College Friends network while one of the six group members is active in the Soccer Buds network. Also when the user hovers over an icon it may show the presence of active members in the Social Network. In this way information concerning the activities and status of the Social Network conveniently appears to the user without navigating to the browser window shown in or to a Social Space as described below.

Due to the limited real estate provided to the Side Bar in most cases not all Social Networks may be presented to the user at a given time. For limiting the number of presented Social Networks the invention may permit user configuration for displaying what Social Networks are shown. Alternatively or in addition the system may provide intelligent filters to show Social Networks based on a given set of criteria. Thus the list of networks presented in the Side Bar may be static such as user configured or it may be dynamic based on an active filter. In yet another alternative the presented list may be a combination. For example the user may pin a subset of the available Social Networks to the Side Bar part while other Social Network icons are changed dynamically based on activity.

For providing information concerning changes in activity or other status changes in a Social Network one feature of a preferred embodiment presents various notifications to the user. For example the user could receive notifications when new members come online in a given Social Network. Such notifications may be presented only when the user is engaged in activities in a Social Network. Alternatively the notifications may be presented whenever the user is operating his or her computing device.

In a preferred embodiment the Social Space layout is divided into sections with constituent parts. A first section displays an overview of recent activity and status changes of the group. By obtaining information provided by Activity Objects associated with the Social Network the overview section creates an overall sense of recent changes in the Social Network. The overview section includes a Meta information subsection that provides information to assist the user in associating the Social Space. The Meta information subsection displays a user tile the name of the space and the date.

For providing recent activity and status information the Activity Objects aggregated and displayed in the overview section are primarily transient activity objects. For example a Recent Activity subsection provides a quick overview of new activities that have occurred with respect to the Social Network. Recent activities are decided by events that occur with respect to the Social Space. The Recent Activities subsection subscribes to updates to other parts and activities in the Social Network and displays the three most recent activities that have been launched together with participating members or the latest updates to parts of the Social Space.

Other features in the overview section include a Message Board that provides information about new messages that have been received. In addition the Message Board provides a launch point for an associated email application program to enable the user to view the messages. The overview section further displays a Members or Presence subsection providing a dynamic list of current group members and their respective status.

The Social Space includes a parts section that provides a canvas on which persistent activity objects may be presented. The parts that are included in section are implemented as miniature windows that a user can arrange resize and position on the parts section . For example the user may select and move a corner or edge of the miniature window via a mouse stylus or other user input device. The parts provide a high level overview and entry point to an associated shared application or file system item collection. In the illustrated embodiment the parts can also be maximized in which the part is displayed on the entire viewable parts area or minimized in which the part is only displayed in the title bar of parts by the user. As shown a Social Calendar Updates part presents a customized miniature window of the calendar of the group for a user specified amount of time. The following information is displayed for various calendar entries in the illustrated embodiment day of appointment time span of appointment title of appointment and location of appointment.

Another graphical window included in the presentation of the parts section is a Recently Added Files part . This part presents a view of recently added files together with an entry point to the shared files associated with the displayed entries. In an embodiment the Recently Added Files part may be persistent and includes the following information file name file type owner or individual who added the file and the date in which the file was added. Of course the presentation may alternatively be implemented in a customizable file experience such as a Photo Album Activity Object.

Additional parts displayed in the section illustrated in are various List Updates parts and . Preferably the lists of information presented to the user are customizable and extensible. Accordingly the List Update parts may be configured to only display lists that have changed. This enables the user to navigate to the relevant list and view any changes. These lists may have both graphical and control elements as well. That is as with the other parts described the parts and provide entry points to applications and or data associated with the part.

Another section shown in the Shared Space is a Launch section . The Launch section permits the user to launch activities with members of the Shared Space . The Launch section includes and Activity Launch area that displays a preset number of recently used activities. Thus when the user clicks or otherwise activates an item in the Launch area an invitation is automatically sent to other active members inviting them to participate in the activity. The Launch section also presents a List Launch area that displays a preset number of recently used lists. When the user activates an entry in the List Launch area the associated list is launched for the user. While the presentation of graphical and control elements shown in is representative for the illustrated Shared Space those skilled in the art will appreciate that the layout and informational items by be altered and or extended without departing from the invention.

The Social Space also includes a customizable parts section . In the illustrated embodiment a Social Calendar Update part presents the user a view of the calendar of the group for a user specified amount of time. Other graphical elements included in the parts section include a Recently Added Files part and graphical presentations of lists and . These parts are reordered as compared to the parts section shown in . They also include pictorial and graphic elements for enhanced identification by the user. Finally a Launch section provides an Activity Launch area and a List Launch area .

Having described the details of the various parts of a social space graphical interface the details of customization of the shared space are now described. As illustrated in a dialog box may be presented to the user to aid in customization of a Social Space. The illustrated dialog may be launched by selecting a Customize View link elements and shown in respectively . The dialog box includes a Social Space tile or textual information identifying the relevant space. In addition the dialog box presents a list of Social Space Parts currently being used and a list of available parts. For most cases a new part may be moved to the Parts section through a drag and drop operation or by importing the relevant part through an appropriate configuration operation. In the illustrated embodiment the dialog box also presents an Advanced options list that may be used to permit the user to create a custom list part from a query builder or import a part from a file accessible by the system. In this way the Parts section of a Social Space may be customized according to user preference.

In this way the invention enables interactions among group members according to real world scenarios. For example a user may take voluminous pictures and some video of his or her children. Because sharing such content especially the video content is particular difficult the user may simply create a Family social network to use in order to exchange these and other files with his or her relatives. In addition the user may access shared calendar information to determine plans for other group members i.e. family members in this example at any given time. Also the user can choose to receive notifications of changes or updates in the group.

In another real world example a user may schedule a meeting with several members of her business team and a few partners she has met at a tradeshow. Because she plans to share some information with other meeting participants the user creates a group social network for the meeting and uses the list of people near her to add her team members and the partners to the group. The user also may pre populate the social network with the presentation and other materials as desired. As attendees arrive to the meeting and power on their computing systems in preparation for the meeting they are notified that a social network has been created join the social network and access the documents. In addition such attendees can readily add other materials concerning the meeting. When the meeting concludes the user and or other attendees may delete the social network or maintain it for on going collaboration. For example by using workspace tools the user may initiate a review process of documents generated in the group setting and incorporate feedback from other group members to prepare final document drafts. Other team members such as a sales force in this example may have shared spaces configured to receive notification of the final document drafts for processing.

As noted above the invention is not limited to Social Networks that include a plurality of group members who interact with each other via a computer network. For example a user may define a Social Network as a device space to enable data access among devices. That is a shared space may be used to provide interaction among different computing devices such as in a home network. Due to the topology independence of a shared space a user may alternatively define a Social Network as a personal space to enable access to shared data resources or other items from different computing devices and or locations. In this example the Social Network remains constant despite the changes in network topology.

Various activities may occur in the group space. Such activities may include file sharing chatting either by text and or audio visual gaming white boarding message boarding content distribution distribution of software and patches. Indeed the invention may be used to perform distributed computing tasks such as for example working together to solve complex real world problems such as weather forecasting complex biological problems like mapping DNA astronomical process analysis or searching within group content for basic research tasks. Alternatively the invention may simply be used to keep other family members informed of new activities.

It will be appreciated that a novel application architecture and interface for group interaction over a network have been described. In view of the many possible embodiments to which the principles of this invention may be applied it should be recognized that the embodiments described herein with respect to the drawing figures are illustrative and should not be taken as limiting the scope of the invention. For example those skilled in the art will recognize that elements of the illustrated embodiments shown in specific software implementations may be implemented in many different ways and that the illustrated embodiments can be modified in arrangement and detail without departing from the spirit of the invention. Also the invention has been described primarily with reference to personal computers and their associated displays and desktops. However the invention does not require a PC or a traditional desktop. That is the invention can also be implemented on other devices that support a visual display function. Accordingly the invention as described herein contemplates all such embodiments as may come within the scope of the following claims and equivalents thereof.

