---

title: Method and system of controlling computer system external effects for a computer game, the external effects such as incandescent lights, fluorescent lights, vibration devices, LED/laser diodes, and/or fans
abstract: A method and system of controlling computer system external effects. At least some of the illustrative embodiments may be a computer system comprising a processor (wherein a computer system user interacting with software executed on the processor triggers a software event), and an external effects controller coupled to the processor (wherein the external effects controller controls at least one device being a purely aesthetic device or a non-aesthetic device operated in a manner for aesthetic reasons). The computer system user selectively associates the at least one device to the software event such that, if associated, upon occurrence of the software event an operational state of the at least one device is changed by the external effects controller.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08131885&OS=08131885&RS=08131885
owner: Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P.
number: 08131885
owner_city: Houston
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051102
---
A particular segment of the population executes and interacts with software based games on personal computers rather than dedicated game consoles. This segment of the population may be referred to PC Gamers. Part of the allure of being a PC Gamer is the ability to build personalized computer systems from individual components and then execute the software based games on the personalized computer systems. For example specialty computer cases or boxes in a variety of colors and with see through panels are available. Some PC Gamers also employ purely aesthetic add on devices such as black lights neon bulbs light emitting diodes and laser diodes. Operation of these purely aesthetic devices are manually controlled or varied based on ambient sound but are not otherwise linked to game play. For performance enhancement some PC Gamers modify their motherboards to clock the processor beyond the processor s rated clock rate and these computer systems thus require additional cooling such as fans and water based cooling systems.

Certain terms are used throughout the following description and claims to refer to particular system components. As one skilled in the art will appreciate computer companies may refer to a component by different names. This document does not intend to distinguish between components that differ in name but not function.

In the following discussion and in the claims the terms including and comprising are used in an open ended fashion and thus should be interpreted to mean including but not limited to . . . . Also the term couple or couples is intended to mean either an indirect or direct connection. Thus if a first device couples to a second device that connection may be through a direct connection or through an indirect connection via other devices and connections.

The following discussion is directed to various embodiments of the invention. Although one or more of these embodiments may be preferred the embodiments disclosed should not be interpreted or otherwise used as limiting the scope of the disclosure. In addition one skilled in the art will understand that the following description has broad application and the discussion of any embodiment is meant only to be exemplary of that embodiment and not intended to intimate that the scope of the disclosure is limited to that embodiment.

Text and video generated by software executing on the processor is provided to a display driver device coupled to the host bridge by way of an Advanced Graphics Port bus PCI Express or other suitable type of bus. Alternatively the display driver device could couple to the primary expansion bus or one of the secondary expansion buses i.e. the peripheral component interconnect PCI bus . The display device to which the display driver device may couple comprises any suitable electronic display device upon which any image or text can be represented.

Computer system also comprises a second bridge logic device that bridges the primary expansion bus to various secondary buses such as a low pin count LPC bus the PCI bus and a Universal Serial Bus USB . These secondary expansion buses are only illustrative and other secondary expansion buses and bus protocols now in existence or after developed could be equivalently used. In some embodiments the bridge device is an Input Output I O Controller Hub ICH such as that manufactured by Intel Corporation. In the embodiments shown in using an I O Controller Hub as the second bridge logic device the primary expansion bus is a Hub link bus which is a proprietary bus of the Intel Corporation. However computer system is not limited to any particular chipset vendor and thus other suitable buses as well as chipsets from other manufacturers may be equivalently used.

A Super Input Output I O controller couples to the second bridge logic device and controls many system functions. The Super I O controller may interface for example with a system pointing device such as a mouse various serial ports and floppy drives. The Super I O controller is often referred to as super because of the many I O functions it may perform.

A computer system in accordance with some embodiments also comprises an external effects controller coupled to the processor . In the embodiments shown in the external effects controller couples to the processor by way of the USB however in alternative embodiments the external effects controller couples to the processor by way of PCI bus primary expansion bus or any other bus or bus protocol now in existence or after developed. In other alternative embodiments the external effects controller could be combined with other functionality e.g. the graphics card . In yet still other embodiments multiple external effects controllers could be present in the system.

As the name implies the external effects controller controls a variety of devices that may or may not relate to proper execution of software by computer system . In particular external effects controller comprises a plurality of output signal ports that couple to a plurality of devices which devices may be purely aesthetic devices or non aesthetic devices that the external effects controller controls for aesthetic reasons. For example external effects controller may couple to one or more incandescent lights by way of an output port . In some embodiments output port is a switch or digital output port meaning that the external effects controller has on off control of the one or more incandescent lights. Brightness may be controlled in these embodiments by pulse width modulation of the signal of the digital output port . In alternative embodiments output port may be an analog output port and in these embodiments the external effects controller may have not only on off control but may also control the brightness using variable output voltages.

External effects controller may also couple one or more fluorescent lights by way of an output port . The fluorescents lights may be for example a Logisys cold cathode ultraviolet light model number CLK15BL available from Logisys Computer Inc. of Pomona Calif. In some embodiments output port may be a digital output port meaning that the external effects controller has on off control of the one or more fluorescent lights. Brightness may be controlled in these embodiments by pulse width modulation of the signal of the digital output port . In alternative embodiments output port may be an analog output port and in these embodiments the external effects controller may have not only on off control but may also control the brightness using variable output voltages.

External effects controller may also couple to one or more light emitting diodes LEDs and or laser diodes by way of an output port . The LEDs and or laser diodes may be a laser beam LED part number LB R available from Logisys Computer Inc. In some embodiments output port may be a digital output port meaning that the external effects controller has on off control of the one or more LEDs and or laser diodes. Brightness may be controlled in these embodiments by pulse width modulation of the signal of the digital output port . In alternative embodiments output port may be an analog output port and in these embodiments the external effects controller may have not only on off control but may also control the brightness using variable output voltages.

External effects controller may also couple to one or more vibration devices by way of an output port . In these embodiments the one or more vibration devices are contemplated to be devices having an eccentric weight coupled to the shaft of an electric motor. In some embodiments output port may be a digital output port meaning that the external effects controller has on off control of the vibration device . Speed of the motor of the vibration device and therefore the vibration frequency may be controlled in these embodiments by pulse width modulation of the signal of the digital output port . In alternative embodiments output port may be an analog output port and in these embodiments the external effects controller may have not only on off control but may also control the speed of the motor whether by a variable voltage direct current DC voltage or by generating an alternating current AC signal having selectable voltage and frequency.

The illustrative external effects discussed to this point have been purely aesthetic devices i.e. proper execution of software on the processor is not dependent upon the operational state of these devices. However the external effects controller may also control non aesthetic devices possibly in a manner for aesthetic reasons such as one or more cooling fans . In particular the external effects controller may couple to the one or more cooling fans by way of output port . The cooling fans may be for example a cooling fan with integrated LEDs having a part number LT9BLRD available from Logisys Computer Inc. In some embodiments output port may be a digital output port meaning that the external effects controller has on off control of the one or more cooling fans . Speed of the motor coupled to the fan may be controlled in these embodiments by pulse width modulation of the signal of the digital output port . In alternative embodiments output port may be an analog output port and in these embodiments speed may be controlled whether by a variable DC voltage or by generating and AC signal having selectable voltage and frequency.

Yet still other external effects that could be controlled by the external effects controller possibly using the output signal ports related directly to the user. For example the external effects controller may trigger devices for olfactory stimulation. Further the external effects controller may directly or indirectly trigger direct muscle and or neural stimulation of the user.

In accordance with embodiments of the invention the external effects controller selectively controls the various external effects based on the occurrence of software events. More particularly in accordance with embodiments of the invention a computer system user has the capability of associating various software events e.g. events that occur during execution of software based game play to operation of the various external effects such that upon the occurrence of a software event an operational state of one or more of the external effects is changed. In the illustrative context of software based game play the software events which trigger changes in operational state may be based on game play parameters e.g. character health remaining lives character heart rate speed altitude or may be based on particular milestones in game play e.g. game start game win a game loss opponent kill striking a blow to the opponent directly or through a weapon being struck by an opponent directly or through a weapon successful takeoff successful landing .

The operational state changes are varied as well. The software event could trigger a change in the operational state from on to off or from off to on. In cases where varying speed and or brightness are possible the software event could trigger a change in the speed brightness or intensity of one or more external effects. In the illustrative case of a cooling fan operated for aesthetic reasons the software event could trigger a fan speed increase with associated noise with the fan speed increase not needed for cooling effects of any internal components.

In accordance with embodiments of the invention prior to game play a user associates software events to external effects such as by entering that information in the computer system by way of a software applet. In alternative embodiments especially personal computers the user may make or change associations during game play. The information entered by the user may be stored in many forms but in at least some embodiments and during operation the information is stored in a table in main memory . The information of the table may be stored in non volatile memory when the computer system is not operational and loaded during the boot process. After associating the software events to external effects the software based game or other software may be executed and wherein the software events are triggered based on interaction of the user with the software.

In accordance with embodiments of the invention when a software event is reached the software notes such an event by way of an application programming interface and the software within which the event occurred can resume its operation. The application programming interface thereafter communicates with the external effects controller to effectuate the change of operational state of at least one external device.

Communicating with the external effects controller may take many forms. In some embodiments the external effects controller may be fully controlled by the application programming interface software. In these embodiments the application programming interface software executing on processor accesses the table based on the particular software event determines the one or more external effects whose operational state the user desires to change based on the particular event and commands the external effects controller to make such a change in one or more of its output ports .

In alternative embodiments communicating with the external effects controller may involve the application programming interface software informing the external events controller of the occurrence of the software event rather than commanding particular output signals. Thus the interface software may send a packet based message across the various computer system buses which messages inform the external effects controller of the software event. Alternatively the interface software may place an indication of the software event in a portion of the main memory accessible by the external effects controller . In these alternative embodiments the external effects controller may periodically read the portion of the main memory accessible to controller and software executing on the processor to determine if a software event has occurred. Regardless of the mechanism by which the external effects controller is notified the external effects controller makes changes to the states of the output ports based on the associations held in table a copy of which may also be stored in the external effects controller itself.

If a software event has occurred again block the occurrence of the software event is communicated to the external effects controller block . As discussed above the communication may be a message transferred across one or more of the expansion buses or the external effects controller itself may periodically access memory looking for an indication that a particular software event has occurred. The table that associates software events to change of state of external devices is accessed block to determine the state of which external device should be changed. Based on the access to the table one or more of the outputs of the external effects controller are driven block and the process resumes with the user interacting with software block and checking for the occurrence of software events block .

In at least some embodiments of the invention it is envisioned that the software itself such as a software based game will be programmed to call the application programming interface upon occurrence of predetermined software events. In these embodiments software programmers when coding the software or software based game will specifically code calls to the application program interface based on particular events. In alternative embodiments the external effects controller may operate in a system with software and or software based games not specifically programmed to make calls to the application programming interface at particular software events and in these embodiments the memory and or communication bus messages may be snooped to determine when particular events have taken place.

Referring again to the Super I O controller discussed above may have additional and or unused digital output ports and analog output ports. Thus in accordance with alternative embodiments the Super I O controller may control one or more of the external effects as illustrated in by the dashed lines between the Super I O controller and the illustrative external effects. Control of the external effects by the Super I O controller may be in place of the external effects controller in which case the Super I O controller become the external effects controller or in conjunction with the external effects controller.

The various embodiments thus further comprise computer readable media storing an application program interface program that when executed by a processor performs a method comprising accessing a data table where a computer system user has previously correlated desired actions and occurrence of game software events communicating with an external effects controller and driving output signals to external effects devices being purely aesthetic devices or non aesthetic devices operated in a manner for aesthetic reasons based on desired actions from the data table and occurrence of the game software events.

