---

title: Supersonic gas compressor
abstract: A gas compressor based on the use of a driven rotor having a compression ramp traveling at a local supersonic inlet velocity (based on the combination of inlet gas velocity and tangential speed of the ramp) which compresses inlet gas against a stationary sidewall. In using this method to compress inlet gas, the supersonic compressor efficiently achieves high compression ratios while utilizing a compact, stabilized gasdynamic flow path. Operated at supersonic speeds, the inlet stabilizes an oblique/normal shock system in the gasdyanamic flow path formed between the rim of the rotor, the strakes, and a stationary external housing. Part load efficiency is enhanced by the use of a pre-swirl compressor, and using a bypass stream to bleed a portion of the intermediate pressure gas after passing through the pre-swirl compressor back to the inlet of the pre-swirl compressor. Inlet guide vanes to the compression ramp enhance overall efficiency.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07293955&OS=07293955&RS=07293955
owner: Ramgen Power Systrms, Inc.
number: 07293955
owner_city: Bellevue
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050323
---
This application is a Continuation In Part of prior U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 672 719 filed Sep. 25 2003 now abandoned entitled SUPERSONIC GAS COMPRESSOR assigned of record on Apr. 22 2004 and May 3 2004 and recorded on May 11 2004 at Reel Frame 015313 0771 to Ramgen Power Systems Inc. of Bellevue Wash. which utility application claimed priority from prior U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 414 793 filed on Sep. 26 2002 the disclosures of which are incorporated herein in their entirety by this reference including the specification drawings and claims of each application.

This invention was made with United States Government support under Contract No. DE FC026 00NT40915 awarded by the United States Department of Energy. The U.S. Government has certain rights in the invention.

A portion of the disclosure of this patent document contains material that is subject to copyright protection. The applicant no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office patent file or records but otherwise reserves all copyright rights whatsoever.

This invention relates to a high efficiency novel gas compressor in which saving of power as well as improved compression performance and durability are attained by the use of supersonic shock compression of process gas. Compressors of that character are particularly useful for compression of air refrigerants steam and hydrocarbons.

A continuing demand exists for simple highly efficient and inexpensive gas compressors as may be useful in a wide variety of gas compression applications. This is because many gas compression applications could substantially benefit from incorporating a compressor that offers a significant efficiency improvement over currently utilized designs. In view of increased energy costs particularly for both for electricity and for natural gas it would be desirable to attain significant cost reduction in gas compression. Importantly it would be quite advantageous to provide a novel compressor which provided improvements 1 with respect to operating energy costs 2 with respect to reduced first cost for the equipment and 3 with respect to reduced maintenance costs. Fundamentally particularly from the point of view of reducing long term energy costs this would be most effectively accomplished by attaining gas compression at a higher overall cycle efficiency than is currently known or practiced industrially. Thus the important advantages of a new gas compressor design providing the desirable features of improved efficiency particularly at part load operation can be readily appreciated.

We have now invented a gas compressor based on the use of a driven rotor having a compression ramp traveling at a local supersonic inlet velocity based on the combination of inlet gas velocity and tangential speed of the ramp which compresses inlet gas against a stationary sidewall. In using this method to compress inlet gas the supersonic compressor efficiently achieves high compression ratios while utilizing a compact stabilized gasdynamic flow path. Operated at supersonic speeds the inlet stabilizes an oblique normal shock system in the gasdyanamic flow path formed between the rim of the rotor the strakes and a stationary external housing.

Efficiency can be further enhanced by using a pre swirl inlet compressor wheel prior to entry of gas to the supersonic compression ramp. Such pre swirl inlet compression wheel a provides an initial pressure boost over incoming often ambient atmospheric pressure in the case of air compression gas pressure and b energizes inlet gas in a counter swirling direction to impart an initial velocity vector on the inlet gas so as to increase apparent mach number when the inlet gas is ingested by the supersonic compression ramp.

By use of a gas bypass valve arrangement the low pressure compressed gas output i.e. mass flow rate from the pre swirl compressor unit can be turned down as necessary while maintaining high rotating velocity utilizing a fixed shaft speed i.e. constant rotating velocity where necessary or desirable such as is necessary when utilizing constant speed compressor drive apparatus while maintaining minimal output loads. Moreover this technique allows maintenance of relatively high efficiency compression with good turn down capability since the supersonic compressor wheel continues to operate at an efficient high speed condition.

The structural and functional elements incorporated into this novel compressor design overcomes significant and serious problems which have plagued earlier attempts at supersonic compression of gases in industrial applications. First at the Mach numbers at which my device operates in the range from about Mach 1.5 or lower to about Mach 4.0 the design minimizes aerodynamic drag. This is accomplished by both careful design of the shock geometry as related to the rotating compression ramp and the stationary wall as well as by effective use of a boundary layer control and drag reduction technique. Thus the design minimizes parasitic losses to the compression cycle due to the drag resulting simply from rotational movement of the rotor. This is important commercially because it enables a gas compressor to avoid large parasitic losses that undesirably consume energy and reduce overall efficiency.

Also more fundamentally this compressor design can develop high compression ratios with very few aerodynamic leading edges. The individual leading edges of the thousands of rotor and stator blades in a conventional high pressure ratio compressor especially as utilized in the gas turbine industry contribute to the vast majority of the viscous drag loss of such systems. However in that the design of the novel gas compressor disclosed herein utilizes in one embodiment less than five individual aerodynamic leading edges subjected to stagnation pressure viscous losses are significantly reduced compared to conventional gas compression units heretofore known or utilized. As a result the novel compressor disclosed and claimed herein has the potential to be up to ten percentage points more efficient than a conventional gas turbine compressor when compared at competing compression ratios in the range from about ten to one 10 1 to about thirty to one 30 1 .

Second the selection of materials and the mechanical design of rotating components avoids use of excessive quantities or weights of materials a vast improvement over large rotating mass bladed centrifugal compressor designs . Yet the design provides the necessary strength particularly tensile strength where needed in the rotor commensurate with the centrifugal forces acting on the extremely high speed rotating components.

Third the design provides for effective mechanical separation of the low pressure incoming gas from the exiting high pressure gases while allowing gas compression operation along a circumferential pathway.

This novel design enables the use of lightweight components in the gas compression pathway. To solve the above mentioned problems we have now developed compressor design s which overcome the problems inherent in the heretofore known apparatus and methods known to me which have been proposed for the application of supersonic gas compression in industrial applications. Of primary importance we have now developed a low drag rotor which has one or more gas compression ramps mounted at the distal edge thereof. A number N of peripherally preferably partially helically extending strakes S partition the entering gas flow sequentially to the inlet to a first one of the one or more gas compression ramps and then to a second one of the one or more gas compression ramps and so on to an Nth one of the one or more gas compression ramps. Each of the strakes S has an upstream or inlet side and a downstream or outlet side. For rotor balance and gas compression efficiency purposes in one embodiment the number X of gas compression ramps R and the number of strakes N are the same positive integer number and in such embodiment N and X is at least equal to two. In an embodiment shown herein the number of strakes N and the number X of gas compression ramps R are both equal to three. The compressed gases exiting from each of the one or more gas compression ramps is effectively prevented from short circuiting or returning to the inlet side of subsequent gas compression ramps by the strakes S. More fundamentally the strakes S act as a large screw compressor fan or pump to move compressed gases along with each turn of the rotor.

To accommodate the specific strength requirements of high speed rotating service various embodiments for an acceptable high strength rotor are feasible. In one embodiment the rotor section may comprise a carbon fiber disc. In another it may comprise a high strength steel hub. In each case the gas compression ramps and strakes S may be integrally provided or rim segments and gas compression modules may be releasably and replaceably affixed to the rotor.

Attached at the radial edge of the rotor are one or more of the at least one gas compression ramps. The gas compression ramps are situated so as to engage and to compress that portion of the entering gas stream which is impinged by the gas compression ramp upon its rotation which in one embodiment is about the aforementioned drive shaft. The compressed gases escape rearwardly from the gas compression ramp and decelerate and expands outwardly into a gas expansion diffuser space or volute prior to entering a compressed gas outlet nozzle.

Finally many variations in the gas flow configuration and in provision of the inlet gas pre swirl compression and in providing outlet gas passageways may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the teachings hereof. Finally in addition to the foregoing my gas compressor is simple durable and relatively inexpensive to manufacture and to maintain.

The foregoing figures being merely exemplary contain various elements that may be present or omitted from actual implementations depending upon the circumstances. An attempt has been made to draw the figures in a way that illustrates at least those elements that are significant for an understanding of the various embodiments and aspects of the invention. However various other elements of the supersonic gas compressor especially as applied for different variations of the functional components illustrated embodiments may be utilized in order to provide a robust supersonic gas compression unit still within the overall teachings of the present invention and the legal equivalents thereof.

Referring now to the drawing depicts a partial cut away perspective view of my novel supersonic gas compression apparatus . Major components shown in this include a stationary housing or case having first and second inlets for supply of low pressure gas to be compressed and a high pressure compressed gas outlet nozzle . In this dual unit design a first rotor and a second rotor are provided each having a central axis defined along centerline here shown defined by common shaft and adapted for rotary motion therewith in case . Each one of the first and second rotors extends radially outward from its central axis to an outer surface portion and further to an outer extremity on the strakes S. On each one of first and second rotors one or more supersonic shock compression ramps R are provided. Each one of the supersonic shock compression ramps R forms a feature on the outer surface portion of its respective first or second rotor. Within housing a first circumferential stationary interior peripheral wall is provided radially outward from first rotor . Likewise a second circumferential stationary interior peripheral wall is provided radially outward from second rotor . Each one of the stationary peripheral walls and are positioned radially outward from the central axis defined by centerline and are positioned very slightly radially outward from the outer extremity of first and second rotors respectively. Each one of the first and second stationary peripheral walls and have an interior surface portion and respectively. Each one of the one or more supersonic shock compression ramps R cooperates with the interior surface portion and of one of the stationary peripheral walls or to compress gas therebetween.

One or more helical strakes S are provided adjacent each one of the one or more supersonic compression ramps R. An outwardly extending wall portion Sof each of the one or more strakes S extends outward from at least a portion of the outer surface portion of its respective rotor or along a height HH see to a point adjacent the respective interior surface portion or of the peripheral wall or . The strakes S effectively separate the low pressure inlet gas from high pressure compressed gas downstream of each one of the supersonic gas compression ramps R. Strakes S are in the embodiment illustrated by the circumferential flow paths depicted in provided in a helical structure extending substantially radially outward from the outer surface portion of its respective rotor or . As shown in the number of the one or more helical strakes S is N and the number of the one or more supersonic gas compression ramps R is X and the number N of strakes S is equal to the number X of compression ramps R. The strakes Sthrough Spartition entering gas so that the gas flows to the respective gas compression ramp R then incident to the inlet area of the gas compressor. As can be appreciated from the preferably helical strakes S S and Sare thin walled with about 0.15 width axially at the root and about 0.10 width at the tip. With the design illustrated herein it is believed that leakage of gases will be minimal.

For rotor or balance purposes we prefer that the number X of gas compression ramps R and the number N of strakes S be the same positive integer number and that N and X each be at least equal to two. In one embodiment N and X are equal to three as illustrated herein. The strakes Sthrough Sallow feed of gas to each gas compression ramp R without appreciable bypass of the compressed high pressure gas to the entering low pressure gas. That is the compressed gas is effectively prevented by the arrangement of strakes S from short circuiting and thus avoids appreciable efficiency losses. This strake feature can be better appreciated by evaluating the details shown in where strakes Sand Srevolves in close proximity to the interior wall surface . The strakes Sand Shave a localized height HS and a localized height HS respectively which extends to a tip end TSand TSrespectively that is designed for rotation very near to the interior peripheral wall surface of housing to allow for fitting in close proximity to the tip end TSor TSwith that wall.

As seen in in each of the gas compression ramps R the inlet gas stream is compressed at apparent supersonic velocity to create an oblique normal shock structure between the respective gas compression ramp and the adjacent peripheral wall. Each of the one or more gas compression ramps R has an outwardly sloping gas compression ramp face . The face has a base which is located adjacent the intersection of the outwardly sloping face and the outer surface portion of the respective rotor or . The face and the outer surface of rotors and intersect at a preselected angle alpha of from about one 1 degree to about fifteen 15 degrees which angle alpha will vary based on the design Mach number and gas properties such as temperature and density. The gas compression ramps R also include a throat and downstream thereof an inwardly sloping gas deceleration section . The deceleration transition section is provided to step down to the outer surface of the rotor or .

For improving efficiency each of the one or more gas compression ramps R has one or more boundary layer bleed ports B. In the configuration illustrated in at least one of the one or more boundary bleed ports B is located at the base of the gas compression ramp R. As depicted a pair of shovel scoop shaped cutouts Bare shown each having a generally parallelepiped sidewall configuration. Bleed air enters structures Bas indicated by reference arrows in . Also as shown in at least one of the one or more boundary bleed ports Bare located on the face of the gas compression ramp R. Bleed air enters structures Bas indicated by reference arrows in . As depicted in each one of the gas compression ramps R further comprise a bleed air receiving chamber each of which is configured for effectively containing therein for ejection therefrom bleed air provided thereto as indicated by exit bleed air reference arrows in .

As depicted in downstream of each of first and second rotors is a first and second high pressure outlet respectively each configured to receive and pass therethrough high pressure outlet gas resulting from compression of gas by the one or more gas compression ramps R on the respective rotor or . One or more combined high pressure gas outlet nozzles can be utilized as shown in to receive the combined output from the first and second high pressure outlets and from rotors and .

For improved efficiency and operational flexibility the compressor may be designed to further include a first inlet casing and a second inlet casing having therein respectively first and second pre swirl impellers. These pre swirl impellers and are located intermediate the low pressure gas inlets and and their respective first or second rotors. Each of the pre swirl impellers and are configured for compressing the low pressure inlet gas LP to provide an intermediate pressure gas stream P at a pressure intermediate the pressure of the low pressure inlet gas LP and the high pressure outlet gas HP as noted in . In one application for the apparatus depicted air at ambient atmospheric conditions of 14.7 psig is compressed to about 20 psig by the pre swirl impellers and . However such pre swirl impellers can be configured to provide a compression ratio of up to about 2 1. More broadly the pre swirl impellers can be configured to provide a compression ratio from about 1.3 1 to about 2 1.

Also for improving efficiency the gas compressor can be provided in a configuration wherein downstream of the pre swirl impellers and but upstream of the one or more gas compression ramps R on the respective rotors and a plurality of inlet guide vanes are provided a first set or before first rotor and a second set or before second rotor . The inlet guide vanes and as illustrated in impart a spin on gas passing therethrough so as to increase the apparent inflow velocity of gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps R. Additionally such inlet guide vanes and assist in directing incoming gas in a trajectory which more closely matches gas flow path through the ramps R to allow gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps to be at approximately the same angle as the angle of offset to minimize inlet losses.

In one embodiment as illustrated the pre swirl impellers and can be provided in the form of a centrifugal compressor wheel. As illustrated in pre swirl impellers and can be mounted on a common shaft with the rotor and . It is possible to customize the design of the pre swirl impeller and the inlet guide vane set to result in a supersonic gas compression ramp inlet inflow condition with the same pre swirl velocity or Mach number but a super atmospheric pressure. Since the supersonic compression ramp inlet basically multiples the pressure based on the inflow pressure and Mach number a small amount of supercharging at the pre swirl impellers can result in a significant increase in cycle compression ratio.

In a circumferential view of the gas flow path into and out of the rotating shock compressor wheel is provided where the configuration is developed without an inflow pre swirl feature in that the inlet guide vanes and function only as a flow straightener imparting no pre swirl into the flow before it is ingested by the shock compression ramp R on the rotor or . Note that this figure also illustrates the use of a radial diffuser having a plurality of radial diffuser blades downstream of the discharge side of the rotating shock compression ramp R to then deflect compressed high pressure gas HP outward toward outlet or shown in in the direction of reference arrows .

With or without the aid of pre swirl impellers and it is important that the apparent velocity of gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps R is in excess of Mach 1 so that the efficiency of supersonic shock compression can be exploited. However to increase efficiency it would be desirable that the apparent velocity of gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps R be in excess of Mach 2. More broadly the apparent velocity of gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps R can currently practically be between about Mach 1.5 and Mach 3.5 although wider ranges are certainly possible within the teachings hereof.

As depicted in another aspect of the current invention is the provision where desirable for maintaining relatively high efficiency at reduced mass flows from design maximum flow rate of the compressor to further include adjacent the outlet of the pre swirl impeller or an outlet for intermediate pressure gas and a bypass line between the intermediate outlet and the gas inlet so that the bypass line is configured to route a portion of the gas at the intermediate pressure to the gas inlet . In this configuration it is advantageous to utilize gas flow regulating valve . The valve is configured to vary the rate of passage of intermediate pressure gas therethrough so as to in turn vary the amount of intermediate pressure gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps R on rotor . From the other discussion herein it should be clear to one of ordinary skill in the art and to whom this specification is directed that a duplicate valve may be provided with respect to a second rotor for achieving equivalent results i.e. mirror image of the portion shown in . In one embodiment valve is adjustable at any preselected flow rate from a a closed position wherein the valve seals the bypass line so that as a result substantially no intermediate pressure gas escapes to the gas inlet and b an open position wherein the valve allows fluid communication between the pre swirl impeller outlet and the gas inlet or c a preselected position between the closed position and the open position.

The compressor provides an ideal apparatus for the compression of various gases including a air b refrigerant c steam and d hydrocarbons. In various applications it has been calculated that compressor is capable of providing compression of a selected gas at an isentropic efficiency in excess of ninety percent as is graphically illustrated in . The compressor operates most efficiently at a non dimensional specific speed from about 60 to about 120. As further depicted in the compressor is capable of compressing a selected gas at an isentropic efficiency in excess of ninety five percent.

For assuring operation at high rotational speed to achieve high apparent Mach number at the inlet of each of the one or more gas compression ramps R a high strength rotor or is provided. In one embodiment such rotors include a high strength central disc. As illustrated in such rotors and in particular a central disc portion may include a tapered portion at least in part i.e. that is thinner at increasing radial distance from the center of rotation. To increase aerodynamic efficiency at least a portion of such rotor can be confined within a close fitting housing having a minimal distance D between an outer surface of the rotor and an inner surface of the close fitting housing so as to minimize aerodynamic drag on the rotor. These aspects of the design of such compressors can be seen in .

The compressor disclosed herein allows practice of unique methods of compressing gases. Practice of such methods involves providing one or more gas compression ramps on a rotor which is rotatably secured for high speed rotary motion with respect to stationary housing having an inner surface. Each of the one or more gas compression ramps is provided with an inlet low pressure gas stream. The low pressure gas is compressed between one of the one or more gas compression ramps and the inner surface of the stationary housing which is located circumferentially about the rotor to generate a high pressure gas therefrom. To achieve gas compression and to avoid bypass of the compressed gas back to the entering low pressure gas stream one or more helical substantially radially extending strakes are provided along the periphery of the rotor. Each on of the one or more strakes S is provided adjacent to one of the one or more gas compression ramps R. At least a portion of each of the one or more strakes S extends outward from at least a portion of an outer surface portion of the rotor to a point adjacent to the inner surface of the stationary housing. The rotor is driven by application of mechanical power to an input shaft operatively connected to the rotor and thus to each of the one or more gas compression ramps. In one embodiment the apparent inlet velocity of the one or more gas compression ramps i.e. the approach speed between incoming gas and the opposing motion of a selected gas compression ramp R is at least Mach 1.5. More broadly the apparent inlet velocity of the one or more gas compression ramps is between Mach 1.5 and Mach 4. At the design point in one embodiment the apparent inlet velocity of said gas compression ramps is approximately Mach 3.5.

This method of gas compression allows high efficiency compression of a variety of commonly compressed gases including a air b steam c refrigerant and d hydrocarbons. Some important applications include compression of air natural gas refrigerants in refrigeration and air conditioning applications and steam in various services.

Overall the designs incorporated into compressor provide for minimizing aerodynamic drag by minimizing the number of leading edge surfaces subjected to stagnation pressure within the compressor. In one embodiment as illustrated herein the number of leading edge surfaces subjected to stagnation pressure is less than five. And each of the one or more gas compression ramps are circumferentially spaced equally apart so as to engage a supplied gas stream substantially free of turbulence from the previous passage through a given circumferential location of any one said one or more gas compression ramps. The cross sectional areas of each of the one or more gas compression ramps can be sized and shaped to provide a desired compression ratio. Further the helical strakes can be offset at a preselected angle delta and wherein the angle of offset matches the angle of offset of each one of the one or more gas compression ramps and wherein so that the angles match to allow gas entering the one or more gas compression ramps to be at approximately the same angle as the angle of offset to minimize inlet losses.

The rotors and are rotatably secured in an operating position by a fixed support stationary housing or casing in a manner suitable for extremely high speed operation of the rotors and such as rotation rates in the range of 10 000 to 20 000 rpm or even up to 55 000 rpm or higher. In this regard bearing assemblies must provide adequate bearing support for high speed rotation and thrust with minimum friction while also sealing the operating cavity so as to enable provision of a vacuum environment adjacent the rotor disc to minimize drag. The detailed bearing and lubrication systems may be provided by any convenient means by those knowledgeable in high speed rotating machinery and need not be further discussed herein. However note that in the embodiment shown in with back to back mounting of opposing pre swirl impellers and opposing rotor discs the thrust vectors created during compression are effectively eliminated since they are basically created in equal but opposite directions by the opposing rotors and pre swirl impellers.

It is to be appreciated that the various aspects and embodiments of a supersonic gas compressor and the method of operating such devices as described herein are an important improvement in the state of the art. The novel supersonic gas compressor is simple robust reliable and useful for work in various gas compression applications. Although only a few exemplary embodiments have been described in detail various details are sufficiently set forth in the drawings and in the specification provided herein to enable one of ordinary skill in the art to make and use the invention s which need not be further described by additional writing in this detailed description.

Importantly the aspects and embodiments described and claimed herein may be modified from those shown without materially departing from the novel teachings and advantages provided by this invention and may be embodied in other specific forms without departing from the spirit or essential characteristics thereof. Therefore the embodiments presented herein are to be considered in all respects as illustrative and not restrictive. As such this disclosure is intended to cover the structures described herein and not only structural equivalents thereof but also equivalent structures. Numerous modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention s may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described herein. Thus the scope of the invention s as set forth in the appended claims and as indicated by the drawing and by the foregoing description is intended to include variations from the embodiments provided which are nevertheless described by the broad interpretation and range properly afforded to the plain meaning of the claims set forth below.

