---

title: System and method for booking of hotel accommodations for travelers
abstract: A method of making a hotel reservation includes receiving a reservation request from a booking source, wherein the reservation request is based on an allocation to the booking source from a hotel and wherein the reservation request is price-blind; transmitting the reservation request to the hotel; receiving a confirmation from the hotel; and transmitting the confirmation to the booking source. The booking source can be a consolidator, a travel agent, a tour operator, a Global Distribution System or a wholesaler. The method also includes connecting to the hotel using a web service to transmit the reservation to the hotel. If the reservation request exceeds the allocation, the hotel has an option of accepting the reservation request or declining the reservation request. The method also includes receiving polling inquiries from the booking source prior to transmitting the hotel's confirmation to the booking source. The confirmation from the hotel can be received using a web service. The confirmation can be transmitted to the booking source using a web service. The reservation request can include a “special request.” The method can also include translating parameters of the reservation request from a format of the booking source to a format of the hotel.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07584110&OS=07584110&RS=07584110
owner: Emirates
number: 07584110
owner_city: Dubai
owner_country: AE
publication_date: 20050920
---
The present invention is related to booking of hotel accommodations for travelers and more particularly to automating the process of exchanging information regarding hotel bookings.

At the present time the process of booking hotel accommodations lags far behind in automation compared to its close relative the process of booking airline tickets. In the airline industry Global Distribution Systems GDSs exist to consolidate the information regarding flights seats times of departure and arrival prices etc. Virtually all the world s airlines and for all practical purposes all the travel agents are connected to one or more GDSs. This permits a relatively painless process of booking a flight either by the travel agent or by the consumer directly through the Internet confirming the purchase collecting the money from the passenger etc.

In the hotel industry this is far from being the case. Unlike airline seats which come essentially in only three varieties economy class business class and first class with possibly some minor variations such as premium economy on some airlines there is a lack of standardization in the hotel industry of the terms used to describe a particular room and a vastly greater variety of products offered to the consumer. For example one hotel could refer to its room with a queen size bed roughly 40 square meters in area and having an ocean view as DBL DLX Ocean VW. Another hotel could refer to the same exact type of room as Double Queen Deluxe View. This presents a problem in automating the reservation process.

Because the GDSs the travel agents consolidators and the hotels all frequently use their own codes to describe the same products for example the same double room with a sea view can also be called DBLVIEW DBSVW etc. by other hotels there is no consistency in the information exchange between the various actors in the reservation process.

Although many hotels also subscribe to the GDSs and therefore some hotel information is available through the GDSs this information is incomplete. In essence the process of booking a hotel room through a travel agent has changed little in the last 15 20 years when fax machines became widely available. The travel agent sends a fax to the hotel requesting to book a room. That fax is received printed out and is then manually entered into the hotel s reservation system. A confirmation is then sent back to the travel agent by fax email or through some other mechanism.

It should be remembered that frequently a confirmation received during an online booking process through many travel websites does not in fact confirm that the room will be available to the customer. The confirmation that many travel websites provide to the consumer is not a confirmation from the hotel but only a confirmation from the travel website. It is entirely possible for the consumer to show up at the hotel only to discover that there is in fact no room waiting for him at the price agreed to earlier.

A consolidator is essentially another term for a very large travel agency or a tour operator. A consolidator often has smaller travel agents as its customers. The travel agent in turn has consumers or hotel guests as its customers. Consolidators being larger business entities frequently have their own computer systems that keep track of sales allocations places etc. The information in the consolidator s own database is normally sufficient to actually sell the room in other words the consolidator knows the price the customer s name the hotel and given the allocation that the room will actually be available. Note however that a confirmation from the consolidator is still not necessarily a confirmation that the room has actually been reserved by that guest for that hotel. It is only a confirmation from the consolidator s computer system. Note also that frequently the travel agent with whom the customer deals with directly calls not the hotel but the consolidator and passes the consolidator s confirmation not the hotel s confirmation on to the customer. The consolidator at this point still needs to fax to the hotel the reservation and receive the hotel s confirmation.

An allocation or allotment in the travel industry refers to an agreement between a particular hotel or hotel chain and a travel agent or a consolidator or tour operator etc. Essentially the consolidator promises the hotel that he will sell X number of rooms and the hotel gives the travel agent a certain price which given the volume sale is usually at a discount from its standard rates . However since the hotel does not want the inventory to simply sit there usually there is a time limit on the allocation for example 30 days 60 days 90 days etc. In other words the travel agent can only book the room at most X days in advance.

Many travel agencies particularly large ones have their own separate allocations with many hotels. Other travel agents do not have separate agreements but instead rely on published hotel room prices. Typically each hotel that has such allocation agreements with a consolidator assigns a code to each such consolidator. Frequently the particular allocation agreement or discount that the hotel gives to the consolidator is also assigned its own special code by the hotel. This code rate code needs to be communicated to the hotel by the consolidator when booking the room for the customer.

All bookings require a confirmation from the hotel otherwise they are not treated as confirmed bookings. Frequently a 48 hour turn around time is required for bookings to be confirmed. This restricts publishing of last minute availability of hotel rooms since most hotels do not operate a 24 hour reservation center. Although the numbers are generally geographic and hotel specific the problem is a common one in the travel industry.

One way to send reservation requests to a hotel as shown in is from a hotel or chain website . The website can be linked via a middleware application or service to the hotel central reservation office CRO which in turn connects to the Property Management System PMS at the hotel being booked.

However the link between CRO and PMS may only be one way i.e. the CRO and web site only have a limited view of the availability at the hotel . The hotel s PMS is the only true view of a hotel s room inventory in real time. Also there are costs associated with licensing and supporting the middleware tier used to make the booking there may be additional costs per transaction

Another way is using middleware i.e. a third party application that can talk to the PMS . The website links to the hotel PMS using the middleware or the website can simply send an email request to the reservations department from the web user customer. If there is a direct connection to the PMS then this is the best option available but it will have transaction costs or support and maintenance cost associated with it. If the websitelO is not connected to the PMS then there is a problem with managing the allocation and rates shown on the website in addition to the process required in making and confirming the booking at the hotel level.

Another way is for the hotel to use a market representation company to process all bookings. This usually involves having the booking section of the hotel website provided by a third party and residing in an HTML frame on another server. This option usually has a sales cost associated with it and does not help the hotel reduce costs by dealing directly with guest. The market representation company is essentially acting as a travel agent and making the sale on behalf of the hotel . The hotel has limited control over the look and feel of the booking element of the website .

Also the market representation company does not have a direct link into the hotel PMS so each reservation received via the web site will need to be manually entered into the PMS possibly introducing error and delay.

Consolidators can send faxes or emails to the hotel CRO which are processed manually in a Central Reservation System CRS not shown in but usually located in the CRO by a reservation agent and a CRS confirmation is sent back manually to the consolidator via fax or email. This method relies on reservation agents receiving communication that is then printed out and re keyed or cut and pasted into a CRS. A CRS confirmation not a confirmation from the PMS hotel is then sent back to the consolidator . Similar issues exist when using travel agent or consolidator websites to make the booking.

Market representation companies do not have direct links to the hotel PMS so each reservation has to be sent to the hotel and then printed out and re keyed or cut and pasted into the PMS. The consolidator is provided with a confirmation by the market representation company but this is no guarantee that the hotel has even received the booking.

Yet another way is for the consolidator to use a GDS to make the booking. However the GDS is the most disconnected channel to the hotel .

The hotel only provides a limited view of availability to the GDS and incurs an additional charge higher than that of a market representation company fee for every booking process at the GDS level. Today it is very rare to find a GDS that has a direct connection to a hotel at the PMS level required to process bookings in near real time

Another way to reserve a room is through Alternative Distribution Systems ADSs . This is essentially the same scenario as using travel agents or consolidators discussed above. ADSs tend to be large online travel portals that are treated by hotels as consolidators or wholesalers of rooms. Their focus tends to be based on price and convenience to their customers. Many hotels provide ADSs with last minute volatile inventory at much reduced rates and therefore have to put considerable effort into managing this sales channel as far as what the hotel can sell and at what rate. This is usually done through a form of extranet requiring the reservations staff to log into the system to upload inventory and rates on a daily or even hourly basis.

However ADSs sell online and provide customers with their own confirmation codes without being able to guarantee that the hotel has received the reservation. In many instances hotels have to connect to the ADS extranet to retrieve any booking for their property in other cases an email or fax is sent to the hotel containing the reservation request. Therefore each reservation has to be printed out and re keyed or cut and pasted into the PMS before a valid hotel confirmation can be sent back by email or after connecting to the ADS extranet.

Accordingly there is a need in the industry for an automated exchange that permits booking of hotel rooms and exchange of actual confirmation information while maintaining confidentiality of hotel travel agent commercial information.

The present invention relates to a system and method for booking of hotel accommodations for travelers that substantially obviate one or more of the disadvantages of the related art.

More particularly in an exemplary embodiment of the present invention a method of making a hotel reservation includes receiving a reservation request from a booking source wherein the reservation request is based on an allocation to the booking source from a hotel and wherein the reservation request is price blind transmitting the reservation request to the hotel receiving a confirmation from the hotel and transmitting the confirmation to the booking source. The booking source can be a consolidator a travel agent a tour operator a Global Distribution System or a wholesaler.

The method can also include connecting to the hotel using a web service to transmit the reservation to the hotel. If the reservation request exceeds the allocation the hotel has an option of accepting the reservation request or declining the reservation request. The method also includes receiving polling inquiries from the booking source prior to transmitting the hotel s confirmation to the booking source. The confirmation from the hotel can be received using a web service. The confirmation can be transmitted to the booking source using a web service. The reservation request can include a special request. The method can also include translating parameters of the reservation request from a format of the booking source to a format of the hotel.

In another aspect a system for processing hotel reservations includes a first web service for receiving a reservation request from a booking source a second web service for interfacing to a hotel and receiving an online confirmation of the reservation request from the hotel a database for storing the reservation request if the hotel is offline and a third web service for communicating the confirmation to the booking source. A translation table can be used for converting reservation request formats between the booking source and the hotel. In an alternative embodiment a single webservice can support multiple transaction types calls and commands.

In another aspect a method of making a hotel reservation includes receiving a reservation request from a booking source in a format of a booking source translating the reservation request to a standardized format transmitting the reservation request to the hotel in the standardized format receiving a confirmation from the hotel and transmitting the confirmation to the booking source in the format of the booking source.

Additional features and advantages of the invention will be set forth in the description that follows and in part will be apparent from the description or may be learned by practice of the invention. The advantages of the invention will be realized and attained by the structure particularly pointed out in the written description and claims hereof as well as the appended drawings.

It is to be understood that both the foregoing general description and the following detailed description are exemplary and explanatory and are intended to provide further explanation of the invention as claimed.

Reference will now be made in detail to embodiments of the present invention examples of which are illustrated in the accompanying drawings.

In the context of the present discussion web services should be distinguished from web servers. Web servers are constructs that are most familiar to people who use the Internet. A web server generates a web page that is viewed by a user in a browser after clicking on a link or typing a URL universal resource locator . A web service on the other hand does not generate web pages but delivers information over the Internet. For example when a consumer buys a book at an online bookstore that book may be shipped via Federal Express. When the next day the consumer goes on the online bookstore s website and checks on the status of the order the online bookstore s server sends a request to a web service maintained by Federal Express. That web service which is implemented using some type of a computer queries its own database for the status of that order and sends the information back to the online bookstore s web server which in turn displays it on a web page to the customer. In other words a web service does not maintain web pages although the information from the web service may be used in the creation of web pages. Essentially web services refers to computers talking to each other and consuming each others functionality over the Internet rather than users directly communicating with a web server using a browser.

In the discussion below a consolidator is used as an example of a booking source who talks to a DAEX web service discussed below although it will be appreciated that anyone who acts as a travel agent large or small can play the role of a consolidator.

DAEX web service retrieves availability and rates and or rate codes from hotels and passes booking information to the hotels . DAEX web service interfaces to travels agents and travel websites for example myTravelChannel see www.mytravelchannel.com to Wizcom and to Open Destination which are sales channels for the various GDSs .

Hotel inventory and rates are exchanged between DAEX web service and the hotels . Booking information flows to the hotels . DAEX web service can also interface to airlines call centers travel websites consolidators user applications and MICE Meetings Incentives Conferences and Events a type of travel business receiving booking requests and returning booking confirmation.

DAEX web service provides a web service based reservation API Application Programming Interface to allow DAEX web service to deliver the reservations from an allocation in an on line mode to a Property Management Systems PMS of a hotel see .

DAEX web service automates the manual reservation delivery process and allows hotels to migrate other sources of reservations e.g. tour operators online once they are connected to DAEX web service .

Hotel or chain websites can be provided with an allocation at the PMS level which is usually in place already and then when a booking is requested the website simply calls the DAEX web service with the allocation code and a confirmation code is returned from the PMS to the customer.

The consolidators CRS can send a booking request containing the allocation code and hotel identifier to the DAEX web service which in turn sends the booking to the hotel PMS and returns a confirmation code from the hotel to the consolidator s CRS .

Alternative Distribution Systems can access the PMS inventory through DAEX web service in real time allowing the hotel to increase or decrease rates and allocation available to the ADS through the PMS . This is already done in the PMS today but then the hotel has to copy that same information into the ADS extranet. DAEX web service removes the need to re enter this data and also provides the confirmation required to give peace of mind that the reservation has been delivered to the hotel .

A consolidator also has an email server either locally hosted on managed by their Internet Service Provider. It is common for CRS to connect to either the consolidator s email server which in turn use the Internet to connect to the hotel s email server for the purpose of sending reservation requests. It is also not uncommon for a consolidator to use a printer and fax machine or a fax gateway connected to the CRS to send reservation requests to the hotel s fax machine in many instances a large consolidator is provided with a dedicated fax machine at the hotel purely for the purpose of prioritizing their booking requests rather than have them sitting in a generic fax in tray .

In some instances the booking is not sent directly to the hotel but to a Central Reservation Office CRO . Some hotel chains have regional CROs others may have a global CRO. Where a CRO is managing booking for each of the hotel properties they usually also have a hotel CRS in place that sends reservations received at the CRO down to the PMS at the hotel being requested.

A booking request can enter the hotel or CRO through either email or fax. In each instance a reservation agent is required to take the booking request and retype or cut and paste the request into either the hotel CRS or PMS . A reservation agent will then either fax or email a confirmation back to the requester consolidator travel agent etc. 

As shown in one exemplary arrangement of a consolidator includes a consolidator mail server central reservation system or application to manage sales and or allocations for a consolidator and a consolidator interface these may be combined into one physical device which is connected to the DAEX web service via a network such as the Internet.

The DAEX web service interfaces to a consolidator on one side and to the hotel on the other side. Optionally a DAEX website may be used for example by small travel agencies that can use their web browsers to interface to DAEX web service . In the event that a consolidator or travel agent does not have a central reservation system of their own then the DAEX website provides a simple web interface that can be accessed using a web browser and internet connection. The DAEX website provides this functionality through web pages that use the DAEX web service functionality described herein.

The DAEX web service is connected through a network to a consolidator interface . The consolidator interface in turn connects to the consolidators reservation system to a fax or telephone machine and other hardware available on the consolidator side. On the hotel side the DAEX web service interfaces to the hotel PMS through the PMS interface through an interface . On the hotel side there is typically a mail server which can be connected to the reservations manager who is in turn connected to the PMS .

Once the request is made the consolidator will use the same GUID to check on the status of this request as described previously.

The process of making a reservation starts with the reservation request see which is received from a consumer or another travel agent and processed to generate a reservation request guest ID GUID . The reservation request is passed from the CRS to the DAEX web service .

The consolidator thus tells DAEX web service that it wants to reserve a room at a particular hotel which the consolidator can optionally do using its own product codes. The DAEX web service will then convert that product code using the standard set of product codes derived from the Open Travel Alliance OTA see http www.opentravel.org and will then communicate the request for a reservation to the hotel . In other words a translator is used to convert the consolidator s codes to a standard format. The Open Travel Alliance provides a standard set of designations for the various hotel products including rooms content of rooms down to the level of whether VCR and DVD players are available for rent and for how much view from the room etc.

The PMS DAEX interface is responsible for delivering reservations to the PMS . Reservation delivery includes all subsequent modifications and cancellations. Reservations are sent where appropriate with the following types of profile Guest Company and Travel Agent. Travel agent consolidator profiles may be matched in the PMS by using the agent s IATA International Air Travel Association number or any pre agreed agency code. Guest and Company profiles are matched using a user definable profile matching system. DAEX values are converted into matching values in the PMS using a set of conversion tables. Users can check the status of the interface using a monitor screen were the details of the incoming messages can be viewed and printed if required.

Reservation requests are delivered to the PMS in real time using the PMS DAEX interface . The PMS DAEX interface communicates with the PMS in real time ensuring quick confirmation of reservations to the consolidator . The consolidator can also act for a third party booking system.

Once the reservation is processed the on line interface returns the confirmation details to the consolidator via DAEX web service .

When a booking is made by the consolidator it is entered into the consolidator s reservations system and a message containing the booking request is sent to the DAEX web service via the consolidator s DAEX interface . As further shown in once an initial booking request is received from the consolidator interface see in the credentials of the consolidator i.e. the sender of the initial booking request are checked see .

The credentials are attempted to be authenticated using a DAEX database or credentials table see . The DAEX web service authenticates the message sent by the consolidator s DAEX interface which contains a UserID and password against the DAEX credentials database that contains the credentials for each consolidator . Once authenticated and as described later the data contained in the message is validated the consolidator is returned a reservation request GUID. At the time of issuing the GUID DAEX web service will store the reservation request in the DAEX database and queue it for processing.

If the credentials supplied in the reservation request cannot be authenticated failure is indicated see an appropriate failure response is sent to the consolidator interface and a security log entry is made containing the credentials and information provided in the booking request.

Also an intrusion velocity check can be performed see . Subject to a failure velocity setting that counts the number of failures in a given time period to assess if someone is trying to masquerade as the consolidator and guess their password an alert may be sent to both the operations team and the registered contact at the consolidator explaining the situation.

If the authentication in step is successful the booking request is translated to standard DAEX format see . A consolidator specific database or translation table may be used see .

DAEX web service provides a number of conversion tables. The purpose of the conversion tables is to convert values sent by DAEX web service into values recognized by the hotel . An example of this is rate codes. Every PMS can be different and users are free to choose how rate codes are configured. This can lead to the same rate being configured slightly differently in each hotel . For example the rate code Weekend can be configured in the following ways WKND Weekend or WKEND. DAEX web service uses OTA based values e.g. WKND and this will not always match the configuration of the same rate in PMS . Conversion tables are provided so that the incoming values can be converted to the appropriate codes in the PMS . These conversion tables are maintained locally by each consolidator and DAEX web service maintains an up to date database of the conversion tables.

Note also that this approach can be expanded to connect to the GDSs not shown in In other words the left hand side of can equally apply to the GDSs which essentially play the role of a travel agent or consolidator in this context. This also permits the GDS to confirm the booking in real time.

The request is then validated see . There is no Lingua Franca among hotels tour operators and travelers. For example a hotel may refer to most of its rooms as deluxe sea facing and some rooms maybe be super deluxe which are both sea facing and with a balcony. A tour operator can refer to the Deluxe Sea Facing rooms as SuperiorSV superior sea view . A Super Deluxe Sea Facing with Balcony would be SuperiorSVB superior sea view balcony . The overcome this issue DAEX web service provides a common repository of standard room names that are mapped to each room type used by the consolidators and to each hotels room type as stored in the PMS . These room types are based on data published by a standards body such as the Open Travel Alliance OTA so that they can described by a common room type and amenities facilities for example 

The translation process described above can either take place at the interface level i.e. the initial reservation request from a tour operator is normalized before being sent to the DAEX web service . Alternatively a lookup table in DAEX web service is used to match any consolidator specific elements descriptions such as room type guest details etc. to DAEX standard elements.

DAEX web service verifies that the initial reservation request has standard room amenity descriptions before sending the GUID. If the data in the initial reservation request message is invalid then an error message is returned to the consolidator s interface by the DAEX web service or to the user of the DAEX web site see . If the booking request is validated then a response to the client or consolidator is generated and is entered into a DAEX database . A GUID is then issued see which is transmitted to the consolidator interface .

The hotel specific reservation request is transmitted to the DAEX PMS interface at the hotel . This interface usually developed by the hotel s PMS vendor provides an automated mechanism to place a reservation into the PMS . Certain checks are made at the PMS Interface level which can include 

 d In the case of the last check does the consolidator have allocation available for the request If the allocation is not available then DAEX web service can convert this booking into a special request as described later in this document .

As shown in once the reservation request is received the reservation processing begins see in concert with the data in the DAEX database . The booking request is then converted if necessary to hotel specific format see using the hotel specific translation table or database . Then a check is made if this is a special request see . If it is not it is then placed into the DAEX outbound queue . The interface is used to transmit the request to the hotel interface and to the PMS . If the booking request is a special request it is placed in a special request queue . The request then goes into the DAEX mail server which interfaces to the hotels mail server .

There are instances where a reservation may be subject to some special requests such as an early check in late check out or a booking outside of the consolidator s allocation at the hotel . In these instances DAEX web service performs the translation of room type and description to the hotel standard and then sends an email with all of the booking information along with the special request which is clearly highlighted to the hotel reservations department for approval.

If a reservation is subject to a special request then the DAEX web service will send that reservation to a reservation agent for confirmation or rejection through a process of the reservation agent replying to that reservation special request with a simple YES NO response in the email body. If the response is YES then DAEX web service will send the reservation directly to the PMS interface to be confirmed by the PMS without the reservation agent having to enter or re enter any information in the PMS .

The PMS interface will return a reservation confirmation code to DAEX web service which is then stored for later retrieval by the consolidator s CRS .

The response from the hotels mail server is processed see and is placed in the DAEX database . The request is then placed in the outbound queue and is transmitted through the interfaces and to the hotels PMS .

If the authentication is successful status is retrieved using the GUID see using the status information in the DAEX database . The response is sent to the consolidator see using the consolidator interface .

The interface provided by the PMS vendor provides most if not all of the functionality made available to the hotel reservation department. This includes the ability to use the interface to add change and cancel a reservation.

The interface will return to DAEX web service a confirmation code identical to the code that would be provided if someone where booking directly with the hotel s reservation office i.e. the PMS confirmation is returned to DAEX web service .

The consolidator can also request a status update on each outstanding reservation request by sending the previously issued GUID to the DAEX web service . This status request can either be initiated by the consolidator s CRS or by the DAEX interface where the DAEX web service is not natively supported by the CRS . Alternatively the DAEX web site can show the current status of each request bases on the userID and password provided.

The process is as follows the DAEX interface provides the authentication information as described previously along with the GUIDs for each request that information is being requested on. The authentication process described previously then takes place and upon successful authentication DAEX web service retrieves the latest status from the DAEX database that was previously populated by either the initial reservation request on an outstanding request or the response from the DAEX hotel interface where a reservation has been processed by the hotel interface PMS . The status for each GUID supplied is placed into an XML recordset that is returned by the DAEX web service to the consolidator interface .

At the consolidator a confirmation or rejection response is used to update the booking request in the CRS .

To cancel or change a booking a call is made to the DAEX web service containing the GUID of the initial reservation request and an optional reason for the cancellation . DAEX web service carries out the same authentication process as described previously and then submits the cancellation or change request to the PMS interface along with the original hotel confirmation code contained within the DAEX database . The hotel PMS interface is responsible for accepting the change or cancellation. The hotel PMS interface applies the rules already contained within the PMS for the consolidator s rate contract allocation that the booking was made under. Note that the rules contained within the PMS usually have restrictions as to when a cancellation can be made for example if the booking to be cancelled is for tomorrow then the hotel will usually insist that the booking is paid for in full by the consolidator or guest as the hotel would be left with inventory that it may not be able to sell on such short notice.

If the hotel PMS interface rejects a cancellation request then there is an option for the cancellation request to be submitted to the hotel Reservations Agent Department in the same way a special request booking is made as described earlier for example the hotel is presented with the option of responding with a simple YES or NO to the request.

Note that DAEX web service is price agnostic. It is not necessary for the DAEX web service to know price information in order to make the reservation with the hotel . All DAEX web service needs to know is the identity of the consolidator which includes the relevant allocation information the code which is assigned to consolidator by the hotel and the rate code or allocation identification etc. . With this identifying information but without a need for price information DAEX web service can connect the consolidator with the hotel make the reservation and get a confirmation while being price agnostic and therefore price blind.

If DAEX web service required the knowledge of pricing for its operation few people would use it since such information is considered confidential and sensitive in the hotel business. Therefore from a commercial perspective price blindness is a prerequisite for success.

The DAEX web service also translates the request into a standard OTA format. If necessary and if the hotel uses its own code system the DAEX web service can translate the reservation request from the consolidator s format to the hotel s format.

6. If a rate code is not provided by the reservation source the InventoryBlockCode and Room Type must be provided.

8. Special requests SRs may require different handling and the codes used must be the ones agreed upon otherwise the booking request may be rejected.

The GUID provided by the consolidator serves as glue for all subsequent communication with DAEX web service and serves as a transaction identifier.

A special request code should be mutually agreed between the consolidator and DAEX web service . Only certain codes like EC early check in trigger the Special Request procedure. All other requests are treated as ordinary requests and sent to the PMS as normal request messages. It is the requestor s responsibility to provide the right code. If for example the online reservation request contains a special request like EC the message will not be sent to the PMS immediately.

The PMS DAEX interface will make the reservation on the PMS side and return either Reserved or Reservation Denied message

Frequently the consolidator has an allocation from the hotel in essence the hotel saying We grant you the right to sell X number of rooms at a price Y. Conventionally if the consolidator were to try to book more rooms at that price than had been allocated to him the response from the hotel would be along the lines of Cannot confirm reservation not made. DAEX web service allows the hotel based on its own business considerations to handle this issue differently. DAEX web service sends an email to the hotel s reservation manager informing him of the attempt to book the room that is outside the allocation and giving him the option of accepting or declining for example by typing the words Yes or No in the body of the reply or in the subject line. The hotel can then automatically enter the booking information into its own reservation system.

As one optional embodiment a particular mechanism is may also be used to intercept the traditional communication of a booking from a consolidator to a hotel . This includes intercepting emails that would normally go to the hotel reservation department for manual processing confirmation from the consolidators email server by redirecting them to a consolidator interface that takes the booking email and parses the required data required by the DAEX web service to confirm or reject the booking request. Other examples of intercepts include interfacing with a Mail Application Programmable interface such a Microsoft MAPI to intercept both mail and fax output from consolidator reservation systems and process them with DAEX web service through the DAEX interface .

Additionally DAEX web service allows hotels to know not only the business that they are getting which they know from internal accounting but also the business that they are not getting. This information which is easily extractable from the queries and reservation requests to the hotel that subscribes to the DAEX service and from comparison of reservations with similar parameters can assist the hotels in real time with their marketing and pricing.

Also DAEX web service can provide demographic information to local tourist authorities such as how many people come to visit a particular city what types of rooms they reserve how long their average stay is their origin etc.

DAEX web service also provides a profile matching facility to reduce the number of duplicate profiles created in the system. The profile matching is dependent on the amount of profile information received by DAEX web service . The profile matching works by using a user definable points system. The users define the number of points against each of the profile fields sent by DAEX web service . If the total number of points of an incoming profile is equal to or exceeds e.g. 1 000 then the profile is considered a match and the reservation is attached to the existing profile in the PMS .

It should also be appreciated that various modifications adaptations and alternative embodiments thereof may be made within the scope and spirit of the present invention. The invention is further defined by the following claims.

