---

title: Movable audio/video communication interface system
abstract: A system that includes a desk top assembly of a display and sensors mounted on a robotic arm. The arm moves the assembly so that it remains within position and orientation tolerances relative to the user's head as the user looks around. Near-field speaker arrays supply audio and a microphone array senses a user's voice. Filters are applied to head motion to reduce latency for arm's tracking of the head. The system is full duplex with other systems allowing immersive collaboration. Lighting and sound generation take place close to the user's head. A haptic interface device allows the user to grab the display/sensor array and move it about. Motion acts as a planar selection device for 3D data. Planar force feedback allows a user to “feel” the data. Users see not only each other through display windows, but can also see the positions and orientations of each others' planar selections of shared 3D models or data.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07626569&OS=07626569&RS=07626569
owner: Graphics Properties Holdings, Inc.
number: 07626569
owner_city: Palo Alto
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051024
---
This application is related to and claims priority to U.S. provisional application entitled A Movable Audio Video Communication Interface System having Ser. No. 60 621 085 by Lanier filed Oct. 25 2004 and incorporated by reference herein.

The present invention is directed to a system for immersing a user into a multi dimensional collaborative environment using position tracking to adjust a position of a display displaying a 3D scene and or other participants in the collaboration.

In the past a number of different technologies have been used to help people collaborate at a distance by coupling them together in some sort of common environment. These technologies have includes conference telephone systems video telephones networked head mounted displays collaborative document software etc. These technologies suffer from an inability to create a viable personal communications and computing environment for collaboration among individuals in part because the underlying sensor and display components are not used in a way that allows them to perform well enough to meet human factors needs. What is needed is a better such system.

For instance video conferencing systems cannot provide true sight lines between participants because the camera and display are in different positions. Therefore eye contact between participants is impossible. This problem has led to a very large number of attempted solutions over a period of three quarters of a century.

One class of solutions is to reduce the effects of imperfect sight lines by the use of other design elements while another is to find ways to generate accurate sight lines. Accurate sight lines require dynamic tracking of the positions of the eyes of users and generally require that the visual scene presented to each eye be digitally reconstructed to be of the correct perspective since it is difficult to consistently place a physical camera at the correct position to capture the proper perspective. This approach is generally called tele immersion. A tele immersion example is Jaron Lanier s prototype described in the Scientific American article referenced. Several problems have made tele immersion systems impractical. One is that displays and eye position sensors that are currently available or are foreseen to be available in the near future do not work well outside of narrow tolerances for the position and orientation of the user s head. For instance in order for participants to be able to be apparently placed close to each other in a shared virtual space stereo vision must be supported but for each eye to see a unique point of view either some form of eyeware must be worn or an autostereo display must be used but available autostereo displays place restrictions on a user s head position. Because of these problems it has been difficult to design tele immersion systems that combine true sight lines full duplex meaning that users can see each other without problems due to intervening machinery such as stereo viewing glasses and flexible virtual placement meaning that viewers can be placed at any distance near or far and in any arrangement. Another problem has been that tele immersion systems have generally required dedicated rooms which has limited their practicality. The physical layout of tele immersion instrumentation has placed restrictions on the virtual layout of participants in the virtual space. The blue c system generates true sight lines but places restrictions on relative placements of users in virtual space cannot support high resolution sensing or display with currently available components and requires dedicated rooms. The HP Coliseum system cannot support true sight lines and generalized placement of participants at the same time.

It is an aspect of the present invention to provide a personal communications and computing environment that can also be used for collaboration among individuals.

It is also an aspect of the present invention to provide an immersive type experience that can be easily integrated with other modes of working.

It is also an aspect of the present invention to provide an immersive type of experience without requiring large resources of floor space or specialized rooms.

The above aspects can be attained by a system that includes an assembly of multimodal displays and sensors mounted on a mechanical or robotic arm rising out of a desktop or other base. The arm moves the assembly so that it remains within position and orientation tolerances relative to the user s head as the user looks around. This lowers the requirements for sensor and display components so that existing sensors and displays can work well enough for the purpose. The arm does not need to be moved with great accuracy or maintain perfect on axis alignment and uniform distance to the face. It must merely remain within tolerances. Kalman filters are applied to head motion to compensate for latency in the arm s tracking of the head. Tele immersion is supported by the assembly because local and remote user s heads can be sensed and then represented to each other with true sight lines. By placing user interface transducers in motion it becomes possible for users to move as they normally would in group interactions particularly those including more than two participants. The invention provides a solution that is full duplex and yet has a small footprint. Users can be placed in any arrangement in virtual space. Because lighting and sound generation take place close to the user s head the invention will not disrupt other activities in the local physical environment. Near field speaker arrays supply immersive audio and a microphone array senses a users voice. In this way a user can be alerted by an audio event such as a voice to look in the direction of the event. Since the display will move to show what is present in that direction the display need not be encompassing or restrict access to the local physical environment in order for the user to benefit from immersive virtual environments. The invention is also a haptic interface device a user can grab the display sensor array and move it about. The invention acts as a planar selection device for 3D data. This is important for volumetric data such as MRI scan data. The physical position and orientation of display assembly provides planar selection and the need for mental rotation is reduced. Planar force feedback can also be used to allow a user to feel the center of density within a scalar field as resistance and curl. Users see not only each other through display windows but can also see the positions and orientations of each others planar selections of shared 3D models or data so area of interest is communicated with minimal effort. The invention can also be used to subsume or simulate other user interface designs such as command control rooms with multiple displays wall sized displays videobots or conventional desktop PC displays.

These together with other aspects and advantages which will be subsequently apparent reside in the details of construction and operation as more fully hereinafter described and claimed reference being had to the accompanying drawings forming a part hereof wherein like numerals refer to like parts throughout.

The present invention which can also be called a Compact Collaborative Desktop Explorer COCODEX is a user interface technology that can provide a solution to some of the most important and longest standing problems in Virtual Reality Tele immersion 3D visualization and video teleconferencing technologies. The invention includes an assembly of display and sensor components mounted on a mechanical arm that allows the assembly to move to a wide variety of locations around a user s head. Because the display and sensors are mobile it is possible to keep them within constrained positions or tolerances relative to the user s face or head as the user looks around thus making a variety of functions reliable that are not reliable in other configurations. These include auto stereo display effects 3D audio without headphones machine vision analysis of the user s face illumination of the face audio sensing of the voice and so on. This can be accomplished without physical contact with or obscuring of the face so it becomes possible to accurately accomplish full duplex tele immersion or other visual communications involving the face. The invention is a full duplex solution for tele immersion or visual teleconferencing that allows for varied numbers and virtual arrangements of participants makes demands of sensor and display technologies that can be met using known techniques and materials and has a practical footprint for widespread deployment. The invention can be thought of as the halfway point in a design continuum between head mounted displays and CAVE like room displays while offering significant advantages that neither extreme can offer.

As depicted in the hardware of the system of an embodiment includes two or more systems local and remote connected by a full duplex communications network such as the Internet. Each system includes a computer connected to a computer controlled robotics arm . The arm is a conventional robotics arm that has multiple degrees of freedom with effectively 6 degrees of freedom in the end attachment allowing the display to tilt swivel move up down away toward right left etc. The arm also includes the conventional feedback systems that indicate the position and attitude of the arm so that the direction that the display is facing is known. The arm holds a visual display such as a flat panel display to which are attached an array of audio speakers visual sensors illumination sources such as LEDs and an audio sensor such as a microphone array allowing sound direction to be determined. The flat panel display can include autostereo viewing capability by using suitable devices such as a lenticular screen through which the images are projected to the user. The display provides a view into the scene that can be adjusted. The autostereo view capability allows the user to see stereo cues in the virtual scene. The speakers and sensors are positioned around the display so that three dimensional 3D effects can be obtained and projected. For example the visual sensors as will be discussed later herein are used to sense the position of a user s head and the near field speakers can be used to present to the user a stereo audio image that approximates a position of a participant that appears on the display while at the same time not projecting the sound too far from the physical space of the user. A handle for manual control of the positioning of the display and the view of the object is also provided and includes one or more buttons like the buttons of a conventional mouse I O device or interface elements such as roller balls thumb wheels jog wheels allowing different types of control and selection. For example buttons and a roller ball can be used to select and activate graphical user interface GUI elements that appear on the display such as a typical menu or GUI icon based desktop. These robotic arm feedback systems can provide manual resistance to movement of the handle as controlled by the computer to allow the user to feel the data through which a view or cut plane is traveling. The components and are conventional components such as video cameras microphones etc and are coupled to the computer through conventional interfaces suitable to the components.

The freedom of movement of the display of the present invention essentially allows the user to move about and look about in a view space. As a result the user can take a viewing frustum and move it through a virtual object that is being commonly displayed to the interactive collaborating participants. illustrates the display in such a position where a cut plane through a 3D object a head of a person is being displayed.

Because in a situation where many individually may be involved in the collaboration it may be important for each viewer of a common scene to have an understanding of at where the other viewers are looking. depicts a display view showing a 3D object being commonly viewed by another viewer . The other viewer is being shown along with orientation of the other viewer the cut plane or 3D object view being viewed by the other viewer and the other viewers viewing frustum . The other viewer is displayed as a compound portraiture image of the face. A compound portraiture image is an image of a user that is constructed using the best data that can be obtained from sensors placed in advantageous positions by the motion of the robotic arm. It is composed of a polygon mesh head deformed by facial landmarks that are tracked by machine vision algorithms in order to reflect facial expression or pose to which textures are applied. The textures are of varying resolution and are derived differentially from cameras in the camera array so that the best placed camera contributes most to given area of texture on the head. Variably transparent mesh objects extend from the head so that objects that extend substantially from the face such as large hairstyles or hats can be rendered so as to fade into the surrounding environment with an ambiguous border.

The above discussed figures show the user moving essentially horizontally the system tracking the user and moving the display accordingly. The system is also capable of moving the display vertically and at angles.

The present invention also uses the conventional virtual reality capabilities that allow a user to view a 3D scene from multiple changing perspectives and that allow other views such as a view of another user to be combined in the same view space.

The present invention can incorporate a merged dual exit pupil display as its display as depicted in . There have been varied autostereo displays using multiple exit pupils but they have either required very large footprints to handle the optics to make large exit pupils or have demanded an artificially small amount of head motion from the user so that the user can see small exit pupils. The invention makes smaller exit pupils usable by moving them to match the user s moving eye positions. In an embodiment a variation of the arm is required which is hollow and capable of supporting mirrors in its joints. One display for each eye is placed in the base and combined with a combiner . These are preferably DLP or LCOS micro displays illuminated by LEDs or other light sources. Powered mirrors are placed in the joints so that the invention functions like a periscope incorporating the optical properties of a stereo microscope. A holographic optical element is one suitable choice for the final powered optical element coincident with the plane of the sensor display assembly in order to reduce weight.

The aspect of the invention of placing sensors and displays in motion to approximately keep track of a user s head provides multiple benefits a Improved integration of virtual and physical tools With the invention it is easy to look into the 3D scene and then out again while seated allowing users to easily divert attention between people and things depicted in a virtual space and other people and things present in the physical environment. A user can easily use conventional PC tools and immersive virtual world tools in the same work session. b Emulation of other user interface designs The invention can emulate a conventional PC display by defining a virtual PC display at a certain position in the virtual world. When the invention s display is moved to the corresponding physical position it effectively acts as a physical simulation of a conventional PC at the same location. Similarly the invention can be used to emulate command control centers display walls and other user interface designs. c Improved upper body mobility for seated users of tele immersion services Available eye tracking technologies which are required both for facial reconstruction and for the control of autostereo renderings do not track eyes within the full normal range of human head motion during the course of a conversation in which a person might be looking around at multiple remote participants. By coupling eye tracking sensors to the mobile display that is allowed to move in approximate conjunction with the eyes that are being tracked sufficient performance is achieved to support a multi person conversation with diverse relative positions of participants. The same argument is generalized to all visual sensors. A single camera pointed straight at a user is a common design in visual telecommunications but this design fails to meet human factors requirements. Some degree of reconstruction of the user s head face is needed to meet these requirements so that accurate lines of sight can be supported with each user appearing to the others at the proper perspective angle. Machine vision techniques and cameras have not performed well enough to achieve this when limited to fixed viewing positions given normal human ranges of motion. Since with this invention cameras keep up with the face existing cameras and machine vision algorithms can sense a user s face well enough for perspective alteration and other tasks. d Improve the performance of autostereo displays The invention enables rendering of precise points of view within autostereo displays and prevents users from seeing nil pseudoscopic or otherwise incorrect image pairs even while supporting a full range of head motion. e Improved independence of physical and virtual space allocation The physical arrangement of displays in previous tele immersion setups placed constraints on virtual participant arrangements. For instance in order for a user to be able to see remote users to the left and to the right at a virtual table there had to be local physical displays to the left and right to support sight lines to view those remote users. If a tele immersive meeting using fixed displays has more than a few participants the display requirements become expensive and impractical. The invention s single mobile display allows users to look in any direction and thus it foresees any number or arrangement of remote participants with only a modest and fixed requirement for local physical space. f Improved exploration of volumetric data With the present invention by equating physical display position and orientation with virtual viewing frustum the user s brain is relieved from having to perform a 6D transformation that confuses many users in typical immersive systems. This is significant in medical and scientific applications involving selecting sectional views of volumetric data. g Improved user interface for implicit communication of interest and activity between users With the invention users can see renderings of the locations and projective contents of the mobile screens other participants are viewing the world though so each user can tell what the others are paying attention to. Since the invention makes it easy to perform planar selections and manipulations in addition to point based ones it is easy to design visualizations of what other participants are doing. Users see both the heads of other users the screens they are using and the ways that those screens are coupled to virtual objects that are being transformed. h Reduced impact on the local shared physical environment The invention can be desk mounted and doesn t require low light conditions. i Improved sound system for collaboration in a shared physical facility Headphones excel at 3D audio effects while speakers though convenient don t produce these effects well when placed at conventional distances despite a great deal of effort by many labs to get them to do so. Speakers can also be loud when placed conventionally and this can disturb others in a work environment. By coupling near field speakers approximately to head position the invention provides 3D sound at low volumes without head contact and without demanding any time to get into or out of the interface. A similar issue exists with microphones. A mobile microphone or microphone array will pick up the voice more consistently. j Improved integration of audio haptic and visual user interface modalities The invention can be used for planar exploration of a scalar or vector volumetric field or even one with curl. The user interface of exploration using any of the three above sensory modalities is identical moving the display and this tight integration will make it easier to train and collaborate with users who have certain disabilities. That is to say a blind user and a deaf user could each explore a virtual object in similar ways and thus collaborate more effectively. For the blind user a haptic display as described in detail in the pseudocode below will be available in addition to an audio display. For instance the center of density as calculated to provide haptic feedback of the location of a tumor in the pseudocode below could also be used as the source of a virtual sound source using conventional 3D sound rendering techniques.

As can be seen from the above discussion and the attached drawings the present invention solves a number of problems related to positions of sensors and displays. The invention provides autostereo without constraining user position unacceptably provides headphone like 3D audio performance without headphones performs visual facial sensing without constraining user position unacceptably provides consistent illumination of the user s face isolates the user s voice without constraining user position unacceptably provides a compact desktop implementation facilitates instant in and out easy overall workflow when used in conjunction with other user interfaces easily depicts what other users are paying attention to and doing and provides 6 degrees of freedom of the physical display and the virtual viewing frustum which are equivalent making it easier for users to understand six degree of freedom navigation.

Other techniques can be used for head position and orientation sensing. For example a 3D magnetic field based sensor system such as Polhemus sensor and sensor system available from Polhemus Colchester Vt. can be worn on the user s head. These sensors can also be used to warn the user to manually move the display with the attached sensors when the user s head position is reaching a limit.

The invention arm can be mounted on a floor standing pedestal or a rolling such pedestal. The arm can be ceiling mounted. The arm can be mounted on a powered mobile base so that the base moves on a table or other surface in addition to the other motions described above. A mobile floor mounted base can be incorporated to make the invention functional for a walking user.

The display sensor assembly can be hand supported if position and orientation are sensed using sensors such as those described above which do not require a rigid mechanical linkage. The display sensor assembly can be hand supported and wireless using protocols such as Bluetooth to connect all components with computation resources.

The invention display can be a transparent or semi transparent surface that can present to the user superimposed projected images over the physical scene which is visible beyond the display surface. In this case the invention incorporates the functionality of Augmented Reality displays which are well known . When an Augmented Reality type display is chosen the arm can be mounted on the inside surface of a vehicle. This can be done to provide simulated presence of other passengers in the vehicle such as flight instructors in the case of an aircraft . Another example of this variation is a set of commuter trains with invention systems present in each train so that passengers on different trains could simulate being on the same train at once in order to have a meeting while commuting.

The arm can be supported by the human body through a mounting system that attaches to a helmet or directly to the human head shoulders and or waist. When attached to the head the invention resembles a head mounted display but is unlike other head mounted displays in that a there is sufficient clearance from the face for facial sensing to support tele immersion and b small amounts of motion of the display relative to the head are acceptable because the techniques described throughout this patent compensate for them.

The screen and other components can be mounted on the mechanical arm using clips or clamps or other easily disengaged fasteners. This facilitates rapid changing of the choice of components present in the invention. For instance a user can switch between autostereo and higher resolution non stereo displays.

The invention can be constructed as a product that includes the arm and the software described in the pseudocode below with each user adding sensing and display components according to individual preferences.

The invention can incorporate a conventional computer display mounted on the reverse side of the autostereo display facing in the opposite direction. When the user is performing conventional computer tasks the arm swivels the display sensor assembly so that the conventional display is facing the user and when the user wishes to perform tasks suitable for the invention the assembly is turned so that the autostereo display is facing the user. The turning action which switches from an autostereo to a conventional display can be triggered when the user moves the assembly so that it is coincident with the placement of a simulated conventional computer display in the virtual space.

The invention can incorporate a front or rear projection screen as its display where the display surface is in motion but the light source is either stationary or in motion to a lesser degree. In this case the projected image must be directed and distorted to correct for the changing relative placements of the light source and the projection surface which can be accomplished by various established means such as moving mirror and lens systems and computer graphic techniques for simulated optical anti distortion.

The invention can incorporate a screen element which rather than being flat as described above is concave in order to provide the user with an effectively wider angle display.

A subset of the components described as being mounted on the arm can instead be mounted separately on a stationary or less mobile platform. For instance a stationary light source can be substituted for the mobile light sources preferred in this description or a stationary audio sensing or display system can be substituted.

The invention can incorporate only a subset of the displays or sensors described in the preferred embodiment. For instance a silent version might incorporate only the visual components and none of the audio ones.

A barrier can be incorporated which surrounds the space to the rear of all the positions the arm and the display sensor assembly can attain with sufficient clearance for operation but which is open in front to give the user access to the device. This is an alternative or enhancement to relying on collision detection and prevention subsystems to prevent collisions between the arm or assembly and people or objects in an environment. An embodiment of this barrier is an approximate section of a sphere in shape transparent and composed of a lightweight material like plastic. The barrier can be made in several sections that can be attached or detached to facilitate transport.

The mobile portions of the invention can be made largely of low weight soft materials. For instance the display screen can be a soft rear projection surface such as plastic or a flexible such as OLED display. Soft audio speakers are available which are made of piezo and other materials. While soft versions of the sensor components such as cameras microphones and position orientation sensors are not available at this time versions of these components are available which are low weight and small. A version of the invention in which the majority of the mass of the components in motion is comprised of soft lightweight materials will have reduced requirements for collision avoidance.

The invention can incorporate additional optical components to provide accommodation relief for certain autostereo displays. That is to say the distance at which the user s eyes must focus to resolve the stereo images presented in the display can be changed by incorporating these optical elements. A set of lenses Fresnel lenses holographic optical components or other optical devices can be mechanically connected to the invention and positioned appropriately between the user s eyes and the display. It should be pointed out that these optical components typically only function under narrow positioning tolerances so the same technique that is used to make other invention components function of having the components move to track the head s location makes it possible to incorporate such optical elements.

The accommodation relief optical elements described in the previous paragraph can be mounted on a separate arm or a subordinate arm. This is desirable if the positioning tolerances of the optical components are tighter than the display. The same control software described for the display would be applied to the motion of the optical components but with tighter adjustments for tolerances as described in detail in the pseudocode below.

The many features and advantages of the invention are apparent from the detailed specification and thus it is intended by the appended claims to cover all such features and advantages of the invention that fall within the true spirit and scope of the invention. Further since numerous modifications and changes will readily occur to those skilled in the art it is not desired to limit the invention to the exact construction and operation illustrated and described and accordingly all suitable modifications and equivalents may be resorted to falling within the scope of the invention.

FACEFUTURE Predicted near term user head eyes Position Orientations 6D list path or similar representation 

FACE PROTOTYPE which can be generic or user specific a labeled graph of 3D points representing typical relative placements of facial landmarks can be simple geometry or can incorporate biomechanical modeling.

FACEPOSEFUTURE A prediction of geometric distortions of FACE PROTOTYPE a set of future path predictions corresponding to each point in the graph 

ASSEMVARS Most recent measured display sensor assembly Position Orientation 6D relative to COCODEX base 

ASSEMFUTURE Predicted near term display sensor assembly Position Orientations 6D list path or similar representation 

UI VARS State of such things as buttons dials and other UI conventional UI components mounted on the display sensor assembly or elsewhere on COCODEX

WORKING VOLUME a volume relative to the Position Orientation of the display sensor assembly within which display and sensor functions related to the user s face will work it is the intersection of the individual volumes in which autostereo visual effects 3D audio and the various sensors such as cameras and microphones will have adequate functional access to the user s face. IDEAL VOLUME a volume within the WORKING Volume that serves as a safety target for maintaining the relative positions and orientation of the display sensor assembly to the user s face FACE TRACKING VECTOR The change in the Position Orientation of the display sensor assembly that is currently projected to keep the user s eyes and the rest of the user s face in the IDEAL VOLUME in the event that it would otherwise fall out of the IDEAL VOLUME ROBOTIC MOTION CALIBRATION TABLE A pair of sparsely filled in 3D vector fields the first contains instructions that have been sent to the particular robotic arm installed locally and the second contains the resulting move that actually took place. FORCE RESISTANCE VECTOR Vector indicating one component of haptic feedback control REPULSION FIELD VECTOR Vector indicating another component of haptic feedback control PLANAR Haptic feedback map A vector field that stores results in advance to speed the calculation of current values for the above vectors USER APPLIED FORCE VECTOR Vector indicating the force user is applying to the display sensor assembly by grabbing it is nil when the display sensor assembly is not being grabbed TELE LAYOUT of shared virtual environment 

IF Confidence that the user s head is being tracked is high AND COCODEX AS AVATAR mode is NOT activated for local unit

COMMENT This function describes the most characteristic or central feature of COCODEX. The IDEAL VOLUME is contained within the WORKING VOLUME so by testing for near term divergence from the IDEAL VOLUME the head is continuously kept within the WORKING VOLUME. If a set of fast high quality sensors and displays is used the two volumes can be almost the same while low cost sensors require a larger difference between the two volumes. There are of course other techniques that can be used instead to express variable tolerances in control software. Note that in the pseudocode given here only one local user is assumed. The Eyematic type of facial feature tracking has already been demonstrated to be capable of tracking four local users however. Some autostereo screens such as lenticular or parallax barrier displays can support enough distinct views in an appropriate configuration to support more than a single local user as well. All the code for this and other functions can be easily extended to support multiple local users provided the display and sensor subsystems can support a sufficiently large IDEAL zone to contain them all at once.

