---

title: Composite powder particles
abstract: A liquid coating composition including a coating vehicle and composite powder particles disposed within the coating vehicle. Each composite powder particle may include a magnesium component, a zinc component, and an indium component.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07582147&OS=07582147&RS=07582147
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
number: 07582147
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050818
---
This application claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 603 520 filed Aug. 19 2004 and titled AGGLOMERATED AND SINTERED POWDER PARTICLE which is commonly assigned and incorporated by reference herein.

The invention described herein was made by an employee of the United States Government and may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention relates generally to powders and in particular the present invention relates to composite powder particles.

Corrosion of metal structures e.g. steel structures embedded in substrates e.g. of concrete for re enforcing the substrates for use e.g. as highway bridge infrastructure building structures etc is a problem. Coatings have been developed for the reduction of corrosion of the embedded metal structures. These coatings are typically applied as liquids to an external surface of a substrate in which the metal is embedded. The liquid applied coatings act to provide galvanic protection to the embedded metal.

The liquid coating typically includes two or more metals such as magnesium and zinc dispersed in a liquid coating vehicle such as an inorganic silicate where the two or more metals remain conductive after the coating dries. In operation electrical connectivity between the coating and the embedded metal structures induces an electrical current that provides cathodic protection to the embedded metal structures with the coating acting as a sacrificial anode. The coatings are normally applied using methods similar to standard paints e.g. brushing rolling or spraying.

The coatings are often formed by dry mixing powders of the two or more metals together and then adding them to the coating vehicle. However this can produce an inhomogeneous mixture of the two or more metal powders that when applied to a surface results in inhomogeneous electrical connectivity between the coating and the embedded metal structures.

For the reasons stated above and for other reasons stated below which will become apparent to those skilled in the art upon reading and understanding the present specification there is a need in the art for alternatives to existing coatings for reducing corrosion of metal structures embedded in substrates.

The above mentioned problems with existing coatings for reducing corrosion of metal structures embedded in substrates and other problems are addressed by the present invention and will be understood by reading and studying the following specification.

For one embodiment the invention provides a composite powder particle having a zinc component and a magnesium component.

In the following detailed description of the present embodiments reference is made to the accompanying drawings that form a part hereof and in which are shown by way of illustration specific embodiments that may be practiced. These embodiments are described in sufficient detail to enable those skilled in the art to practice disclosed subject matter and it is to be understood that other embodiments may be utilized and that process chemical or mechanical changes may be made without departing from the scope of the claimed subject matter. The following detailed description is therefore not to be taken in a limiting sense and the scope of the claimed subject matter is defined only by the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

For one embodiment composite metal particles include two or more metal components such as zinc magnesium and indium. The intrinsic electrochemical properties of the two or more metal components combine at the particle level so that coating cathodically protects metal structures in substrate by corroding sacrificially to metal structures . Having powder particles with combined electrochemical properties of two or more metal components acts to reduce mix segregation and results in a more uniform electrochemical barrier for protecting metal structures embedded in substrates than can be obtained with conventional dry mixing of bulk metal components.

For one embodiment the average size of composite particle is about 325 mesh 44 micron and includes about 60 to about 80 percent zinc about 20 to about 40 percent magnesium and about 0.0 to about 0.8 percent indium by volume. For another embodiment the size distribution of composite particles in coating or coating of is about 80 percent 200 325 mesh 74 44 micron with the remaining about 20 percent at most about 170 mesh 88 microns and at least about 400 mesh 37 microns .

For one embodiment the composite particles are substantially spherically shaped and are formed by agglomeration and sintering a process that is known in the art. In one exemplary embodiment powdered forms of metal components and each have particles of a substantially spherical shape and nominal size of about 1 10 to about that of composite particle e.g. composite particles of or composite particle of . The powder of each metal component may be formed by melting coarse raw material stock of that metal component e.g. using vacuum induction. The molten metal is then atomized producing a plurality of metal droplets carried by a gas flow. The molten metal droplets are then quenched e.g. cryogenically to produce that powdered metal component having substantially spherically shaped particles. Alternatively the powder of each metal component may be formed by ball milling the coarse raw material stock of that metal component.

Each of the powdered metal components can then be screened to size by injecting that powder into an airflow to create an aerosol that is forced through vibrating screens to filter the particles carried by the air to a predetermined size. The particles of the respective powdered metal components metal components and are bound to each other with a binder material such as binder material of to form composite particles e.g. using an agglomeration process. The composite particles may be additionally subjected to heat treatment e.g. in an inert atmospheric furnace to sinter the composite particles and drive off any remaining binder material. Suitable binders include film binders such as water solutions dispersions powders silicate gel oil alcohol clay starch lubricant such as oil glycerin stearate and wax used to reduce friction and induce flow of the material.

One suitable agglomeration technique is spray drying agglomeration that is known in the art and essentially involves partially drying the individual powdered metal components in a drying chamber or the like. The partially dried powders are directed to a fluid bed where the particles of the respective powdered metal components bind together to form a porous agglomerate or a powder including porous composite particles . The size and structure of the composite particles can be controlled by selection of the drying temperature.

Another suitable agglomeration technique is rewet agglomeration that is known in the art and essentially involves wetting the powdered metallic components e.g. by steam or a water mist in an agglomerating chamber that may also include a rotating disc to further condition and stabilize the agglomerate. The agglomerate is dried in a vibrating fluid bed followed by size classification e.g. using screens. Undersized particulates are returned to the agglomerating chamber. Control of the wetting rate and subsequent drying determines the size of the composite particles forming the agglomerate.

Another suitable agglomeration technique is fluid bed agglomeration that is known in the art and essentially involves fluidizing the powdered metallic components with hot air and spraying powdered metallic components with a binder liquid substantially simultaneously. This causes particles of the individual powders to adhere to each other thus producing dried agglomerate or a powder including the composite particles . Control of air velocity and wetting rate determines the size of the composite particles forming the agglomerate. The process produces agglomerate having of narrow size distribution of composite particles that are screened for size.

After agglomeration the agglomerate or a powder including the composite particles may be sintered. A suitable sintering process known in the art essentially involves pre sintering the agglomerate by heating the agglomerate to a temperature above the vaporization temperature of the organic binder used for agglomeration to remove any residual organic materials. Heating the agglomerate to a temperature corresponding to about the melting point of the metal component having the lowest melting temperature or less and maintaining the temperature for about 7 to about 10 hours then sinters the agglomerate i.e. each of the composite particles. For example an agglomerate containing indium would be heated to about of the melting temperature of indium e.g. 313.88 F. 156.6 C. so sintering should be performed at no greater than about 157 F. 78.5 C. for about 7 10 hours. For an agglomerate of magnesium and zinc the agglomerate is heated to the melting temperature of zinc. Sintering fuses the component particles of the composite particle by forming diffusion bonds that acts to densify and strengthen the composite particle. This enables the agglomerate to have sufficient strength to endure handling and stress associated with deposition through a spray type apparatus so that the agglomerate can flow freely when carried by a coating vehicle through the spray type apparatus.

For one embodiment alloying metal components and together and forming the composite particles from the resulting alloy form the composite particles. For another embodiment the alloy is formed from metal components and only. Specifically powders of metal components are mixed together in the appropriate ratios as defined above. The mixture is then melted e.g. in a crucible or a furnace as a part of a casting process and is allowed to solidify to form an ingot of the composite metal or alloy . The solidified composite is subsequently pulverized into a powder e.g. by crushing and or ball milling that includes the composite particles such as composite particles of or composite particle of .

For one embodiment a powder that includes the composite particles such as composite particles of or composite particle of and formed according to the methods described above are injected into a flow of a liquid coating vehicle such as is commonly done with conventional paint spray systems. Spraying of liquid coatings is discussed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 627 065 issued Sep. 30 2003 entitled LIQUID GALVANIC COATINGS FOR PROTECTION OF EMBEDDED METALS which patent is commonly assigned the entire contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. The powder may be carried by nitrogen argon or clean dry oil free compressed air through a flow passage such as provided by a hose connected to a spray gun. The composite particles disburse in the air liquid stream exiting a nozzle of the spray gun and the spray gun is moved across a surface of a substrate such as substrate in .

Although specific embodiments have been illustrated and described herein it will be appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art that any arrangement that is calculated to achieve the same purpose may be substituted for the specific embodiments shown. Many adaptations of the invention will be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art. Accordingly this application is intended to cover any adaptations or variations of the invention. It is manifestly intended that this invention be limited only by the following claims and equivalents thereof.

