---

title: System and method for providing a software installation or removal status display
abstract: A method includes initiating an installation of software on a device or a removal of software from the device. The installation or removal of the software involves a plurality of installers capable of installing software components on or removing the software components from the device. The method also includes presenting a status panel associated with the installation or removal of the software to a user. The status panel identifies a plurality of operations associated with the installation or removal of the software and a status of each of the operations. The plurality of operations is associated with at least two different installers. The status panel includes at least one indicator that repeatedly changes to indicate that the installation or removal of the software is progressing.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08010960&OS=08010960&RS=08010960
owner: Honeywell International Inc.
number: 08010960
owner_city: Morristown
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051130
---
This disclosure relates generally to computing systems and more specifically to a system and method for providing a software installation or removal status display.

Processing facilities are often managed using process control systems. Example processing facilities include manufacturing plants chemical plants crude oil refineries and ore processing plants. Among other operations process control systems typically manage the use of motors valves and other industrial equipment in the processing facilities.

In conventional process control systems the installation or removal of software on system components is typically a time consuming process. This is often because many different software modules and subsystems need to be installed on or removed from the components. During the installation or removal of software on the components of the conventional process control systems visual feedback identifying the progress of the software installation or removal is often provided but only for an individual software module or subsystem. Also there may be periods of time during which nothing appears to be happening when software is being installed on or removed from the components in the conventional process control systems.

This disclosure provides a system and method for providing a software installation or removal status display.

In a first embodiment a method includes initiating an installation of software on a device or a removal of software from the device. The installation or removal of the software involves a plurality of installers capable of installing software components on or removing the software components from the device. The method also includes presenting a status panel associated with the installation or removal of the software to a user. The status panel identifies a plurality of operations associated with the installation or removal of the software and a status of each of the operations. The plurality of operations is associated with at least two different installers. The status panel includes at least one indicator that repeatedly changes to indicate that the installation or removal of the software is progressing.

In particular embodiments the method further includes coordinating execution of the installers to install the software on or remove the software from the device.

In other particular embodiments the status panel includes a plurality of visual indicators identifying the status of the operations and the at least one indicator that repeatedly changes includes the visual indicator associated with the operation currently being performed.

In a second embodiment an apparatus includes at least one processor capable of initiating an installation of software on a device or a removal of software from the device. The installation or removal of the software involves a plurality of installers capable of installing software components on or removing the software components from the device. The apparatus also includes a display capable of presenting a status panel associated with the installation or removal of the software to a user. The status panel identifies a plurality of operations associated with the installation or removal of the software and a status of each of the operations. The plurality of operations is associated with at least two different installers. The status panel includes at least one indicator that repeatedly changes to indicate that the installation or removal of the software is progressing.

In a third embodiment a computer program is embodied on a computer readable medium and is operable to be executed by a processor. The computer program includes computer readable program code for initiating an installation of software on a device or a removal of software from the device. The installation or removal of the software involves a plurality of installers capable of installing software components on or removing the software components from the device. The computer program also includes computer readable program code for generating a status panel associated with the installation or removal of the software to a user. The status panel identifies a plurality of operations associated with the installation or removal of the software and a status of each of the operations. The plurality of operations is associated with at least two different installers. The status panel includes at least one indicator that repeatedly changes to indicate that the installation or removal of the software is progressing.

Other technical features may be readily apparent to one skilled in the art from the following figures descriptions and claims.

Before undertaking the DETAILED DESCRIPTION below it may be advantageous to set forth definitions of certain words and phrases used throughout this patent document. The term couple and its derivatives refer to any direct or indirect communication between two or more elements whether or not those elements are in physical contact with one another. The term application refers to one or more computer programs sets of instructions procedures functions objects classes instances or related data adapted for implementation in a suitable computer language. The terms include and comprise as well as derivatives thereof mean inclusion without limitation. The term or is inclusive meaning and or. The phrases associated with and associated therewith as well as derivatives thereof may mean to include be included within interconnect with contain be contained within connect to or with couple to or with be communicable with cooperate with interleave juxtapose be proximate to be bound to or with have have a property of or the like. The term controller means any device system or part thereof that controls at least one operation. A controller may be implemented in hardware firmware software or some combination of at least two of the same. The functionality associated with any particular controller may be centralized or distributed whether locally or remotely. Definitions for additional words and phrases may be provided throughout this patent document. Those of ordinary skill in the art will understand that such definitions apply in many if not most or all instances to prior as well as future uses of the defined words and phrases.

In this example embodiment the process control system includes one or more process elements . The process elements represent components in a process or production system that may perform any of a wide variety of functions. For example the process elements could represent motors catalytic crackers valves and other industrial equipment in a production environment. The process elements could represent any other or additional components in any suitable process or production system. Each of the process elements includes any hardware software firmware or combination thereof for performing one or more functions in a process or production system.

Two controllers are coupled to the process elements . The controllers control the operation of the process elements . For example the controllers could be capable of providing control signals to the process elements periodically. Each of the controllers includes any hardware software firmware or combination thereof for controlling one or more of the process elements . The controllers could for example include processors of the POWERPC processor family running the GREEN HILLS INTEGRITY operating system or processors of the X86 processor family running a MICROSOFT WINDOWS operating system.

Two servers are coupled to the controllers . The servers perform various functions to support the operation and control of the controllers and the process elements . For example the servers could log information collected or generated by the controllers such as status information related to the operation of the process elements . The servers could also execute applications that control the operation of the controllers thereby controlling the operation of the process elements . In addition the servers could provide secure access to the controllers . Each of the servers includes any hardware software firmware or combination thereof for providing access to or control of the controllers . The servers could for example represent personal computers such as desktop computers executing a MICROSOFT WINDOWS operating system. As another example the servers could include processors of the POWERPC processor family running the GREEN HILLS INTEGRITY operating system or processors of the X86 processor family running a MICROSOFT WINDOWS operating system.

One or more operator stations are coupled to the servers . The operator stations represent computing or communication devices providing user access to the servers which could then provide user access to the controllers and the process elements . For example the operator stations could allow users to review the operational history of the process elements using information collected by the controllers and servers . The operator stations could also allow the users to adjust the operation of the process elements controllers or servers . Each of the operator stations includes any hardware software firmware or combination thereof for supporting user access and control of the system . The operator stations could for example represent personal computers having displays and processors executing a MICROSOFT WINDOWS operating system.

In this example at least one of the operator stations is a remote station. The remote station is coupled to the servers through a network . The network facilitates communication between various components in the system . For example the network may communicate Internet Protocol IP packets frame relay frames Asynchronous Transfer Mode ATM cells or other suitable information between network addresses. The network may include one or more local area networks LANs metropolitan area networks MANs wide area networks WANs all or a portion of a global network such as the Internet or any other communication system or systems at one or more locations.

In this example embodiment the system includes two additional servers . The servers execute various applications to control the overall operation of the system . For example the system could be used in a processing or production plant or other facility and the servers could execute applications used to control the plant or other facility. As particular examples the servers could execute applications such as enterprise resource planning ERP manufacturing execution system MES or any other or additional plant or process control applications. Each of the servers includes any hardware software firmware or combination thereof for controlling the overall operation of the system .

As shown in the system includes various redundant networks and single networks that support communication between components in the system . Each of these networks represents any suitable network or combination of networks facilitating communication between components in the system . The networks could for example represent Ethernet networks.

In one aspect of operation software may be installed on or removed from various components in the system such as the servers and the operator stations . The software may for example implement logic used to control or monitor the controllers or other logic used in the system . A software installation or removal in the system could possibly involve the installation or removal of a large number of software modules and subsystems referred to collectively as software components . Also each individual software component or group of software components could be installed or removed using a different installer or removal application referred to as installers . In addition the software being installed on a component of the system could be provided to the component of the system over a network such as networks using a physical storage medium such as a CD or DVD or in any other suitable manner.

During a software installation or removal a status panel is displayed to a user. The status panel provides various information about the software installation or removal to the user. For example the status panel could identify various operations that occur during the software installation or removal. The status panel could also identify the operation that is currently being performed any operations that have been completed and any operations that remain to be completed. At least some of these operations may be associated with different installers. The status panel could further identify general or detailed information about the current operation being performed or about the overall installation or removal process such as the estimated amount of time remaining before completion of the current operation and the estimated amount of time remaining before completion of the entire installation or removal process. In addition the status panel could include one or more indicators that repeatedly change such as once every second . The status panel may provide this information even when multiple installers are required in order to install or remove the software program.

By identifying the various operations and the status of each operation in a software installation or removal process a user is able to determine the overall status of the process. Also the user is able to identify how much of the software installation or removal process remains to be completed. In addition by including an indicator that repeatedly changes the user is able to determine that the software installation or removal process is progressing even during periods of time when nothing appears to be happening to the user. This may be particularly useful when multiple installers are required to install or remove the software program.

The status panel could be generated by any suitable element in the system such as a server or or an operator station or . One example of a software installation and removal mechanism for installing and removing software is shown in which is described below. The software installation and removal mechanism could generate a status panel and could be used within any suitable component of . Also the status panel could be displayed on any suitable component in the system such as when the status panel is displayed to a user using an operator station or . An example embodiment of the status panel is shown in which is described below.

Although illustrates one example of a process control system various changes may be made to . For example a control system could include any number of process elements controllers servers and operator stations. Also illustrates one operational environment in which a status panel could be used during a software installation or removal process. The status panel could be used in any other suitable device or system whether the system is a process control or non process control system.

In this example the system includes a process product dispatcher . The process product dispatcher controls the overall installation or removal of software on a component of the system . For example the process product dispatcher could initiate other processes or tasks that are needed to install or remove a software program on a server or or on an operator station or . In this way the process product dispatcher represents a top level software installation or removal controller that coordinates the activities of other modules to install or remove software on a component of the system . The process product dispatcher includes any hardware software firmware or combination thereof for controlling the installation or removal of software on a system component. The process product dispatcher could for example represent one or more software modules.

A product selector allows a user to control which software is installed on or removed from a component of the system . For example the product selector could identify one or more software programs that can be selected for installation on a server or or on an operator station or . The product selector could also identify one or more software programs installed on a server or or on an operator station or that can be selected for removal. In some embodiments the product selector may be invoked or initiated by the process product dispatcher . The product selector includes any hardware software firmware or combination thereof for selecting software for installation or removal on a system component. The product selector could for example represent one or more software modules.

A configuration selector allows a user to configure the installation or removal of selected software on a component of the system . For example the configuration selector could allow the user to provide information that affects how the selected software is installed on or removed from a server or or an operator station or . As particular examples the configuration selector could allow the user to define the type or types of networks coupled to the server or operator station and to identify the network address of the server or operator station. This information may then be used to ensure proper installation of the correct software components on the server or operator station. In some embodiments the configuration selector may be invoked or initiated by the process product dispatcher . The configuration selector includes any hardware software firmware or combination thereof for configuring a software installation or removal. The configuration selector could for example represent one or more software modules.

A status panel generator generates information representing a status panel that is displayed to a user. The status panel identifies the progress of a software installation or removal. The status panel may for example identify the overall status of the installation or removal process and provide a list of the operations of the process. The status panel may also identify the operation currently in progress any operations that have been completed and any operations remaining. The status panel generator includes any hardware software firmware or combination thereof for generating information representing a status panel. The status panel generator could for example represent one or more software modules. As a particular example the status panel generator could represent one or more software modules written in C C C Visual Basic WinBatch or any other or additional high level or other code.

In some embodiments the status panel generator represents a stand alone application that is launched by the process product dispatcher . After that the status panel generator may be executed independently of the process product dispatcher . Also in some embodiments the status panel generator includes an application programming interface API or other interface. In these embodiments the information presented in a status panel generated by the status panel generator such as a list of the operations of the installation or removal process may be provided to the status panel generator through the API or other interface.

As noted above the process product dispatcher may represent a top level controller that coordinates the activities of other modules to install or remove software on a component of the system . These other modules could include installers . The installers represent applications that may install individual software components such as software modules or entire software subsystems on or remove individual software components from a system component. An installer could also be capable of installing a group of software components or removing a group of software components from the system component. The software components may perform a wide variety of disparate functions in the system such as configuration of the control system operational monitoring and alarm generation. Also the installation or removal of this software may represent a complex process such as when the order of installing the software subsystems is important because of inter subsystem dependencies between the subsystems.

In these embodiments the process product dispatcher may sequence and coordinate the individual installers to ensure that the installers are executed in the appropriate order. In this way the process product dispatcher supports a hierarchical software installation or removal architecture in the system . Also the status panel generated by the status panel generator and displayed to a user may contain among other things a top level or summary view of the whole installation or removal process even when multiple installers are needed for the process.

The system shown in could be implemented or supported on any suitable component in the process control system of . For example the system could be implemented or supported on a server or or an operator station or . The system could then provide the information representing the status panel to any suitable component such as an operator station or for presentation of the status panel to the user.

Although illustrates one example of a system for software installation or removal various changes may be made to . For example the system could include any other or additional components according to particular needs. Also various components shown in could be combined or further subdivided.

As shown in the status panel contains various information associated with a software installation or removal process. In this example the status panel includes a header which generally identifies the software program being installed on or removed from a component of the system . The status panel also includes an installation removal summary which identifies the total number of operations to be performed and the number of the current operation.

The status panel further includes a list of the operations associated with the software installation or removal process. The operations may represent any suitable aspects of the software installation or removal process. For example an operation could represent the installation or removal of a particular software component the initialization of the process a reboot of the system component or the termination of the process. The operation currently being performed is highlighted in the list .

Each operation in the list is associated with a status box . The status box identifies the status of the associated operation. For example a status box could have one color shading or other visual indicator if the associated operation is complete. A status box could have a different color shading or other visual indicator if the associated operation is currently being performed. A status box could have a third color shading or other visual indicator if the associated operation is not complete and is not currently being performed. Any other or additional indicators could be used to identify the status of the operations associated with the software installation or removal process. As an example completed operations could be identified using italicized text the current operation could be identified using bold text and the remaining operations could be identified using normal text. In these embodiments the status boxes could be omitted from the status panel .

A description area in the status panel contains information about the current operation or information about the overall installation or removal process. The description area could for example contain information identifying the purpose of the current operation or information describing the functions of the current software component being installed.

A current operation status area identifies the status of the current operation of the process being performed. In this example the current operation status area identifies the start time of the current operation. The current operation status area also identifies the estimated time needed to complete the current operation. In some embodiments the estimated time needed to complete the current operation is shown only if the estimated time exceeds a threshold such as one minute or several minutes.

An overall process status area identifies the overall status of the software installation or removal process. In this example the overall process status area includes a bar graph identifying the total progress of the software installation or removal process. The overall process status area also identifies the total estimated time remaining to complete the software installation or removal such as by identifying the estimated amount of time remaining within a total estimated time.

In addition the status panel includes an abort button . The abort button may cause the software installation or removal process to abort as soon as the current operation is completed. Depending on the implementation an aborted software installation or removal process may be restarted at a later time such as by resuming the software installation or removal process starting at the first uncompleted operation.

In some embodiments the status panel includes one or more indicators that repeatedly change allowing a user to verify that the software installation or removal process is proceeding. For example one or more status boxes could flash such as by changing colors or otherwise change periodically or routinely. As a particular example the status box for the highlighted operation in the list could flash. In other embodiments the status panel could include an indicator area having one or more indicators that repeatedly change. As a particular example the indicator area could include a sequence of periods . where periods are periodically or routinely added or removed from the indicator area . Any other or additional indicators could also be used in the status panel .

In particular embodiments the process product dispatcher of interacts with the status panel generator of to generate the status panel . For example the process product dispatcher could exchange commands or messages with the status panel generator where at least some of the commands or messages control how the status panel generator generates the status panel . As a particular example commands or messages could be provided to the status panel generator to identify the contents of the header and the list in the status panel . A command or message could also be used to provide the contents of the description area to the status panel generator . An update command or message could cause the status panel generator to update the status panel with any new information. A heartbeat on item N command or message could cause the status panel generator to begin flashing the Nstatus box in the list . A close command or message could cause the status panel generator to close the status panel . An abort command or message may be sent from the status panel generator to the process product dispatcher to indicate that the abort button has been selected. Any other or additional interactions between the process product dispatcher and the status panel generator could also be used to support the creation and use of the status panel .

In some embodiments different operations or groups of operations listed in the status panel are associated with or performed by different installers . Each individual installer may have no knowledge about the status of the other installers . The status panel however may represent or identify the overall status of the entire installation process.

Although illustrates one example of a status panel identifying a software installation or removal status various changes may be made to . For example the arrangement and composition of the status panel is for illustration only. Any other or additional information could be presented in the status panel and the information shown in the status panel could be arranged in any suitable manner.

A software installation or removal involving a component of the system is initiated at step . This may include for example a user using an operator station or to initiate a software installation or a software removal via the process product dispatcher . The process product dispatcher could reside on the operator station or being used by the user or on another component in the system . This may also include the user identifying the software program to be installed or removed using the product selector and configuring the installation or removal using the configuration selector . The software installation or removal could involve any suitable component of the system such as a server or or an operator station or

Major operations of the software installation or removal are displayed to the user at step . This may include for example the process product dispatcher providing one or more commands or messages to the status panel generator identifying the major operations. This may also include the status panel generator generating a status panel that lists the major operations. The identified operations may be associated with multiple installers .

One of the operations of the software installation or removal is initiated at step . This may include for example the process product dispatcher invoking installation or removal of a software component on the system component by invoking the appropriate installer . This may also include the installer initiating a reboot of the system component or initiating any other actions.

The current operation being performed is identified in the display at step . This may include for example the status panel generator highlighting the current operation in the list . This may also include updating the status panel so that the status box associated with the current operation has a certain color pattern or other visual indicator. As a particular example this could include updating the status panel so that the status box associated with the current operation is blue.

Information about the current operation or about the overall process is presented in the display at step . This may include for example the status panel generator placing text describing the current operation in the description area . This may also include the status panel generator identifying a start time and an estimated time to completion for the current operation in the status panel . This may further include the status panel generator identifying how much of the overall process has been completed and an estimated time to completing the entire process in the status panel .

An indicator indicating that the current operation is proceeding is displayed to the user at step . This may include for example the status panel generator causing the status box associated with the current operation to flash. This may also include the status panel generator causing periods or other indicators in the indicator area of the display panel to repeatedly change.

At some point the current operation is completed at step . The current operation is then identified as being complete in the display at step . This may include for example updating the status panel so that the status box associated with the completed operation has another color pattern or other visual indicator. As a particular example this could include updating the status panel so that the status box associated with the completed operation is green.

If one or more operations remain to be completed at step the method returns to step to initiate another operation in the software installation or removal process. Otherwise all operations of the installation or removal process have been completed and the method ends. At this point the status panel may be closed and the installation or removal process has successfully installed or removed a software program on the specified system component.

Although illustrates one example of a method for displaying a software installation or removal status various changes may be made to . For example while shown as a series of steps various steps shown in could occur in parallel. As a particular example steps could all occur in parallel by updating the status panel once so that the updated status panel includes all of the information displayed in steps .

In some embodiments the various functions performed in conjunction with a software installation or removal status panel are implemented or supported by a computer program that is formed from computer readable program code and that is embodied in a computer readable medium. The phrase computer readable program code includes any type of computer code including source code object code and executable code. The phrase computer readable medium includes any type of medium capable of being accessed by a computer such as read only memory ROM random access memory RAM a hard disk drive a compact disc CD a digital video disc DVD or any other type of memory.

While this disclosure has described certain embodiments and generally associated methods alterations and permutations of these embodiments and methods will be apparent to those skilled in the art. Accordingly the above description of example embodiments does not define or constrain this disclosure. Other changes substitutions and alterations are also possible without departing from the spirit and scope of this disclosure as defined by the following claims.

