---

title: Adjustable toroidal magnet
abstract: In accordance with an embodiment of the present invention, a permanent magnet, includes a body that has a body axis and that, in turn, has a plurality of discreet components. Each of the components may be radially spaced from the body axis approximately an equal distance and each component may be circumferentially spaced an approximately equal distance apart. Also, each of the components may include a cavity and a component axis and wherein each of the components may have an inner body, that, in turn, has a magnetic substance and that is rotatable about the component axis and a plurality of inner segments each having an inner segment magnetic field. The components may also include an outer body that, in turn, includes a magnetic substance and that is rotatable about the component axis. The outer body may also have a plurality of outer segments each having an outer segment magnetic field and the outer body being located in proximity to the inner body whereby each of the inner segment magnetic fields and the outer segment magnetic fields interact.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=06989730&OS=06989730&RS=06989730
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 06989730
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050524
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured used imported sold and licensed by or for the Government of the United States of America without the payment of any royalty thereon or there for.

The present invention relates generally to permanent magnets and more particularly to permanent magnets capable of being adjusted to vary a magnetic field strength.

Permanent magnets for use where a highly uniform magnetic field is required such as in magnetic resonance imaging devices and traveling wave tubes are known. Examples of such permanent magnets may be found in U.S. Pat. No. 4 837 542 to Leupold entitled Hollow Substantially Hemispherical Permanent Magnet High Field Flux Source For Producing a Uniform High Field and U.S. Pat. No. 5 103 200 to Leupold entitled High Field Permanent Magnet Flux Source . The permanent magnets described in those patents produce unusually high fields in their interiors. In the latter example patent a hollow magic cylinder comprises an annulus that is magnetized so that the direction angle of magnetization is twice the local coordinate or 2 .

It is also known to modify a magic cylinder to obtain a twister or a wiggler. For example U.S. Pat. No. 4 862 128 to Leupold entitled Field Adjustable Transverse Flux Sources and incorporated hereby by reference concerns a permanent magnet with a variable field strength created by an axial sequence of two concentric magic rings of equal magnetic field output. Individual rings of each concentric pair are mutually rotatable with respect to each other whereby the magnetic fields of each concentric magic ring add by vector addition or subtraction to augment or diminish the combined magnetic field strength.

In accordance with one embodiment of the present invention a permanent magnet comprises a body that has a body axis and that in turn comprises a plurality of discreet components. Each of the components may be radially spaced from the body axis approximately an equal distance and each component may be circumferentially spaced an approximately equal distance apart. Also each of the components may comprise a cavity and a component axis and wherein each of the components may comprise an inner body that in turn comprises a magnetic substance and that is rotatable about the component axis and a plurality of inner segments each having an inner segment magnetic field. The components may also comprise an outer body that in turn comprises a magnetic substance and that is rotatable about the component axis. The outer body may also comprise a plurality of outer segments each having an outer segment magnetic field and the outer body being located in proximity to the inner body whereby each of the inner segment magnetic fields and the outer segment magnetic fields interact.

In accordance with another embodiment of the present invention a permanent magnet comprises a toroidal body having a body central axis. The toroidal body may comprise an inner body that includes a magnetic substance and that is rotatable about an inner body central axis. The inner body may comprise a plurality of inner segments that each include an inner segment magnetic field. The toroidal body may also comprise an outer body that in turn comprises a magnetic substance and that is rotatable about an outer body central axis. The outer body comprises a plurality of outer segments that each include an outer segment magnetic field and the outer body is located in proximity to the inner body whereby each of the inner segment magnetic fields and the outer segment magnetic fields interact.

One embodiment of the present invention concerns a permanent magnet that is adjustable to provide for the selection of various field strengths along a cavity of thereof. The permanent magnet may comprise a generally toroidal outer configuration and may comprise a plurality of individual components each of which may be rotatable about a transverse axis thereof.

A permanent magnet having a generally toroidally shaped body is illustrated generally at in . Referring also to the permanent magnet may comprise a central cavity an inner body and an outer body . The inner body and the outer body may each comprise a flexible and a magnetic material such as a cobalt rare earth or a rare earth iron. Each of the inner body and the outer body may be separably rotatable about an axis A in a manner similar to that described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 862 128 incorporated herein by reference and described below in connection with . The inner body has an outer radius Rthat is substantially equal in length to an inner radius Rof the outer body although it will be understood that a slight difference may be provided to allow for the rotations of the inner and outer bodies. It will be understood that a transverse magnetic field represented by an arrow within the central cavity may remain almost the same as that in a corresponding unbent cylindrical magnet such as that described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 862 128 although the field may taper slightly from a smaller value on an inner extreme of the central cavity to a slightly larger one on an outer extreme . Although not shown as such it will be understood that in practice a portion of the permanent magnet may be removed in order to provide access to the central cavity .

The inner body of the permanent magnet has a direction of magnetization represented by arrows and an outer body having a direction of magnetization represented by arrows . It will be understood that each direction of magnetization varies in a known manner such that an angle of magnetization is twice a local coordinate or 2 .

In operation rotation of the inner body with respect to the outer body allows for variation in field strength within a portion of the central cavity as a e.g. a magnetic particle travels through the central cavity . Reference may be had below to the description provided in connection with which functions in a similar manner to the permanent magnet and to U.S. Pat. No. 4 862 128 incorporated herein by reference.

Referring now to another embodiment of a permanent magnet in accordance with the present invention which provides for additional adjustment to an internal magnetic field while retaining a generally toroidal configuration is illustrated generally at . The permanent magnet may function as a radial particle accelerator and comprises a plurality of discreet components radially spaced from a central axis a and generally equally spaced apart. Each component may be interconnected via a moldable substance such as a plastic not shown and may comprise a configuration that it will be appreciated provides for rotation of each about an axis c . The axis c may form a central axis of the components as illustrated although an eccentric axis is contemplated by the present invention.

Referring now to which shows an end view of each component it will be appreciated that each component may comprise a generally disk like shape and a magnetic material such as that comprising a rare earth material. Each component may also comprise a central cavity an inner body having a direction of magnetization represented by arrows and an outer body having a direction of magnetization represented by arrows . The inner body and the outer body are each separably rotatable about the axis c and each cylinder comprises a number of segments each having a generally trapezoidal configuration. The inner body has an outer radius Rthat is substantially equal in length to an inner radius Rof the outer body although it will be understood that a slight difference may be provided to allow for the rotations of the inner and outer bodies. It will also be understood that the inner and outer bodies may be generally tubular in configuration.

In operation rotation of the inner body with respect to the outer body allows for variation in field strength represented by arrow within portions of the central cavity . In particular through vector addition each adjacent segment of each inner and outer body may be combined to provide a particular magnitude and direction of the combined magnetic field.

Referring now to one example adjustment in field strength through the central cavity possible with the component of the permanent magnet is shown. In this example the inner body is rotated with respect to the outer body whereby through vector addition a slight variation in the direction of the magnetic field represented by arrow through the central cavity results. It will be appreciated that when multiple components of the permanent magnet are adjusted to provide varying field directions a magnetic particle traveling through each central cavity may be caused to wiggle .

Referring now to a trapezoidal portion of permanent magnet is shown in comparison with a rectangular component of the permanent magnet . A difference in volume of magnetic material is apparent from this comparison which correspondingly results in a loss of magnetic field strength. This loss may be determined in rough proportion to the difference in quantity of matter between the trapezoidal portion and the rectangular component . This is in turn roughly proportional to the disparity between the inner and outer arcs as approximated by equation 1 . 2 1 1 Where V Vand R are the volume of the pared toroid permanent magnet the volume of the complete toroid permanent magnet and the ratio of outer to inner toroidal radius respectively.

Another embodiment of a permanent magnet in accordance with the present invention is illustrated generally at in . As illustrated the permanent magnet comprises a generally linear configuration rather than the generally toroidal configuration of the permanent magnet described above. The permanent magnet comprises a plurality of components each of which may be similar to the components and thus reference may be had above for further details thereof. Each of the components may be connected together via beams comprising e.g. an insulating and moldable plastic substance.

While the present invention has been described in connection with what are presently considered to be the most practical and preferred embodiments it is to be understood that the present invention is not limited to these herein disclosed embodiments. Rather the present invention is intended to cover all of the various modifications and equivalent arrangements included within the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

