---

title: Architectural design for service procurement application software
abstract: Methods, systems, and apparatus, including computer program products, for implementing a software architecture design for a software application implementing service procurement. The application is structured as multiple process components interacting with each other through service interfaces, and multiple service interface operations, each being implemented for a respective process component. The process components include a Project Processing process component; a Purchase Request Processing process component; a Purchase Order Processing process component; a Purchasing Contract process component; a Goods and Service Acknowledgement process component; a Supplier Invoice Processing process component; an RFQ Processing process component that; and a Time and Labor Management process component.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08396731&OS=08396731&RS=08396731
owner: SAP AG
number: 08396731
owner_city: Walldorf
owner_country: DE
publication_date: 20051230
---
The subject matter of this patent application relates to computer software architecture and more particularly to the architecture of application software for service procurement.

Enterprise software systems are generally large and complex. Such systems can require many different components distributed across many different hardware platforms possibly in several different geographical locations. Thus the architecture of a large software application i.e. what its components are and how they fit together is an important aspect of its design for a successful implementation.

This specification presents a software architecture design for a software application implementing service procurement.

The invention can be implemented as methods systems and apparatus including computer program products for implementing a software architecture design for a software application implementing service procurement. The application is structured as multiple process components interacting with each other through service interfaces and multiple service interface operations each being implemented for a respective process component. The process components include a Project Processing process component a Purchase Request Processing process component a Purchase Order Processing process component a Purchasing Contract process component a Goods and Service Acknowledgement process component a Supplier Invoice Processing process component an RFQ Processing process component and a Time and Labor Management process component.

The invention can further be implemented as methods systems and apparatus including computer program products implementing a software architecture design for a software application that is adapted to interact with external software systems through the service operations described in reference to external process components or a subcombination of them.

The subject matter described in this specification can be implemented to realize one or more of the following advantages. Effective use is made of process components as units of software reuse to provide a design that can be implemented reliably in a cost effective way. Effective use is made of deployment units each of which is deployable on a separate computer hardware platform independent of every other deployment unit to provide a scalable design. Service interfaces of the process components define a pair wise interaction between pairs of process components that are in different deployment units in a scalable way.

Details of one or more implementations of the subject matter described in this specification are set forth in the accompanying drawings and in the description below. Further features aspects and advantages of the subject matter will become apparent from the description the drawings and the claims.

As shown in the service procurement design includes nine deployment units a Financial Accounting unit a Project Management unit a Purchasing unit a Supplier Invoicing unit a Payment unit a RFQ Processing unit a Due Item Management unit a Requisitioning unit and a Human Capital Management unit .

The Financial Accounting deployment unit includes an Accounting process component that records all relevant business transactions.

The Project Management deployment unit includes a Project Processing process component that is responsible for structuring planning and executing measures or projects e.g. short term measures complex projects etc. .

The Purchasing deployment unit includes four process components a Purchase Request Processing process component a Purchase Order Processing process component a Purchasing Contract Processing process component and a Goods and Service Acknowledgement process component .

The Purchase Request Processing process component provides a request or instruction to the purchasing department to purchase specified goods or services in specified quantities within a specified time.

The Purchase Order Processing process component includes a purchase order business object and a purchase order confirmation business object. The purchase order is a request from a purchaser to an external supplier to deliver a specified quantity of goods or perform a specified service within a specified time. The purchase order confirmation is a communication from a supplier to a purchaser to advise that a purchase order has been received. In particular a purchase order confirmation may advise the purchaser of the supplier accepting the purchase order or the supplier proposing changes to the purchase order or the supplier not accepting the purchase order.

The Purchasing Contract Processing process component handles an agreement between a purchaser and a supplier that details the supply of goods or the performance of services at agreed conditions. The Purchasing Contract process component includes the purchasing contract business object.

The Goods and Service Acknowledgement process component includes a Goods and Service Acknowledgement business object. The Goods and service Acknowledgement business object is a document that states the recipient s for example a purchaser s obligation to pay the supplier for goods received or services rendered. An invoice is normally created after the goods and service acknowledgement has been confirmed.

The Supplier Invoicing deployment unit includes a Supplier Invoice Processing process component . The Supplier Invoice Processing process component includes a supplier invoice business object and a supplier invoice request business object. The supplier invoice is a document that states the recipient s obligation to pay the supplier for goods received or services rendered. The invoice may be created after the goods and service acknowledgment has been confirmed. The supplier invoice request is a document that is sent to invoice verification advising that an invoice for specified quantities and prices is expected and may be created through evaluation settlement. The system uses the invoice request as a basis for invoice verification as well as for the automatic creation of the invoice.

The Payment deployment unit includes a Payment Processing process component . The Payment Processing process component is used to handle all incoming and outgoing payments as well as represent the main database for a liquidity status.

The RFQ Processing deployment unit includes an RFQ Processing process component . The RFQ Processing process component handles requests for quotation and corresponding quotes. A request for quotation RFQ is a description of materials and services that purchasers use to request responses from potential suppliers. Requests for Quotation can be one of a number of types including a request for price information a request for quote that may run over a certain period of time a request for proposal in complex purchasing situation or live auctions that may be performed over a short time frame. A quote is a response to a request for quotation in which a supplier offers to sell goods and services at a certain price. The quote can be subject to complex pricing and conditions.

The Due Item Management deployment unit includes a Due Item Processing process component . The Due Item Processing process component is used to manage all payables receivables from service and supply and corresponding sales including a withholding tax.

The Requisitioning deployment unit includes an Internal Request Processing process component . The Internal Request Processing process component includes an Internal Request business object. Employees of a company may make an internal request for the procurement of goods or services for the company. For example the employees may order stationary computer hardware or removal services by creating an internal request. The internal request can be fulfilled by an issue of a purchase request to the purchasing department a reservation of goods from stock or a production request.

The Human Capital Management deployment unit includes a Time and Labor Management process component . The Time and Labor Management process component supports the definition of employees planned working time as well as the recording or the actual working times and absences and their evaluation.

The Source of Supply Determination process component uses two business objects to determine a source of supply a supply quota arrangement business object and a source of supply business object. A supply quota arrangement is a distribution of material requirements or goods to different sources of supply business partners or organizational units within a company. An example of the use of supply quota arrangements is the distribution of material requirements between in house production and different sources for external procurement. A supply quota arrangement can also define the distribution of goods to customers in case of excess production or shortages. A source of supply is an object that describes a logical link between a possible source of products and a possible target.

A number of external process components described below will be used to describe the architectural design. These include a Customer Invoice Processing at Supplier process component a Sales Order Processing at Supplier process component a Payment Processing at Business Partner process component a Bank statement create at bank process component and a Payment order processing at house bank process component .

The Supplier Invoicing deployment unit receives messages from the Customer Invoice Processing at Supplier processing component which is used at a supplier to charge a customer for the delivery of goods or services.

The Sales Order Processing at Supplier process component may receive messages from the RFQ Processing process component . The Sales Order Processing at Supplier process component handles customers requests to a company for delivery of goods or services at a certain time. The requests may be received by a sales area which is then responsible for fulfilling the contract.

The Payment Processing at Business Partner process component the Bank statement create at bank process component and the Payment order processing at house bank process component may interact with the Payment Processing process component . The Payment Processing process component may send updates to a Payment Processing at Business Partner processing component which is used to handle at business partner all incoming and outgoing payments and represent the main data base for the liquidity status. The Payment Processing process component also receives messages from the Bank statement creates at bank process component . The message may include a bank Statement for a bank account. The Payment Processing process component send messages to the Payment order processing at house bank process component . The message may include a Bank Payment Order that is a Payment Order which will be sent to a house bank. The bank payment order may contain bank transfers as well direct debits.

Not explicitly represented in the figures is a foundation layer that contains all fundamental entities that are used in multiple deployment units. These entities can be process components business objects and reuse service components. A reuse service component is a piece of software that is reused in different transactions. A reuse service component is used by its defined interfaces which can be local APIs Application Programming Interfaces or service interfaces.

In contrast to a deployment unit the foundation layer does not define a limit for application defined transactions. Deployment units communicate directly with entities in the foundation layer which communication is typically not message based. The foundation layer is active in every system instance on which the application is deployed. Business objects in the foundation layer will generally be master data objects. In addition the foundation layer will include some business process objects that are used by multiple deployment units. Master data objects and business process objects that should be specific to a deployment unit are assigned to their respective deployment unit.

A process component of an external system is drawn as a dashed line process component drawn as icon . Such a process component may be referred to as an external process component and it is used to represent the external system in describing interactions with the external system however this should be understood to require no more of the external system that it be able to produce and receive messages as required by the process component that interacts with the external system.

Interactions between process component pairs involving their respective business objects process agents operations interfaces and messages are described as process component interactions which determine the interactions of a pair of process components across a deployment unit boundary i.e. from one deployment unit to another deployment unit. Interactions between process components are indicated in by directed lines arrows . Interactions between process components within a deployment unit need not be described except to note that they exist as these interactions are not constrained by the architectural design and can be implemented in any convenient fashion. Interactions between process components that cross a deployment unit boundary will be illustrated by the figures of this patent application these figures will show the relevant elements associated with potential interaction between two process components but interfaces process agents and business objects that are not relevant to the potential interaction will not be shown.

The architectural design is a specification of a computer software application and elements of the architectural design can be implemented to realize a software application that implements the end to end process mentioned earlier. The elements of the architecture are at times described in this specification as being contained or included in other elements for example a process component is described as being contained in a deployment unit. It should be understood however that such operational inclusion can be realized in a variety of ways and is not limited to a physical inclusion of the entirety of one element in another.

The architectural elements include the business object. A business object is a representation of a type of a uniquely identifiable business entity an object instance described by a structural model. Processes operate on business objects.

A business object represents a specific view on some well defined business content. A business object represents content which a typical business user would expect and understand with little explanation. Business objects are further categorized as business process objects and master data objects. A master data object is an object that encapsulates master data i.e. data that is valid for a period of time . A business process object which is the kind of business object generally found in a process component is an object that encapsulates transactional data i.e. data that is valid for a point in time . The term business object will be used generically to refer to a business process object and a master data object unless the context requires otherwise. Properly implemented business objects are implemented free of redundancies.

The architectural elements also include the process component. A process component is a software package that realizes a business process and generally exposes its functionality as services. The functionality contains business transactions. A process component contains one or more semantically related business objects. Any business object belongs to no more than one process component.

Process components are modular and context independent. That they are context independent means that a process component is not specific to any specific application and is reusable. The process component is the smallest most granular element of reuse in the architecture.

The architectural elements also include the operation. An operation belongs to exactly one process component. A process component generally has multiple operations. Operations can be synchronous or asynchronous corresponding to synchronous or asynchronous process agents which will be described below. An operation is the smallest separately callable function described by a set of data types used as input output and fault parameters serving as a signature.

The architectural elements also include the service interface referred to simply as the interface. An interface is a named group of operations. Each operation belongs to exactly one interface. An interface belongs to exactly one process component. A process component might contain multiple interfaces. In one implementation an interface contains only inbound or outbound operations but not a mixture of both. One interface can contain both synchronous and asynchronous operations. All operations of the same type either inbound or outbound which belong to the same message choreography will belong to the same interface. Thus generally all outbound operations to the same other process component are in one interface.

The architectural elements also include the message. Operations transmit and receive messages. Any convenient messaging infrastructure can be used. A message is information conveyed from one process component instance to another with the expectation that activity will ensue. An operation can use multiple message types for inbound outbound or error messages. When two process components are in different deployment units invocation of an operation of one process component by the other process component is accomplished by an operation on the other process component sending a message to the first process component.

The architectural elements also include the process agent. Process agents do business processing that involves the sending or receiving of messages. Each operation will generally have at least one associated process agent. A process agent can be associated with one or more operations. Process agents can be either inbound or outbound and either synchronous or asynchronous.

Asynchronous outbound process agents are called after a business object changes e.g. after a create update or delete of a business object instance.

An output process agent will generally perform some processing of the data of the business object instance whose change triggered the event. An outbound agent triggers subsequent business process steps by sending messages using well defined outbound services to another process component which generally will be in another deployment unit or to an external system. An outbound process agent is linked to the one business object that triggers the agent but it is sent not to another business object but rather to another process component. Thus the outbound process agent can be implemented without knowledge of the exact business object design of the recipient process component.

Inbound process agents are called after a message has been received. Inbound process agents are used for the inbound part of a message based communication. An inbound process agent starts the execution of the business process step requested in a message by creating or updating one or multiple business object instances. An inbound process agent is not the agent of a business object but of its process component. An inbound process agent can act on multiple business objects in a process component.

Synchronous agents are used when a process component requires a more or less immediate response from another process component and is waiting for that response to continue its work.

Operations and process components are described in this specification in terms of process agents. However in alternative implementations process components and operations can be implemented without use of agents using other conventional techniques to perform the functions described in this specification.

The architectural elements also include the deployment unit. A deployment unit includes one or more process components that are deployed together on a single computer system platform. Conversely separate deployment units can be deployed on separate physical computing systems. The process components of one deployment unit interact with those of another deployment unit using messages passed through one or more data communication networks or other suitable communication channels. Thus a deployment unit deployed on a platform belonging one business can interact with a deployment unit software entity deployed on a separate platform belonging to a different and unrelated business allowing for business to business communication. More than one instance of a given deployment unit can execute at the same time on the same computing system or on separate physical computing systems. This arrangement allows the functionality offered by a deployment unit to be scaled to meet demand by creating as many instances as needed.

Since interaction between deployment units is through service operations a deployment unit can be replaced by other another deployment unit as long as the new deployment unit supports the operations depended upon by other deployment units. Thus while deployment units can depend on the external interfaces of process components in other deployment units deployment units are not dependent on process component interaction within other deployment units. Similarly process components that interact with other process components or external systems only through messages e.g. as sent and received by operations can also be replaced as long as the replacement supports the operations of the original.

The Bill of Exchange Submission business object sends incoming bill of exchange receivables to the house bank for cashing. The Incoming Check business object represents a check sent by a business partner. The incoming check will be sent to the house bank by a check deposit. The Check Deposit business object sends a collection of incoming checks to the house bank for cashing. The Payment Order business object creates payment media for either a bank a credit card a settlement institute or a business partner on the base of payment requests. The Bank Statement business object is a bank statement for a house bank account. The Bill of Exchange Receivable business object represents a Bill of Exchange received from a business partner or a Bill of Exchange Request sent to a business partner. The Cash Transfer business object is a document that shows an internal money transfer between a bank account and another bank account bank transfer a cash account and a bank account cash deposit a bank account and a cash account cash withdrawal or a cash account and another cash account cash transfer . The Payment Allocation business object documents a process step by which open payments of different types belonging to one another are indicated as confirmed or sent to other components for post processing. For example an incoming check may confirm a payment advice or a bank statement item may confirm a check deposit. The Clearing House Payment Order business object is an order document for clearing a collection of credit card payments to the clearing house. The Cash Payment business object is a document showing an incoming or outgoing cash payment from or to a business partner.

The Payment Processing process component also includes a number of outbound process agents each tied to a particular business object. The Notify of Payment from Bill of Exchange Submission to Accounting outbound process agent creates an accounting notification from the Bill of Exchange Submission business object . The Notify of Payment from Incoming Check to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a bounced or cancelled check. The Notify of Payment from Check Deposit to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a change in status of a check deposit. For example a notification may be sent stating that a deposit is ready for transfer to another account. The Notify of Payment from Payment Order to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment by payment order or a cancellation of payment. The Notify of Payment from Bank Statement to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment by bank account or a cancellation of payment. The Notify of Payment from BoE Receivable to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by a bill of exchange or a cancellation of payment. The Notify of Payment from Cash Transfer to Accounting outbound process component may notify the Accounting process component about a transfer of money between house bank accounts and or cash accounts or a cancellation of payment. The Notify of Payment from Payment Allocation to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by a payment allocation or a cancellation of payment. The notify of Payment from Credit Card Settlement to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by credit card or a cancellation of payment. The Notify of Payment from Cash Payment to Accounting outbound process agent may notify the Accounting process component of a payment made by cash or a cancellation of payment.

The outbound process agents above may cause invocation of a Notify of Payment operation or a Notify of Payment Cancellation operation to update accounting. The operations may be included in a Payment Accounting Out interface . The Payment Accounting Out interface may send a Payment Accounting Notification message or a Payment Accounting Cancellation Notification message to a Payment Accounting In interface in the Accounting process component . The Payment Accounting In interface includes a Create Accounting Document operation or a Cancel Accounting Document operation depending on the received message. A Maintain Accounting Document based on Payment inbound processing component updates the Accounting Notification business object . The Accounting Notification business object is a common input channel for all kinds of operational business transactions into Financial Accounting. The Accounting Notification may also be called by operational components in order to record the business transactions in Financial Accounting.

The Purchase Request Processing process component includes a Purchase Request business object . The Purchase Request business object contains a request or instruction to the purchasing department to purchase goods or services in specified quantities within a particular period.

In the Purchase Request Processing process component a Request Request for Quote Execution from Purchase Request to RFQ Processing outbound process agent requests the execution of a request for quote. The outbound process agent uses a Request Request for Quote Execution operation to send an RFQ Execution Request message to the RFQ Processing process component . The Request Request for Quote Execution operation is part of a Request for Quote Out interface .

The RFQ Execution Request message is received by a Maintain Request for Quote operation in a Request for Quote In interface where the operation initiates a Maintain Request for Quote inbound process agent which creates or updates a Request For Quote business object out of business documents such as the Request for Quote business object document that are involved in the bidding process or in the negotiation process. Next the Confirm Request for Quote outbound process agent receives the request for quote and initiates a Confirm Request for Quote operation in a Request for Quote Out Interface .

The Confirm Request for Quote operation sends a RFQ Execution Confirmation message to the Purchase Request Processing process component to confirm a RFQ execution. The Change Purchase Request operation which is part of a Request for Quote In interface receives the message and initiates a Change Purchase Request based on Request for Quote inbound process agent . The inbound process agent updates the references of the purchase request in the Purchase Request business object .

As shown in a bank statement is created at a bank and a Bank Statement Notification message with statement information is transmitted. The Payment Processing process component receives the Bank Statement Notification message into the Bank Statement Processing In interface where a Create Bank Statement operation is invoked to create a bank statement in the Payment Processing process component . A Maintain Bank Statement inbound process agent updates the Bank Statement business object by creating a new bank statement or modifying an existing bank statement. For example the bank statement may be a statement for a house bank account where modifications are made when bills are paid.

Interactions Between Process Components Time and Labor Management and Goods and Service Acknowledgement 

The Time and Labor Management process component includes an Employee Time Calendar business object that gives a read only information of a calendar based overview of different time data e.g. Planned working time an absences and working time confirmation of employees and their superposition e.g. illness vacation etc. . The Employee Time Calendar business object may use a Notify Goods and Services Acknowledgement outbound process agent to invoke a Notify of Goods and service Acknowledgement Notification operation or a Notify of Goods and Service Acknowledgement Cancellation operation which are both included in the Internal Service Acknowledgement Out interface . The Notify of Goods and service Acknowledgement Notification operation notifies the Goods and Service Acknowledgement process component of a service provided by an external employee. The Notify of Goods and service Acknowledgement Notification operation sends a Goods and Service Acknowledgement Request message when an active employee time with Goods and Service Acknowledgement relevant information is created or changed.

The Goods and Service Acknowledgement process component receives the Goods and Service Acknowledgement Request message via an Internal Acknowledgement In interface . Upon receipt of the Goods and Service Acknowledgement Request message a Create Goods and Service Acknowledgement operation is invoked to create Goods and service Acknowledgement and Time and Labor Management by initiating a Maintain GSA based on Internal Acknowledgment inbound process agent . The Maintain GSA based on Internal Acknowledgment inbound process agent updates or creates a Goods and Service Acknowledgement business object to report the receipt of goods and services. The Goods and Service Acknowledgement business object may be used when employees of a company can confirm that they have received the goods and services they ordered through internal requests purchasers or designated recipients of goods and services can confirm that they have received the goods and services they ordered on behalf of the employees for whom they are responsible or suppliers or service providers can report that they have delivered the requested goods or have rendered they requested services.

The Notify Goods and Services Acknowledgement outbound process agent may also invoke the Notify of Goods and Service Acknowledgement Cancellation operation to notify the Goods and Service Acknowledgement process component of a cancellation of goods and service. The Notify of Goods and Service Acknowledgement Cancellation operation sends a Goods and Service Acknowledgement Cancellation Request message when an active employee time with Goods and Service Acknowledgement relevant information is cancelled. Upon receipt of the Goods and Service Acknowledgement Cancellation Request message a Cancel Goods and Service Acknowledgement operation is invoked to cancel Goods and service Acknowledgement. Next the Maintain GSA based on Internal Acknowledgment inbound process agent updates the Goods and Service Acknowledgement business object to report the cancellation of goods and services.

A Supplier Invoice Processing process component includes a Supplier Invoice business object which is a document that states the recipient s usually the purchaser s obligation to pay the supplier for goods received or services rendered. The invoice is normally created after the goods and service acknowledgment has been confirmed. The Notify Supplier of Invoice to a Due Item Processing outbound process agent invokes a Notify of Invoice operation to notify the Due Item processing component about the receivables payables due for the invoice that has been paid. Alternatively a Request Invoice Cancellation operation may be invoked to cancel the previously sent notification for receivables payables due. Both operations may be included in a Receivables Payables Out interface . If the Notify of Invoice operation is invoked then a Receivables Payables Notification message is sent to the Due Item Processing process component . If the Request Invoice Cancellation operation is invoked the Receivables Payables Cancellation Request message is sent to the Due Item Processing process component .

The Receivables Payables Messages are received by a Receivables Payables In interface where operations may be performed. If the notification message is received then a Create Receivables Payables operation is performed to create a trade and or tax receivable or payable. If the cancellation message is received then a Cancel Receivables Payables operation is performed to cancel a trade and or tax receivable or payable. Cancellations and updates may be sent by a Maintain Trade and Tax Receivables Payables inbound process agent to one or more of three business objects a Trade Receivables Payables Register business object a Tax Receivables Payables Register business object or a Due Clearing business object . The Trade Receivables Payables Register business object may register for all trade receivables and payables from goods and services of a company from to its business partners. The Tax Receivables Payables Register business object may register for all tax receivables and payables of a company that are due for delivered goods and rendered services between buyers and sellers the consumption of goods and the transfer of goods that are withheld from payments to vendors. The Due Clearing business object is group of receivables and payables for clearing. Clearing means that the amounts of the receivables and payables of a group balance to zero taking cash discounts and other deductions into account. The group is typically payments and invoices that belong together but it can also be credit memos and invoices or customer and vendor invoices. A group results uniquely from the invoice reference information of a payment.

The Project Processing process component includes a Project business object . The Project business object is a business operation that is characterized by the unique set of conditions on which it is based. For example the set conditions may include the targets to be met the organization structure and the financial personal time constraints on the project and other conditions that may be included in the order. The Project business object is structured by project elements such as phases and tasks. The Project Processing process component also includes a Request Service from Project to Purchase Request Processing outbound process agent that may invoke a Request Service operation when a project manager enters a demand for an external source or service related to project tasks. Via a Purchasing Out interface the Request Service operation sends a Purchase Request Request message to the Purchase Request Processing process component . The Purchase Request Processing process component includes a Purchasing In interface that includes a Maintain Purchase Request operation to receive the Purchase Request Request message . The Maintain Purchase Request operation invokes a Maintain Purchase Request inbound process agent to create change or chancel a Purchase Request business object .

The Purchase Request Processing process component includes a Confirm Purchase Request outbound process agent to confirm the creation change or cancellation of the Purchase request business object . The Confirm Purchase Request outbound process agent then invokes a Confirm Purchase Request operation . The Confirm Purchase Request operation is included in a Purchasing Out interface . The Purchasing Out interface and the Confirm Purchase Request operation confirms the creation change or cancellation of the Purchase request business object by sending out a Purchase Request Confirmation message to the Project Processing process component .

The Project Processing process component includes a Purchasing In interface which includes a Change Project based on Purchase Request Confirmation operation to receive the Purchase Request Confirmation message . The Change Project based on Purchase Request Confirmation operation informs the requester of the extent to which a requisition has been fulfilled. For example the Change Project based on Purchase Request Confirmation operation may informs the requester that the requested quantity of goods is ordered or rejected. By doing so a Change Project based on Purchase Request Confirmation inbound process agent is invoked to update the Project business object .

Interactions Between Process Components Payment Processing and Payment Processing at Business Partner 

The interaction model begins in the Payment Processing process component with a Payment Order business object . The Payment Order business object creates payment media for either a bank a credit card a settlement institute or a business partner on the base of payment requests. After the payment is created the Payment Order business object sends a notification using a Notify of Payment from the Payment Order to the Business Partner outbound process agent . A Payment Order can create different sub items within a payment one for each check bank transfer etc. that is sent if the payment medium is subject to amount limitations. The Payment Processing process component also contains an outgoing payment Advicing Out interface that includes a Notify of Payment operation . The Notify of Payment operation creates a payment advice and sends a Payment Advice Notification message to the Payment Processing at Business Partner processing component .

The process component interaction model begins the Payment Processing process component with a Purchase Order business object having an update. The Purchase Order business object is a request from a purchaser to an external supplier to deliver a specified quantity of goods or perform a specified service within a specified time. When the Purchase Order business object has been created changed or cancelled a notification may be sent using a Notify of Purchase Order to Project Processing outbound process agent . The Purchasing Out interface includes a Notify of Purchase Order operation that creates changes or cancels a Purchase. A Purchase Order Notification message is sent to a Purchasing In interface in the Project Processing process component . A Change Project based on Purchase Order operation may be invoked to inform a project business object about the creation of a purchase order for an external resource that was ordered by the project manager. Similar to the Project business object the Project business object is a business operation that is characterized by the unique set of conditions on which it is based. An update to the Project business object will be sent using a Change Project based on Purchase Order inbound process agent .

The Purchase Request Processing process component may receive the Purchase Request Request message using a Purchasing In interface . Upon receiving the Purchase Request Request message the Purchasing In interface includes a Maintain Purchase Request operation to create or update a request from a requester to a purchaser to externally procure products e.g. material or services . For example the Maintain Purchase Request operation may create using a Maintain Purchase Request inbound process agent a Purchase Request business object . The Purchase Request business object is a request or instruction to the purchasing specified goods or services in specified quantities within a specified time.

A creation update or cancellation of the Purchase Request business object may trigger a Confirm Purchase Request outbound process agent . The Confirm Purchase Request outbound process agent may invoke a Confirmation Purchase Request operation to transmit a confirmation of the creation update or cancellation of the Purchase Request business object . The Confirmation Purchase Request operation then sends via a Purchasing Out interface a Purchase Request Confirmation message to the Internal Request Processing process component .

The Internal Request Processing process component receives the Purchase Request Confirmation message through a Purchasing In interface . The Purchasing In interface includes a Change Internal Request based on Procurement Progress operation . The Change Internal Request based on Procurement Progress operation confirms the creation change or cancellation of the Purchase Request business object by updating the Internal Request business object using a Change Internal Request based on Procurement Progress inbound process agent .

The process components include business objects to create and update data by passing messages between the Payment Request process component and the Due Item Processing process component . Multiple operations can be carried out within the interfaces. Both inbound and outbound process agents carry the business object data to and from the interfaces.

A due payment business object may create payment requests manually or automatically for payment processing. The due payment business object is responsible for the payment and clearing of payables and receivables for goods and services. A product tax declaration business object is a declaration of the product tax liabilities receivables of a company to the responsible tax authority according to the tax declaration arrangement and country specific legal requirements that triggers the payment to the tax authority.

A Synchronous Request Payment Reservation interface from Due Payment to Payment Processing outbound process component may create a payment reservation request from Due Payment. The Payment Request Out interface includes several operations which go on to create messages and updates to business objects in the Payment Processing process component . The operations messaging and business objects are discussed in the following paragraphs.

The Payment Request Out interface includes a synchronous Request payment information and provisional Payment Reservation operation that generates a Payment Order Reservation Request message to request a payment order reservation. A synchronous Create Payment Reservation operation receives the message and uses a Sync Maintain Payment Reservation inbound process agent to update a Payment Order business object . In addition a Payment Order Reservation Confirmation synchronous message is sent back to the Due Item Processing process component .

The Payment Request Out interface also includes a Notify of provisional Payment Reservation Deletion operation that registers the change of a provisional payment to the last transactional saved state. A Payment Order Reservation Cancellation Notification message may be generated and a Cancel Payment Reservation operation may be invoked that cancels a previously sent payment reservation by reference. Next a maintain Payment Order inbound process agent sends an update to the Payment Order business object .

The Payment Request Out interface further includes a synchronous Request Payment Information and provisional Payment Reservation Change operation that requests payment information with a provisional reservation of money in payment processing. A Payment Order Reservation Change Request synchronous message is generated and a synchronous Sync Change Payment Reservation operation is invoked that changes a reservation of payment and confirms the change to the caller. Next a Payment Reservation Confirmation synchronous message may be generated and sent back to the Due Item Processing process component .

The Payment Request Out interface further includes a Notify of provisional Payment Reservation Change Deletion operation that registers the change of a provisional payment to the last transactional saved state. A Payment Order Reservation Change Deletion Cancellation Notification message may be generated and a Change Payment Reservation operation may be invoked that changes a previously sent payment reservation by reference. Upon completion of the operation the Maintain Payment Order inbound process agent updates the Payment Order business object .

A Request Payment from Due Payment to Payment Processing outbound process agent may send a payment update to the Payment Processing process component from a Due Payment business object . A Request Payment operation is then invoked that sends a request for payment to Payment Processing. Upon completion of the operation a Payment Order Request message is sent the Payment Processing process component where a Create Payment Order operation begins. Then the Maintain Payment Order inbound process agent updates the Payment Order business object to create or cancel a payment order.

A Request Payment from Product Tax Declaration to Payment Processing outbound process agent may send an update from a Product Tax Declaration business object . The update is sent into the Payment Request Out interface and a Request Payment Cancellation operation is invoked to cancel a provisional requested or ordered payment. A Payment Order Cancellation Request message is then generated and sent to the Payment Processing process component where a Cancel Payment Order operation is invoked.

The payment order business object may use a Confirm Payment Request from Payment Order to Due Item Processing outbound process agent to confirm the processing status of a payment to the sender of a payment request. A Confirm Payment Request operation may then be invoked thereby generating a Payment Order Request Confirmation message to send to the Due Item Processing process component . The message is received in a Change payment based on Payment Request Confirmation operation that uses a Change Due Payment based on Payment Request Confirmation outbound process agent to update the processing status of Due Payment based on the confirmation of a payment request.

Interactions Between Process Components Purchase Order Processing and Sales Order Processing at Supplier 

As shown in the Purchase Order Processing process component includes a Purchase Order business object which is a request from a purchaser to an external supplier to deliver a specified quantity of goods or perform a specified service within a specified time. The Request Purchase Order to Supplier outbound process agent can request invocation of a Request Purchase Order Creation operation a Request Purchase Order Cancellation operation or a Request Purchase Order Change operation in an Ordering Out interface .

The Request Purchase Order Cancellation operation requests a Cancellation of a Purchase Order that was formerly ordered at a supplier which creates a Purchase Order Cancellation Request message . The Request Purchase Order Change operation requests a change of a purchase order that was formerly ordered at the supplier which creates a Purchase Order Change Request message . The Request Purchase Order Creation operation requests a Purchase Order from a Supplier which creates a Purchase Order Change Request .

Upon receiving a create a change or a cancellation message the Sales Order Processing process component may create a Purchase Order Confirmation message to update the Purchase Order Processing component . To complete the update a Create Purchase Order Confirmation operation included in an Order In interface may transfer the update to a Purchase Order Confirmation business object by using a Create Purchase Order inbound process agent . The Purchase Order Confirmation business object is a confirmation from an external supplier to the request of a purchaser to deliver a specified quantity of material or perform a specified service at a specified price within a specified time.

Interactions Between Process Components Customer Invoice Processing at Supplier and Supplier Invoice Processing 

The Supplier Invoice Processing process component receives an Invoice Request message into an Invoicing In interface which includes a Create Invoice operation that creates a supplier invoice based on information received from the supplier or a different invoicing party. A Create Supplier Invoice based on Invoice Request inbound process agent updates a Supplier Invoice business object . The Supplier Invoice business object is a document that states the recipient s obligation to pay the supplier for goods received or services rendered.

After the update occurs a Confirm Invoice to Supplier outbound process agent sends an update to an Invoicing Out interface which includes a Confirm Invoice operation . The Confirm Invoice operation sends an Invoice Confirmation message to notify the supplier whether the previously sent invoice is accepted or rejected depending on the outcome of invoice verification. A Request ERS Evaluated Receipt Settlement Invoice to Supplier outbound process agent may also be triggered send a message to the Customer Invoice Processing at Supplier process component via a ERS Invoicing Out interface . The ERS Invoicing Out interface creates an Invoice Request message by a Request ERS Invoice operation .

The Due Item Processing process component includes three business objects a Due Clearing business object to clear the amounts of the receivables and payables of a group balance to zero taking cash discounts and other deductions into account a Due Payment business object to create payment requests for payment processing and a Product Tax Declaration business object to declare the product tax liabilities receivables of a company to the responsible tax authority according to the tax declaration arrangement and country specific legal requirements that triggers the payment to the tax authority.

The business objects send updates into one of three outbound process agents a Notify of Payment from Due Clearing to Accounting outbound process agent which sends notification for a clearing of trade receivables and or payables to Accounting a Notify of Payment from Due Payment to Accounting outbound process agent which sends notification to Accounting for inward or outward trade receivables and or payables payments and a Notify of Payment from Product Tax Declaration to Accounting outbound process agent which sends notification for a payment of tax receivables and or payables to Accounting.

A Payment Accounting Out interface includes a Notify of Payment operation which sends a Payment Accounting Notification message to the Accounting process component notifying Financial Accounting about inward or outward movements of trade or tax receivables or payables. Alternatively a Request Payment Cancellation operation is invoked that sends a Payment Accounting Cancellation Request message to the Accounting process component canceling an inward or outward movement of trade or tax receivables or payables in Financial Accounting.

The Accounting process component receives the messages in a Payment Accounting In interface which includes a Create Accounting Document operation to receive Payment Accounting Notification from Payment Processing or Due Item Processing. If the message received was a cancellation a Cancel Accounting Document operation is invoked which cancels the payment processing or due item processing. Updates are sent to an Accounting Notification business object using a Maintain Accounting Document based on Payment inbound process agent . The Accounting Notification business object is a common input channel for all kinds of operational business transactions into Financial Accounting that is called by operational components in order to record the business transactions in Financial Accounting.

The Goods and Service Acknowledgement process component includes a Good and Service Acknowledgement business object a document reporting the receipt of goods and services. When the Good and Service Acknowledgement business object has been confirmed and valuation is expected at this point of time a Notify of Goods and Service Acknowledgement to Accounting outbound process agent is triggered to notify to accounting if valuation is required when goods and service acknowledgement is confirmed. The Notify of Goods and Service Acknowledgement to Accounting outbound process agent may call one of the operations included in a Goods and Service Accounting Out interface a Notify of Goods and Service Acknowledgement operation and a Notify of Goods and Service Acknowledge Cancellation operation . If the Notify of Goods and Service Acknowledgement operation is called it may send accounting information about rendered goods or services performed to the Accounting process component by transmitting a Goods and Service Acknowledgement Accounting Notification message . The Accounting process component may receive the message through a Goods and Service Accounting In interface which include a Create Accounting Document operation . The Create Accounting Document operation receives Goods Movement Resource Consumption Notification from the Goods and Service Acknowledgement process component . The operation may trigger a Maintain Accounting Document based on a Goods and Service Acknowledgement Description inbound process agent to update or create an Accounting Notification business object .

If the Notify of Goods and Service Acknowledgement to Accounting outbound process agent calls the Notify of Goods and Service Acknowledgement Cancellation operation the operation may send accounting information about cancellation of rendered goods or services to the Accounting process component by transmitting a Goods and Service Acknowledgement Cancellation Request message . The Accounting process component may receive the message through the Goods and Service Accounting In interface . The Cancel Accounting Document operation receives the Goods and Service Acknowledgement Cancellation Request message from the Goods and Service Acknowledgement process component . The operation may also trigger the Maintain Accounting Document based on a Goods and Service Acknowledgement Description inbound process agent to cancel the Accounting Notification business object .

Interactions Between Process Components Supplier Invoice Processing and Purchasing Contract Processing 

The process component interaction model begins the Supplier Invoice Processing process component with a Supplier Invoice business object having an update. The Supplier Invoice business object is a document that states the recipient s obligation to pay the supplier for goods received or services rendered. When the Supplier Invoice business object is updated a notification may be sent using a Notify of Contact Release from Supplier Invoice Request to Purchasing Contract Processing outbound process agent . The Contract Release Out interface includes a Notify of Contract Release operation that may be called in case of a change in a contract related invoice is posted. A Purchasing Contract release Notification message is sent to a Contract Release In interface in the Purchasing Contract Processing process component . Maintain Purchasing Contract Release operation may be invoked to create or update contract releases from the Supplier Invoice business object . An update to the Purchasing Contract business object will be sent using a Maintain Purchasing Contract Release inbound process agent .

As shown in the Supplier Invoice Processing process component includes a Supplier Invoice business object . The Supplier Invoice business object is or represents a document that states a recipient s obligation to pay a supplier for goods received or services rendered. For example the Supplier Invoice business object may be created after a goods and service acknowledgement has been confirmed. The Supplier Invoice business object may then trigger a Notify of Supplier Invoice to Accounting outbound process agent which notifies accounting of the existence of the supplier invoice. For example once the supplier invoice is posted to the system the outbound processing agent sends a notification to accounting stating the Supplier Invoice business object has been posted.

The processing agent provides an Invoice Accounting Out interface with the notification and additional data such as invoice billing numbers or a credit memo. Here the interface includes the Notify of Invoice operation and the Request Invoice Cancellation operation . The Notify of Invoice operation may be invoked if the invoice accounting out interface receives a notification to post an invoice. Upon performing the Notify of Invoice operation the Invoice Accounting interface sends an Invoice Accounting Notification message with the invoice accounting notification. Alternatively the Request Invoice Cancellation operation may be invoked if the Invoice Accounting interface receives information requesting a cancellation. For example the Request Invoice Cancellation operation may be invoked in order to cancel an invoice. Upon performing the Request Invoice Cancellation operation the Notify of Supplier Invoice to Accounting outbound process agent transmits a Invoice Cancellation Accounting Notification message with the invoice accounting cancellation request.

The Accounting process component includes an Invoice Accounting In interface that may receive messages sent by the Supplier Invoice Processing process component . Here the Invoice Accounting interface includes a Create Accounting Document operation that creates an accounting document for a customer invoice or supplier invoice if accounting receives the Invoice Accounting Notification message . The Invoice Accounting In interface also includes a Cancel Accounting Document operation that cancels a customer or supplier invoice.

The Accounting process component includes a Maintain Accounting Document based on Invoice inbound process agent that can maintain accounting documents. For example the inbound process agent may update the accounting document if a creation or cancellation operation is received. After updating the accounting document the inbound process agent may forward information about the updated document into the Accounting Notification business object . The Accounting Notification business object may receive input from operational business transactions such as the invoice notification above and record the business transactions in a Financial Accounting deployment unit.

The Purchase Order Processing process component includes a Purchase Order business object which includes a request from a purchaser. An update in the Purchase Order Processing process component may trigger a Notify of Invoicing Due from Purchase Order to Supplier Invoice Processing outbound process agent to invoke includes a Notify of Invoicing Due operation . The Notify of Invoicing Due operation which is included in an Invoice Verification Out interface may send an Invoicing Due Notification message that will be received by elements in the Supplier Invoice Processing process component . The message is routed to an Invoice Verification In interface where a Maintain Invoice Request operation is invoked to create or update a reference object in the Supplier Invoice Processing deployment unit in order to perform invoice verification with reference to a purchase order without having to access other deployment units. The Maintain Supplier Invoice Request outbound process agent sends updates or changes to the invoice data into the Supplier Invoice Request business object . The system uses the Supplier Invoice Request business object as a basis for invoice verification as well as for the automatic creation of the invoice.

In this illustration the Notify of Invoiced Values from SIR to Purchase Order Processing outbound process agent invokes a Notify of Invoiced Values operation of an Invoice Verification Out interface to send a Supplier Invoice Request Invoiced Values Notification message that will be received by components in the Purchase Order Processing process component . The notification message is sent to make certain that if parts of a purchase order have been previously posted the corresponding purchase order is not changed to an amount lower than the one that has already been delivered. Upon receipt of the message the Invoice Verification In interface includes a Change Purchase Order based on Invoiced Values operation to change appropriate invoiced quantities in the purchase order. The updated change information is sent to the Purchase Order business object using the Change Purchase Order based on Invoiced Values inbound process agent .

Interactions Between Process Components Goods and Service Acknowledgement and Supplier Invoice Processing 

The process component interaction model begins the Goods and Service Acknowledgement process component with a Goods and Service Acknowledgement business object having an update. The Goods and Service Acknowledgement business object is a document that reports the receipt of goods and services. When the Goods and Service Acknowledgement business object is updated a notification may be sent using a Notify of Invoicing Due from GSA to Supplier Invoice Processing outbound process agent . The Invoice Verification Out interface includes a Notify of Invoice Due operation that may be called in case of a change in a contract related invoice is posted. When a GSA is created the Supplier Invoice Processing process component needs to be informed because this information is necessary in case of goods receipt based invoice verification. An Invoicing Due Notification message is sent to an Invoice Verification In interface in the Supplier Invoice Processing process component . A Maintain Invoice Request operation may be invoked to create or update a reference object in the Supplier Invoice Processing process component to perform invoice verification with reference to a purchase order. The reference object is used for checks against the preceding documents and to make proposals for invoice entry. The Supplier Invoice Request business object is a document for invoice verification that is advising an invoice for specified quantities and prices to be expected or to be created through evaluation settlement. The system uses the Supplier Invoice Request business object as a basis for invoice verification as well as for the automatic creation of the invoice. An update to the Supplier Invoice Request business object will be sent using a Maintain Supplier Invoice Request inbound process agent .

The process component interaction model begins at the Project Processing process component with a Project business object which is a business operation having an update. When the Project business object is updated a notification may be sent using a Notify of Project to Time and Labor Management outbound process agent . The Project Task Confirmation Out interface includes a Notify of Project operation that may publishes or unpublishes project tasks with assigned human resources. A Employee Time Confirmation View on Project Notification message is sent to a Project Task Confirmation In interface in the Time and Labor Management process component . A Maintain Employee Time Confirmation View On Project operation may be invoked to maintain an Employee Time Confirmation View on Project business object based on changes of the object Project in the Project Processing process component . The Employee Time Confirmation View on Project business object is a view on a project adapted for the confirmation of Employee Times. An update to the Employee Time Confirmation View on Project business object will be sent using a Maintain Employee Time Confirmation View on Project inbound process agent .

The Time and Labor Management process component also includes an Employee Time Calendar business object . The Employee Time Calendar business object gives a calendar based overview of different time data. A creation or cancellation of the Employee Time Calendar business object may trigger a Notify of Project Task Confirmation from Employee Time Calendar to Project Processing outbound process agent to notify the Project Processing process component of the creation or cancellation of the Employee Time Calendar business object . The Project Task Confirmation Out interface includes a Notify of Project Task Confirmation operation that may notify the Project Processing process component of a project task confirmation or a project task status change. This notification is sent when an active employee time with project relevant information is created changed or cancelled. A Project Task Confirmation Notification message is sent to a Project Task Confirmation In interface in the Project Processing process component . A Change Project based on Employee Time Calendar operation may be invoked to confirm employee s working time for a project task including working times and additional information such as status short text remaining work etc. An update to the Project business object will be sent using a Change Project based on Employee Time Calendar inbound process agent .

The outbound process agent sends notification into an Order Accounting Out interface which includes a Notify of Purchase Order operation . The Notify of Purchase Order operation may occur when a purchase order has been created changed or cancelled. An Order Accounting Notification message may then be sent to the Accounting process component .

The Accounting process component receives the Order Accounting Notification message in an Order Accounting In interface which includes a Maintain Subledger Account operation that receives order accounting notifications from the Purchase Order Processing process component . The notification is to inform Accounting Processing process component about the creation the change or the deletion of any kind of order business objects. The notification may then be sent to the Accounting Notification business object using an inbound process agent . The Accounting Notification business object is a common input channel for all kinds of operational business transactions into Financial Accounting that is called by operational components in order to record the business transactions in Financial Accounting.

Interactions Between Process Components Payment Processing and Payment Order Processing at House Bank 

The Payment Processing process component includes four business objects a Bill of Exchange Receivable business object that represents a Bill of Exchange received from or a Bill of Exchange Request sent to a business partner an Outgoing Check business object that represents a check sent to a business partner that is created via payment order a Bill of Exchange Payable business object that represents a Bill of Exchange sent to a business partner that is created only via payment order and a Bank Payment Order business object which is a Payment Order that will be sent to a house bank and may contain bank transfers as well direct debits.

Various process agents are used to send updates for each of these business objects the Bill of Exchange Receivable business object the Outgoing Check business object the Bill of Exchange Payable business object and the Bank Payment Order business object . The Request Payment Order from Bill of Exchange Receivable to House Bank outbound process agent creates an electronic Bill of Exchange Receivable Request business object . The Request Payment Order from Outgoing Check to House Bank outbound process agent creates an outgoing check to be printed externally. The Request Payment Order from Bill of Exchange Payable to House Bank outbound process agent creates an electronic Bill of Exchange Payable. The Request Payment Order from Bank Payment Order to House Bank outbound process agent creates a Payment order to House Bank.

The Payment Ordering out interface receives the updates from the outbound process agents and . A Request Payment Order operation collects Bank Transfers or Direct Debits for payment submission to the business partner. A Collective Payment Order Request message is generated and processed by the Payment order processing at house bank process component . Upon completion of processing a Collective Payment Order Confirmation message is sent to the Payment Ordering In interface that includes a Maintain Payment Order Confirmation operation to confirm the status updates from processing a payment order. After completing the operation an update is sent to the Bank Payment Order business object using the Maintain Payment Order Confirmation from House Bank inbound process agent .

The subject matter described in this specification and all of the functional operations described in this specification can be implemented in digital electronic circuitry or in computer software firmware or hardware including the structural means disclosed in this specification and structural equivalents thereof or in combinations of them. The subject matter described in this specification can be implemented as one or more computer program products i.e. one or more computer programs tangibly embodied in an information carrier e.g. in a machine readable storage device or in a propagated signal for execution by or to control the operation of data processing apparatus e.g. a programmable processor a computer or multiple computers. A computer program also known as a program software software application or code can be written in any form of programming language including compiled or interpreted languages and it can be deployed in any form including as a stand alone program or as a module component subroutine or other unit suitable for use in a computing environment. A computer program does not necessarily correspond to a file. A program can be stored in a portion of a file that holds other programs or data in a single file dedicated to the program in question or in multiple coordinated files e.g. files that store one or more modules sub programs or portions of code . A computer program can be deployed to be executed on one computer or on multiple computers at one site or distributed across multiple sites and interconnected by a communication network.

The processes and logic flows described in this specification can be performed by one or more programmable processors executing one or more computer programs to perform functions by operating on input data and generating output. The processes and logic flows can also be performed by and apparatus can also be implemented as special purpose logic circuitry e.g. an FPGA field programmable gate array or an ASIC application specific integrated circuit .

Processors suitable for the execution of a computer program include by way of example both general and special purpose microprocessors and any one or more processors of any kind of digital computer. Generally a processor will receive instructions and data from a read only memory or a random access memory or both. The essential elements of a computer are a processor for executing instructions and one or more memory devices for storing instructions and data. Generally a computer will also include or be operatively coupled to receive data from or transfer data to or both one or more mass storage devices for storing data e.g. magnetic magneto optical disks or optical disks. Information carriers suitable for embodying computer program instructions and data include all forms of non volatile memory including by way of example semiconductor memory devices e.g. EPROM EEPROM and flash memory devices magnetic disks e.g. internal hard disks or removable disks magneto optical disks and CD ROM and DVD ROM disks. The processor and the memory can be supplemented by or incorporated in special purpose logic circuitry.

To provide for interaction with a user the subject matter described in this specification can be implemented on a computer having a display device e.g. a CRT cathode ray tube or LCD liquid crystal display monitor for displaying information to the user and a keyboard and a pointing device e.g. a mouse or a trackball by which the user can provide input to the computer. Other kinds of devices can be used to provide for interaction with a user as well for example feedback provided to the user can be any form of sensory feedback e.g. visual feedback auditory feedback or tactile feedback and input from the user can be received in any form including acoustic speech or tactile input.

The subject matter described in this specification can be implemented in a computing system that includes a back end component e.g. a data server a middleware component e.g. an application server or a front end component e.g. a client computer having a graphical user interface or a Web browser through which a user can interact with an implementation of the subject matter described herein or any combination of such back end middleware and front end components. The components of the system can be interconnected by any form or medium of digital data communication e.g. a communication network. Examples of communication networks include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN e.g. the Internet.

The computing system can include clients and servers. A client and server are generally remote from each other and typically interact through a communication network. The relationship of client and server arises by virtue of computer programs running on the respective computers and having a client server relationship to each other.

While this specification contains many specifics these should not be construed as limitations on the scope of the invention or of what may be claimed but rather as an exemplification of preferred embodiments of the invention. Certain features that are described in this specification in the context of separate embodiments may also be provided in combination in a single embodiment. Conversely various features that are described in the context of a single embodiment may also be provided in multiple embodiments separately or in any suitable subcombination. Moreover although features may be described above as acting in certain combinations and even initially claimed as such one or more features from a claimed combination can in some cases be excised from the combination and the claimed combination may be directed to a subcombination or variation of a subcombination.

The subject matter has been described in terms of particular variations but other variations can be implemented and are within the scope of the following claims. For example the actions recited in the claims can be performed in a different order and still achieve desirable results. As one example the processes depicted in the accompanying figures do not necessarily require the particular order shown or sequential order to achieve desirable results. In certain implementations multitasking and parallel processing may be advantageous. Other variations are within the scope of the following claims.

