---

title: Wireless communication method, device and system for establishing a connection
abstract: A method for a user to establish a wireless connection between a wireless portable computing device and a wireless-equipped device in an industrial or electrical power or distribution plant. Actions of the method are carried out by a second computer program that provides information in a graphical user interface display to a user and opens a wireless connection with a selected industrial device. In other aspects a human-machine interface and a system are also described.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08126395&OS=08126395&RS=08126395
owner: ABB Research Ltd.
number: 08126395
owner_city: Zürich
owner_country: CH
publication_date: 20050407
---
This application claims priority to Swedish patent application 0400958 5 filed 8 Apr. 2004 and is the national phase under 35 U.S.C. 371 of PCT SE2005 000516 filed 7 Apr. 2005.

The invention relates to a method for a wireless device to establish communication with another wireless device and for an application a device and a system for doing so. In particular the invention is concerned with establishing wireless communication with devices in industrial commercial and energy or utilities installations.

The use of wireless communication using short range radio transmitter and or receivers in industry is well established. One such standard for wireless transmission accepted for use in industry is the Bluetooth standard. To initialize radio communication between a first handheld device and a second device in the presence of several such second devices it is advantageous to select the desired second device with the minimum of time and effort.

A disadvantage of devices operating according to the Bluetooth standard is that a user has to know which Bluetooth service name to use in order to contact or configure the device at least for a first time. A second disadvantage is the lengthy time necessary to establish a link to a new device even when the devices service name is known. For example when a wireless manager application such as a Bluetooth Manager is used then the connection between devices must first be set up by the user before any interaction with the devices can be established. If a disconnection or a connection to another device is wanted then the user must open and start the Bluetooth Manager and carry out the required steps. Once the change has been completed the user can then turn his her attention back to the maintenance control or programming work or other task in hand. A first time use of an application such as Bluetooth Manager requires many steps perhaps as many as ten steps to be repeated for each device that should be recognised for a first time. Subsequent contact with an already recognised device also requires a plurality of steps or actions by a user to activate communication with the already recognised device. In addition each recognised device is often recorded by such a wireless application manager as having more than one communication protocol which may be organised as a number of protocols collected together in a separate profile for each detected device. It is difficult and time consuming for a user who is not specially trained in the wireless communication field to establish communication with one chosen device of many available devices in a rapid and efficient error free way.

The invention may be summarised as a method and application for establishing a wireless connection and a computing device preferably handheld or portable running the application and a system comprising the portable computing device and the application.

The invention may be practised using hardware components that are low cost and based on existing technology. To initialize a communication using for example a PDA Portable Digital Assistant the user simply selects a first display member or button that is visible on the graphic display in order to display a list of wireless devices and then chooses from the list a representation of the object of interest. This may be for example a medium or low voltage circuit breaker indicated by an easily recognisable text such as Breaker or a known or recognisable symbol for a circuit breaker which may also be accompanied by text reading Breaker or CB . The object of interest Breaker may be depicted in the same display as a plurality of other wireless equipped devices in the vicinity of the user and or Breaker .

The basic idea of the invented method is to present a very user friendly HMI to the operator. This is done to a great extent by hiding from the user everything that explicitly relates to the wireless technology. The invented method comprises an application running for the most part in the background that handles all actions needed for the wireless connections. The application handles making a connection and the operator can concentrate fully on a computer application in the foreground which may be an application for control monitoring data logging troubleshooting or other routine or normal tasks. The operator knows that interacting with any wireless device in the vicinity is always possible without having to consider that it is done using a wireless connection or how to make a wireless connection.

The invention can be implemented in several ways. Preferably a graphic object which can be a text text window a symbol a button a menu or a similar item is displayed for the user always visible or altenatively whenever relevant on top of or beside the GUI of the foreground application. The user can click tap or otherwise select this graphic object to view a list of alternative devices that can be selected. The alternative devices are made available by the background application for the user to interact or communicate with. When the user has made a selection from the list the list can disappear from the screen or the list can still be open to allow multiple selections. Supplementary alternatives in the list can be to update the list to work off line with no device selected to select device from a database to select from a list of the most recently selected device or other relevant alternatives. In another implementation a list of alternatives may be shown automatically every time the foreground application hereafter referred to as a first application needs the user to make a device selection.

The list of devices may contain any representation of the objects of interest for example a name a symbol an icon a number or combination thereof.

To further improve the user friendliness and breadth of application the invention further comprises the use of one or more filters before displaying a list of available devices. Only those devices that are accepted by the filters are then shown to the user as available devices. A first filter may compare the identities of the wireless devices that are found by the background software application with a stored list of devices that are a selected part of the system or plant. A second filter may compare with a stored list of the devices that the user is authorized to work with. A third filter may compare with a stored list of the devices that need a software update or that require configuration.

The principal advantage of the invention is that communication between a first device and a selected second device of a plurality of such second devices each equipped with a short range wireless communication means may be established in a very short period of time. Another advantage of the invention is that selection of one particular device of many in a given location each equipped with wireless communication means may be established quickly and with certainty. It is a further advantage that this is carried out by a user with the minimum of necessary actions. A user with a portable computer such as a PDA may run any computer application for a purpose such as maintenance control data logging etc. and without breaking off or otherwise apparently leaving the current application the user simply selects the button or other graphic object in the GUI of the PDA to display a list of user friendly names for all recognised devices in the vicinity. The user then selects the desired device to communicate with and after those two actions then resumes work using the computerised application of interest still running on the PDA.

It is also an advantage in a large industrial installation or commercial building port airport or hospital with perhaps hundreds of control devices that the operator does not need to know the object or service name system name or control name communication protocol etc. of the desired or target wireless device.

Another further advantage is that the speed of establishment of connection makes it feasible for a technician or operator to establish communication almost instantly with each of many different devices in turn all located in the same general surroundings such as a part of a factory a floor of a warehouse an area inside an airport building a substation in a part of an oil refinery a part of a process or production line breakers or protection equipment in a yard of a power distribution yard and so on. This is a great benefit that enables any authorised person with a wireless equipped portable computer PDA notebook combined mobile phone PDA camera and so on to make contact with a specific wireless equipped industrial component as desired and then examine a status or an alarm a configuration or any other live or stored data associated with that component. This may be done routinely by a user an operator or technician during normal operational or production circumstances.

Similarly any authorised user including an operator technician engineer etc. with a wireless equipped computer phone etc. can make rapid and secure contact with a chosen wireless equipped component during maintenance trouble shooting repairs service work or changes in type of product or production. Contact with any chosen wireless equipped devices is simplified and greatly speeded up thus simplifying and speeding up the monitoring information retrieval from and or control of such wireless equipped devices in any industrial environment. The invention thus reduces down time service time configuration and or set up time during changeovers required to suit changes in type of product made or changes in production output quality or amount.

In an advantageous embodiment the background application hereafter referred to as the second application displays the list of user friendly names automatically when the first computer program requires communication with a device so as to retrieve or write data or to contact the device for some other reason. In this embodiment the second application detects that the first computer program application has requested such a service method or device and automatically displays the list of known devices to the user displayed on top of the first computer program application.

It is also an advantage that the method application device and system according to the invention may be used with any device already installed that operates according to a known and established communication protocol or standard for short range wireless communications.

The industrial device is typically a production or maintenance equipment in the broadest sense of the word in an industrial or commercial installation. This includes for example electrical power generation and or transmission and or distribution installation equipment such as generators circuit breakers transformers protection devices isolators and so on in an industrial installation such as a rolling mill the devices may be casters mill stands shears measuring rolls coilers furnaces in a paper mill may be pulp grinders pulp treatment tanks paper machines dryers and so on in an oil and gas extraction or treatment installation valves pumps risers compressors.

The figure shows separate production equipment in an industrial process a grinder pulper paper machine drier each equipped with sensor of some kind with wireless functionality. The figure also shows electrical distribution and power equipment variable transformer breaker transformer rectifier substation and AC generator or backup AC generator similarly equipped with typically one or more sensors and at least a data I O interface and with wireless functionality. Also shown is a portable computing device such as a PDA with wireless functionality and an interface preferably a graphical user display.

A user operating a wireless enabled PDA or other portable computing device may use it to establish a wireless connection between the portable computing device and one selected wireless equipped industrial device at a time from a plurality of wireless equipped devices in the vicinity of the user. A user with the PDA carries out a task of some kind typically while walking round in an industrial installation typically using a first computer program application running on the PDA. This computer program application may be a text or word processing program a maintenance program a program displaying drawings a data logger a configuration program in short any computer program that a user may use to carry out a part of his or her job. A job such as an operator technician or engineer in order to operate monitor configure access data for or about the device log data and so on or to control the industrial device.

The second application may run in the background all the time the PDA is switched on. The application or a part of it may be resident in processor memory or RAM memory at all times. The second application may run and be configured to be visible in the foreground even if the PDA only has an operating system running for example for working editing configuring passwords etc. off line.

An instance of the user friendly names or symbols are also comprised in a table or other data structure which is used by the second application to retrieve a unique radio address that belongs to each of the devices listed with user friendly names. When a user selects one of the user friendly names the display member disappears and the user returns to whatever display is provided by the first computer application running on the PDA and continues working.

The list of devices with user friendly names may be created for a first time. A device name list containing user friendly names matched to their unique radio addresses may then be downloaded to the or each PDA or other portable computing device. This device name list may be downloaded wirelessly eg from a LAN or WLAN or downloaded from a database or a list table or other data structure held in a memory via a data network such as an industrial LAN or even from the Internet over a secure connection. The device name list may alternatively be retrieved from a removable memory storage device connected to or plugged into a data port or memory module input of the PDA. This also enables a user such as a maintenance engineer who wishes to use the same portable computing device in different plants to easily access equipment located in different installations by using a plug in memory module loaded with a device name list specific to a given installation. Behind the scenes and not visible to the user the second application running on the PDA looks up an address function to find a preconfigured radio address for the device of interest. Depending on the communication or wireless protocol used and other requirements the radio address may be globally unique unique to a country or a plant or to some other grouping. The application then sends a radio message to the device of interest using the unique device address and establishes radio communication with the wireless unit of the device.

In this intuitive way a user may make contact with an industrial device of interest by selecting first a button icon or other visible marker that is displayed on top of another other program and then secondly by selecting a user friendly name. The second application then opens a wireless connection with the desired device. By means of the method and application the user may continue to use another program or the first computer program application which sends and receives messages to and from the device without the user being required to know the service name or the radio address of the device the preferred communication protocol or how to establish communication with one particular wireless equipped device in an area that may contain many such devices. These functions are handled by the second application according to the invention.

Conveniently the user can communicate with an industrial device in order to access or retrieve data check set points adjust set points etc intuitively and with a minimum of actions by means of the method and second application of the invention.

The second application of the present invention may be implemented in a number of different ways according to the scale and type of system used. The second application may for example be implemented as any from the list of computer program executing on the PDA or other portable computing device a computer program that operates in the background a plug in program a computer program client application or thin client that executes locally on the portable computing device in cooperation with a server process on another computing machine an application embedded in a hardware component of the portable computing device. Preferably the second application is implemented as to minimise the processor memory and or ram memory and related resources required to run this function in the PDA. The invention may also be implemented as a web browser program.

In a development of the invention the second application may be configured to respond to radio signals transmitted by devices announcing their presence or inquiring after a connection. In this case the second application is configured to respond to a detection or report by the wireless hardware of a wireless inquiry signal and displaying the list of said first devices on the display of the PDA shown in 

After the list of said first devices provided by the second application has been accessed the list will be removed following a configurable time delay after a request for access to a first said device.

In a further embodiment the device list presented to the user may be filtered. shows a method similar to the method described in relation to but with the addition of a filtering function. The figure shows actions including a filtering function which begin with the action of when the graphic object of is activated by the user to select a device a filter process begins which is not normally visible to the user. All known devices are retrieved and a filter applied to the list to arrive at a filtered selection of all known devices which is presented for the user to select one of the devices as shown with a user friendly name or symbol. A wireless connection to that device is then established in the background by the second application as described before in relation to and also indicated in by steps such that the first application may then communicate with the device so selected as previously described above.

The filter may be carried out in a number of ways according to a variety of requirements or conditions. For example a user logged on as an electrician may see a filtered list of equipment such as devices of further filtered by which physical location in the plant that the electrician is standing. Similarly a process operator may be presented with a device list filtered according to production devices such as alternatively further filtered according to user location in the plant or process area. A maintenance person may have access to an unfiltered list of all devices and also alternately access to a filtered list of devices for which there are open maintenance orders or a device condition such as currently not operating high low value open alarms and so on.

Location of the user in the plant or in a process section of an installation may be known to eg detected by the portable computing device and or by a control system in the plant. Devices may be filtered with respect to where in the plant or plant process the user is presently located. Devices may also or alternatively be filtered according to job so that an electrician may see devices of whereas an operator or process technician may only see devices in a process . A user also has certain authorities and privileges which may also be included in a filter to optimise a selection of devices that a given user may access depending for example on location job and or user authorities.

In a further advantageous embodiment the list of user friendly names is automatically displayed only when it detects that the first application requires a communication channel to a device. This is carried out by the second application running in the background so as to speak. Upon detection by the second application or by a watchdog function or by an agent functioning together with the second application that the first computer program requires communication with a device the second application executes to provide instructions to cause the PDA or other portable computing device to display the list of user friendly device names or symbols on top of the first application similar to that described in relation to and . In a development of the embodiment this embodiment causes the first application to display the list by for example automatically opening a menu option such as that described in relation to . Thus a user is prompted to select a device from a list of user friendly device names or symbols that the first application shall communicate with by a wireless connection. Once again the wireless connection is established in the background by the second application and the user does not need to be aware of how it is done.

Optionally a user may also issue a command to cause the second application to display a list of user friendly names or wireless devices or to display selection means to activate any other functions of the second application. This may be in order to contact a device as described previously or may as well be in order to add devices search for devices or read edit or in some way configure or re configure the information about named devices handled and or presented by the second application or password access to them for one or more users.

Optionally a dedicated physical control or button of the portable computing device may be used to carry out one or more actions of the method of the invention. A button may be dedicated or configured so that pressing the button causes an action such as 

The invention has been described above in terms of two computer programs a first application used for carrying out work related tasks in an industrial plant or distribution yard and a second application for establishing a wireless connection in the background for the most part with most functions not visible to a user. However the invention may also be practised in a combined form in which the second and first applications are combined in a single software or computer program. In this way the establishment of a wireless connection is carried out in the background by a part of the same application or software or computer program that may be used to carry out the work related task.

The invention establishes a wireless connection between a portable computing device and a device for production or associated operations in an industrial installation or an installation for transmission or distribution of energy or electricity suitably equipped for wireless communication. Examples of such devices have been described above such as production or operational devices comprised in production process equipment for pulp and paper and for breakers transformers switches and so on in transmission or distribution installations. Devices may also consist of one or more sensors in a process or production plant or power transmission distribution installations. Thus the device may for example be a pressure and or temperature sensor on a fluid line in a pulp or paper mill steel mill steel converter plant rolling mill or in a fluid tank of a transformer protection device tap changer fluid filled power cable or cable joint and so on in a power distribution installation. The device may consist of one or more sensors of any type responding to changes in properties of any of the list of mechanical electrical magnetic inductive electrical magnetic resistive electromagnetic radiation. Thus a such device may be thermal or optical such as an IR sensor or responsive changes in mechanical forces by means of a magnetoresistive or magneto elastic pressure sensor and so on.

Although the invention has in this specification been described in relation to the Bluetooth standard or compatible with any standard issued by the Bluetooth Special Interest Group SIG it may also be implemented using any other suitable wireless communications protocol. A protocol compatible with for example any variation of IEEE 802.11 WiFi WiMax Ultra Wide Band UWB ZigBee or IEEE 802.15.4 IEEE 802.13 or equivalent or similar. This is also to be understood to have an influence on what type of radio address or radio identity is used by the second application to open a connection with a radio unit of a device. With a Bluetooth system a globally unique radio address may be used however dependent on wireless protocol used and requirements in the installation a radio identity may be a radio address unique to that local plant or another type of radio identity that is locally unique. A standard compatible with WAPI WLAN Authentication and Privacy Infrastructure GB15629.11 2003 or later may advantageously be used in situations where encryption of the wireless signal for authentification and so on such as by methods incorporating elliptical curve encryption algorithms is necessary and or advantageous.

In some industrial situations a radio technology working at high frequencies usually greater than 400 MHz for example in an ISM band with significant interference suppression means by spread spectrum technology may be the preferred type of wireless communication. For example a broad spectrum wireless protocol in which each or any data packet may be re sent at other frequencies of a broad spectrum at around 7 times per millisecond may for example be used such as in a protocol developed by ABB called Wireless interface for sensors and actuators Wisa .

It should be noted that while the above describes exemplifying embodiments of the invention there are several variations and modifications which may be made to the disclosed solution without departing from the scope of the present invention as defined in the appended claims.

