---

title: System for and method of providing priority access service and cell load redistribution
abstract: Systems of and methods for providing cellular priority access and topological guidance information to cellular users are described, employing wireless ad hoc network and cellular logic. A centralized aspect of acquiring cell loading information and geographic coordinates is combine with a distributed scatternet forming aspect to enable guidance information to be computed and indicated to the user. The guidance information is reflective of cell loading and congestion status of neighboring cells, as well as the availability of alternative radio resources in the user's current cell or neighboring cells. The system may also be employed in redistributing cell traffic among cells to optimally balance cell loads.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07623870&OS=07623870&RS=07623870
owner: 
number: 07623870
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050629
---
This Patent Application is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 214 885 U.S. Pat. No. 6 985 740 entitled System For and Method of Providing Priority Access and Cell Load Redistribution filed Aug. 8 2002 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

The present invention relates in general to wireless communications systems and more specifically to systems and methods for relieving cell congestion and providing Priority Access Service PAS to authorized subscribers.

National security and emergency preparedness NS EP personnel have become dependent on commercial wireless communications for the performance of their mission. NS EP personnel frequently require wireless connectivity in order to provide communications in a mobile environment when responding to emergencies such as earthquakes hurricanes and floods. Commercial wireless service provides a cost effective capability for NS EP communications that leverages the use of publicly available wireless telephony rather than a cost prohibitive private network. In addition to minimizing costs and deployment time this arrangement provides broad accessibility.

However following a disaster severe cellular network congestion in any surviving telecommunication systems can cause high call blocking in wireless communications. Thus a priority access service PAS has been deemed necessary to enable critical disaster relief officials to provide services when they are most needed. A wireline PAS currently exists the Government Emergency Telecommunications Service GETS program but a wireless capability is still lacking. Even in non disaster situations a high volume of call traffic can create congestion in cellular networks leading to a need for redistribution of the cell load.

The US National Communications System NCS was chartered to work with cellular and personal communications services PCS operators and vendors to provide wireless PAS for NS EP personnel during emergency situations. The PAS program has been implemented through a series of Federal Communications Commission FCC rules and orders that establish the regulatory administrative and operational framework that enables commercial mobile radio service CMRS providers to offer PAS to NS EP personnel. CMRS providers include cellular licensees broadband personal communications service PCS licensees and specialized mobile radio SMR licensees.

The initial operating capability IOC for PAS is to provide radio priority access for Code Division Multiple Access and Global System for Mobile Communication GSM air interfaces by Dec. 31 2002 i.e. PAS originating calls have a higher priority for access to next available radio resource than public non priority calls. See Issue 1.0 Feb. 22 2002 and Issue 1.0 Feb. 22 2002. The full operating capability FOC is to provide end to end priority access by Dec. 31 2003. The basic mechanism proposed is to queue priority call requests when there are no radio channels available. As radio channel becomes available preference will be given to queued priority calls. In the current implementation of IS 95 cdma2000 CDMA base station BS and base station controller BSC there is no call queuing capability. As a result priority queues are required to be added to the BS BSC. GSM base station sub system BSS already has the call queuing capability. As a result minimal change is required for the GSM BSS to support PAS. PAS is activated on a per call basis and is applicable to mobile to wireline wireline to mobile and mobile to mobile links. When an NS EP user places a PAS call and the service is activated the mobile station MS requests a voice channel via the control channel messaging. In a congested environment the NS EP caller is placed in a queue and will be given the next available voice channel. PAS does not preempt calls in progress and is to be used only in emergency situations where network congestion is blocking call attempts however the invention as described below is not limited in this regard.

Another task of the FCC is enforcement of the Wireless Communications and Public Safety Act of 1999 the 911 Act which mandates the FCC to promote safety of life and property through the use of wire and radio communication. To this end the FCC has adopted requirements that cellular broadband PCS and certain Specialized Mobile Radio SMR licensees implement 911 and E911 services. One of the requirements is that wireless carriers and cell phone manufacturers provide the capability not just to deliver 911 calls to emergency dispatchers or Public Safety Answering Points PSAPs but also to automatically identify to the PSAPs the location from which a wireless call is being made. The 911 Act s requirements were divided into two phases. Phase I required wireless carriers to deliver the telephone number of the handset originating an E911 call and the location of the cell site or base station receiving the E911 call to the PSAPS. Phase II requires carriers to deliver more specific latitude and longitude location information known as Automatic Location Identification ALI to the PSAPs. Full implementation of this phase is expected by the end of 2005 but by Dec. 31 2002 all new digital handsets are to be activated by wireless carriers are to be ALI capable.

A variety of techniques e.g. GPS Angle of Arrival Time Difference of Arrival and others are currently being used to implement ALI capabilities. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 388 147 and 5 479 482 to Grimes teach combining a cellular telephone and a GPS receiver so that the phone s approximate physical location i.e. its approximate geocoordinates can be reported as part of the emergency call. Alternatives to GPS exist but every technique for enabling ALI results from measuring the cellular device s position by reference to established points whose positions are known. The cellular device s location is estimated to lie at the best intersections in a least squares or maximum likelihood sense since all location measurements have random errors of curves whose shapes and locations are determined by the particular technique utilized.

Thus a need exists for assisting NS EP personnel in acquiring PAS. A system that accomplishes this objective by leveraging existing technological architectures would be quite useful.

Additionally cell congestion causes blocking problems for the general population of wireless subscribers. What is needed is a way for any user of a mobile wireless system to acquire access to cellular services when the cell in which the user is currently located is congested. Such a system may serve to alleviate cell congestion by redistribution of cell loading to less congested cells.

In one aspect the present invention is directed to a telecommunications system for and method of providing cellular priority access service to a NS EP user. The invention provides a plurality of devices each having an embedded wireless ad hoc networking WAHN logic module wherein the plurality of devices includes the user s cellular device and at least one candidate cellular device. The user s cellular device and the one or more candidate cellular device s each have embedded cell logic modules and are E911 enabled i.e. they are capable of receiving the information needed to determine their own longitudinal and latitudinal positions under the ALI framework.

If the user requests PAS while located in a congested cell the devices operate to provide the user with one or more of the following indications the direction s to one or more free or less congested candidate cells the distance s to the candidate cell s the cell loading status of the candidate cell s and or the radio resource other frequency code service provider or private network that can be utilized in the candidate cell s . This is accomplished through the interaction of the WAHN logic modules and the cell logic modules. Specifically the cell logic modules operate to receive cell congestion cell loading or radio resource information of the cell in which they are presently located which is being transmitted to them over a control channel by a base station BS . The cell logic module of each cellular device transfers the received cell congestion cell loading or radio resource as well as ALI information to a corresponding WAHN logic module in the same cellular device. Through protocols described below the WAHN logic module of the user s cellular device initiates the creation of a scatternet among the WAHN logic modules of the plurality of devices. The scatternet is grown for a predetermined time interval or until it includes at least one candidate cellular device whose WAHN logic module is indicating existence of a free cell a less congested cell than the cell in which the user is located or alternative radio resources. The cell location cell loading status and radio resource information from the at least one candidate cellular device is gathered and transmitted to the WAHN logic module of the user s cellular device. There it is received and if needed utilized in computing topological information that is then communicated to the cell logic module of the user s cellular device. The user s cell logic module then provides through an interface a message e.g. visual or audial to the user that is reflective of the computed topological information that may be utilized in determining whether to acquire the desired PAS by moving to another cell based on the distance and cell loading status or whether to stay at the same location and acquire access to the alternative radio resource using the radio resource information provided.

In a preferred embodiment the user is preferably a member of a NS EP organization who has been assigned a certain PAS priority class or level consistent with the FCC s PAS framework. In certain embodiments the method described above further comprises the step of temporarily blocking the public users from making cellular calls. This may be implemented in a manner similar to what has been done in extent cellular networks by blocking a user s access to the cellular network based on the user s class. For example a class 1 user can always send his dialed string to the cellular network. However a class 2 user may be blocked 50 of the time. The FCC s PAS framework categorizes priority users into five classes. Accordingly even among priority users not all capacity in a cell may be available to NS EP users of a lower class and there may additionally be an upper threshold for any NS EP usage per cell. As a result it is crucial for NS EP users to be evenly spread among cells to achieve the optimal performance.

In another embodiment the present invention provides a system and method through which a public non NS EP user may acquire access to a free or less congested cell. Using a similar approach the public user may obtain topological information relating to nearby cells with better grade of service and determine whether to move to one of them or simply wait for the cell in which the user is currently located becomes free or less congested. A means for determining whether the user should be granted access to the system based upon the user s authorization or priority class and or upon the existence of emergency usage conditions may optionally be employed.

In another embodiment the present invention provides a system for and method of redistributing public user cell loading evenly among cells thereby optimizing the cellular network capacity. The plurality of devices described above is used in this embodiment to determine which cell or cells are less congested and therefore better able to provide access to a requesting user. Once those cells are determined the topological information provided to the requesting user from the cell logic module of his cellular device take the form of an instruction to the requesting user to proceed in a particular direction to the less congested cell where the desired access will be granted.

In another embodiment the present invention provides a system and method through which a user without any cellular coverage may acquire access to a cell with coverage. In this embodiment the user s cellular device may not have the benefit of knowing its own precise geographic coordinates but approximate topological guidance information may yet be computed from the geographic coordinates of the WAHN logic modules along the path from the one or more candidate devices to the WAHN device nearest to the user. Also if alternative radio resources are available in the cell in which the user is located no topological guidance information is required.

In yet another embodiment the present invention provides a telecommunications system with an ad hoc networking capability useful in forming priority scatternets. Priority users can utilize the scatternet to communicate with other priority users as peer to peer communication. Specialized Bluetooth profiles need to be defined for these usages. Due to the scatternet formation protocol used messages between the priority users are routed via a route with minimum hop count.

As used herein the term cellular device refers to cellular telephony equipment in communication with a cellular network including phones personal digital or data assistants and other PCS equipment. The term cell is used below to refer to one or more specific geographic regions covered by a base station in the cellular network. The terms free or free cell as used below describe cellular service conditions that have no congestion little congestion or substantially less congestion when compared to the cellular service conditions of the cell a user is presently occupying.

Preferred embodiments of the invention will now be described with reference to the accompanying drawings.

The present invention utilizes the strength of two separate technologies cellular and ad hoc networking. A centralized scheme is utilized to send cell congestion cell loading or radio resource information to each cell phone using the existing cellular technology. A distributed scheme is adopted using a wireless ad hoc networking technology to interconnect all cellular devices of interest and route cell location cell congestion cell loading or radio resource information to a user. While much of the description that follows is in terms of the Bluetooth ad hoc networking protocol said description is not meant to be limiting. Artisans will appreciate that other wireless ad hoc networking technologies can be used alternatively and are within the scope of the present invention. The rationale for selecting the Bluetooth technology to perform ad hoc networking is that it is expected that Bluetooth will be embedded in every cell phone by the year 2003. In addition all Bluetooth devices are interoperable with each other. Another advantage of using Bluetooth for interconnecting cell phones is that cellular radio resources are not tied up since the cellular radio resource is especially precious when the cell is congested. Since Bluetooth s coverage range is limited 10 meter 100 meter the proposed approach is more valuable in an urban environment where microcells or picocells are deployed and the distance separation between cell phones is within the communication range of Bluetooth. Since the cells are not balanced in the current cellular network it is likely that a user will not have to travel far to find a less congested cell.

Referring to a cellular network in accordance with the invention is arranged in a conventional centralized architecture such as GSM. A first tier includes a number of service regions called cells shown as A C containing a number of communication nodes one of which in each cell is designated as a base station A C for that particular cell. The base stations A C provide cellular access within their cell to cellular devices e.g. phones PDAs etc. equipped with cell logic modules. A second tier is comprised of a backbone network formed of the base stations A C that enable communications between different cells through a mobile switch center . Communications between different cellular devices are accomplished via the base stations and or mobile switching center . Access to cellular service is typically controlled by a call admission controller located within mobile switching center . One of the functions of the admission controller is to check authorizations and priority levels of callers requesting access. The centralized architecture is further characterized by two different topologies namely tree topology and ring topology both of which are within the scope of the present invention. Each of the base stations A C transmits audio data over traffic channels and control information over control channels . Among the information transmitted to the cellular devices in a particular cell from one of the base stations A C of that cell over the control channels is cell loading information corresponding to that cell. Also appearing in the figure is a GPS satellite broadcasting geolocational information over all of the cells. GPS satellite is an optional part of the inventive system in that the GPS information is used by some E911 enabled devices to provide Automatic Location Information ALI but not all E911 enabled devices.

Referring to in contrast to the centralized architecture a wireless distributed ad hoc network comprised of a plurality of devices equipped with wireless ad hoc network WAHN logic modules requires no base station. Two such WAHNs operating at or near the 2.4 2.5 GHz ISM industrial scientific and medical band are described by the Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 standards. This ISM band is available world wide. The 802.11 standard focuses on the MAC medium access control protocol and physical layer protocol for ad hoc networks. The Bluetooth wireless technology is an industry based specification for providing short range radio links between virtually any digital device.

The devices of WAHN are capable of performing switching and communicating directly with each other. The devices of WAHN includes cellular devices as described above as well as digital devices that may not be equipped with cellular logic modules which could include fixed and mobile computers and peripherals such as FAX machines printers and so on. As stated each device or node of WAHN is capable of forming wireless links to one another without the intervention of the base stations A C.

A method of using the cellular network and WAHN to provide PAS to priority users e.g. NS EP personnel of a cellular device having a cell logic module and a WAHN logic module as shown in will be described with the aid of the flowchart illustrated in and the telecommunications network illustrated in .

In step the user attempts to place a call through the base station not shown corresponding to the cell B in which he is presently located.

In step a determination is made whether the request for cellular service is to be granted. This may simply be a matter of available channels or optionally may additionally be a function of the priority level of the user if one is assigned. A BS may in certain embodiments query a home location register database using the user s cellular number as a key in retrieving the user s associated priority level when an emergency situation occurs. The determination is made preferably by call admission controller not shown . The cell logic module determines whether access was granted or not.

In step if a channel is available for the user the cellular call is established and the process ends.

In step the user may invoke a scatternet formation protocol and information gathering protocol that will find and provide directions to a free or less congested cell or an indication of alternative resources available to the user of cellular device in B. Invocation of these protocols may be either a manual operation effected by the pressing of a button or alternatively may be an automatic process initiated upon call blocking. In step the scatternet formation protocol operates preferably for a predetermined time interval to create a scatternet among the devices equipped with WAHN logic modules in an attempt to find one or more candidate cellular devices that are able to provide alternative resources or whose corresponding cell e.g. cells A of C is less congested than cell B.

In step if no candidate cellular devices and thus less congested cells or alternative resources are found in a predetermined time interval then a message indicating this fact is transferred between the WAHN logic module and cell logic module of the user s cellular device . The cell logic module then provides an indication via interface which in the illustration of is a controller for liquid crystal display LCD to the user of the failure.

In step if one or more candidate devices with a less congested corresponding cell or available alternative resources are found in the predetermined time interval then WAHN information gathering protocol is initiated to collect information about the less congested cell or alternative resource. The collected information is relayed preferably through a minimum hop WAHN route back to the user s cellular device where it is used in computing topological information for display to the user. With this information the user requesting PAS can make a determination which less congested cell e.g. cell A or C to proceed to or whether to remain in his current cell B and acquire the alternative resource. Such alternative radio resources may comprise one or more alternative frequencies codes service providers or private networks that can be utilized.

The scatternet formation protocol and information gathering protocol will now be more fully described in the context of Bluetooth WAHN technology.

As illustrated in the base stations A C not shown broadcast congestion and cell loading status data to cellular devices in their respective cells A C where it is received by corresponding cell logic modules embedded in each of the cellular devices . An exemplary cell logic module and WAHN logic module are depicted in . The congestion data could be a simple one bit implementation i.e. either congestion or no congestion. Cell loading data typically is defined in terms of the percentage of the cell capacity being used. The cell logic modules also acquire their own ALI geolocational coordinates through whatever technology is employed to implement the requirements of the E911 Act discussed above. The cell logic modules of each cellular device pass their corresponding ALI data and cell congestion cell loading or alternative radio resource data to the Bluetooth logic module embedded in the same cellular device in which the particular cell logic module is embedded. The Bluetooth logic modules makes this data available to other Bluetooth devices that are or will be connected via a scatternet. This data will be used in the scatternet formation protocol and information gathering protocol .

In step the priority Bluetooth device i.e. the Bluetooth logic module of the priority user s cellular device performs an INQUIRY procedure to initiate the formation of a priority piconet with neighboring Bluetooth devices . Bluetooth device will become the master of a priority piconet and neighboring devices are its slaves. The INQUIRY procedure is used when the nearby Bluetooth devices are unknown to priority Bluetooth device . Each of the nearby Bluetooth devices periodically performs an INQUIRY SCAN procedure by default. Once the priority master Bluetooth device receives INQUIRY RESPONSE messages from the neighboring Bluetooth devices the master commences a PAGE procedure for frequency hop synchronization with the neighboring Bluetooth devices . The neighboring Bluetooth devices each perform PAGE SCAN procedures. Once the priority master Bluetooth device and the neighboring devices exchange PAGE RESPONSE messages a first layer of the priority piconet is formed having neighboring devices as members of the piconet This is illustrated by solid lines emanating from the priority master Bluetooth device leading to neighboring devices .

In step once the first layer of scatternet which initially is comprised of only priority piconet is built the priority Bluetooth device broadcasts a FIND FREE CELLS message to all the members in the scatternet to find one or more candidate devices whose cell congesting and loading data indicates a corresponding free or less congested cell or available alternative resources. The FIND FREE CELL message as illustrated in includes a master Bluetooth unique identification ID a sequence number in case multiple Bluetooth packets are required to convey the resource information and a time stamp reflecting when the message was sent to which is appended a routing list comprised of one or more unique IDs of each Bluetooth device through which it traverses. The routing list will be used in information gathering protocol . Each Bluetooth device has a globally unique 48 bit IEEE 802 address. This address called the Bluetooth Device Address BD ADDR is assigned when the Bluetooth unit is manufactured and it is never changed. In preferred embodiments the unique IDs comprise either the BD ADDR or a cellular phone ID however other identification schemes may be employed

In step a determination is made whether a candidate cellular device with a less congested cell or available resources is located.

In step a determination is made whether the predetermined time interval allotted for finding a free cell or alternative available resources has timed out. This step is optional in that priority Bluetooth device could simply continue seeking candidate cells until one or more are found i.e. until it receives a FREE CELL FOUND message . Alternatively if the time interval has been exceeded priority Bluetooth device may in step declare that no less congested cells or no alternative radio resource can be found. The predetermined time interval preferably takes into account the time required for the FIND FREE CELLS message to propagate to all devices in the scatternet and for the FREE CELL FOUND message to be returned.

If no free cells or alternative radio resource are found and the time interval has not run out processing continues to step wherein priority Bluetooth device instructs the members of priority piconet to perform INQUIRY procedures in order to extend the range of the priority piconet by connecting to other in range public Bluetooth devices to form a scatternet . Neighboring devices become masters of the individual piconets they construct. A second layer or tier of interconnected piconets i.e. scatternet is formed as illustrated in by the dotted lines connecting neighboring devices of the priority piconet to the more distant devices that they bring into the scatternet. The priority Bluetooth device is both the master of the priority piconet and the extended scatternet . The priority scatternet formation is controlled by the master Bluetooth device thus the scatternet will continue to grow its size unless the master Bluetooth device instructs it not to do so.

In step the priority Bluetooth device again broadcasts a FIND FREE CELLS message. Once each member in the first layer of the scatternet neighboring devices receives the message it first checks to see whether its cell loading status is marked cell free or if it has available alternative resources. If not each first layer member will forward the message to the devices in the extended layer it created. Each first layer member neighboring devices also keeps a local copy of the FIND FREE CELL message so that when it receives another copy of the same FIND FREE CELL message the copy of message may be discarded or ignored. In order to forward the FIND FREE CELL message to the devices in the second layer and beyond inter piconet scheduling is required. The priority Bluetooth device will place the first layer neighboring devices in HOLD mode for a number of slots. During this HOLD period neighboring devices can become masters of their own piconet to communicate with the respective devices in the second layer. In subsequent iterations the same process is used to extend the scatternet and query for free cells beyond the second layer i.e. the first layer neighboring devices acting as masters of their own piconets can in turn put the devices in HOLD mode for a number of slots. And the same procedure continues.

The process then returns to step wherein another determination whether candidate cells were found is made.

If the cell loading status data of a Bluetooth device that has received a FIND FREE CELLS message indicates that a free cell or alternative resources do exist the process transits to the information gathering protocol wherein that candidate device will return a FREE CELL FOUND message. Candidate devices are necessarily only devices that have embedded in them both cell logic modules and WAHN logic modules because the cell loading or alternative radio resource information is only available to such devices. In the scatternet illustrated in the set of devices eligible to be candidate devices are devices and based on potentially available alternative resources in cell B and devices and based either on potentially available alternative resources or on their reflecting less congestion in cells A and C. Once a route has been discovered between the priority Bluetooth device and one or more candidate devices thus also has been discovered a means for the priority user to gain access to the desired cellular service.

In step a candidate device that is located in a free cell receives a FIND FREE CELLS message returns a FREE CELL FOUND message such as shown in utilizing the address routing list appended to the FIND FREE CELLS message . In effect a dynamic source routing protocol is employed whereby the addresses of all the hops used in routing are listed in the FREE CELL FOUND message. A discussion of routing methods can be found in P. Bhagwat et al. A Routing Vector Method RVM for Routing in Bluetooth Scatternets 61999 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. Also included in FREE CELL FOUND message are an identification of the cell in which the candidate device is locate cell loading data for that candidate cell the ALI data for that particular candidate device the master Bluetooth ID of the priority Bluetooth device to which the candidate device is responding a hop counter initially set to zero a sequence number and a time stamp reflective of the instant that the FREE CELL FOUND message was sent. A one slot Bluetooth packet can accommodate 27 bytes of payload information. If one packet is insufficient multiple packets identified by their sequence numbers may be employed.

In step Bluetooth devices located in the route between the priority Bluetooth device and the one or more candidate devices receive FREE CELL FOUND message examine addresses on appended routing list and forward the message to the next hop indicated on the routing list . When forwarding the FREE CELL FOUND message to the next Bluetooth device listed in routing list the relaying Bluetooth devices increment the hop counter by one to indicate that they are one more hop away from the priority Bluetooth device . A relaying Bluetooth device is defined as a device that interconnects two piconets. Each relaying Bluetooth device keeps a copy of the FREE CELL FOUND message . If the relaying device receives another copy of the same FREE CELL FOUND message the message can be discarded.

In step when the priority Bluetooth device receives one or more FREE CELL FOUND messages it first checks whether the message is responding to its own FIND FREE CELLS message by matching its own Bluetooth ID with the master Bluetooth ID in the response message.

In step if the ID s match the priority Bluetooth device can use the ALI data reported in the FREE CELL FOUND message to calculate topological information comprising the distance and the direction to reach each candidate device. Assuming that the location of the priority Bluetooth device is xand y and that the location of a candidate device is x y then the direction to the candidate device and thus to the free cell or available resource may be calculated per the formula Azimuth tan 

and the distance to the candidate device free cell or available resource may be calculated per the formula Distance .

In step the calculated directional information free cell identification and free cell loading data or alternative radio resource and time stamp are communicated from the Bluetooth logic module of the user s cellular device to its corresponding cell logic module . The Bluetooth logic and cell logic modules communicate with each other via a Application Programming Interface wherein commands and data are used to accomplish the tasks described herein. The cell logic module then provides a message through an interface that can be visual or audial or any other effective means to the user of the priority cellular device . The message may include the following information a list of candidate free cells or alternative radio resource the corresponding cell loading status of each of the candidate cells directional information to the respective candidate cells and a time indicating how current the information being provided is based upon time stamp . For example a visual display of a cellular phone may reflect results as illustrated in . The time elapsed data shown on the display is the difference between the time stamp and the current time when the display is being viewed.

As discussed above it is also possible that there are not enough Bluetooth devices available to form a scatternet or that no free cells could be located in the predetermined time interval. In this case a message reflecting as much may be displayed with or without an indication of the current cell loading of the cell in which the user is presently located.

This information as mentioned above enables a user requesting PAS to make a determination which less congested candidate cell to proceed to or whether to remain in his current cell and acquire the alternative resource. The priority user can update the display on cellular phone by executing the same procedure again such that the priority user can always get the most recent information on cell loading status.

Although the systems and methods described above were developed for NS EP users this proposal can also be utilized by the general public.

For example the message provided to a public user requesting cellular service can take the form of an instruction to move to a new cell location before access will be granted. The instruction may be given for the purpose of cell load balancing and or quality of service reasons the public user may obtain topological information relating to nearby cells with better grade of service and determine whether to move to one of them or simply wait for the cell in which the user is currently located becomes free or less congested . Re distributing public user cell loading evenly among cells can increase a cellular network s capacity. As a result the Applicants propose to allow the general public to utilize this inventive system during non emergency situations. During emergency situations only priority NS EP users will be allowed to activate this feature.

To ensure compliance a means for granting access to the system based upon a user s authorization or priority class and or upon the existence of emergency usage conditions may optionally be employed. Existing priority access technologies may be leveraged for this purpose. For example GSM enhanced multi level precedence and preemption EMLPP standards support precedence and preemption. Precedence involves the assignment of a priority level to a user. EMLPP supports a maximum of 7 priority levels.

With a slight modification the systems and methods described above can also be used in establishing peer to peer communications between priority users. In this case a first priority user is connected to a second priority user by treating the second priority user as analogous to the Bluetooth device whose cell is marked free or less congested. The routing procedure for the first priority user s Bluetooth device to reach the target Bluetooth device is simply to route messages e.g. SMS via intervening Bluetooth devices utilizing a least hop count route.

Other embodiments of the invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art from a consideration of the specification or practice of the invention disclosed herein. As stated above a specific implementation of the WAHN is described in terms of Bluetooth technology but other embodiments also within the scope of the present invention. It is intended that the specification and examples be considered as exemplary only with the true scope and spirit of the invention being indicated by the following claims.

