---

title: Dynamic utilization of condensing metadata
abstract: Dynamic utilization of condensing metadata is enabled by condensing information being communicated to/from a mobile device. The communication exchange occurs between a mobile device and an internet service, and it involves a mobile internet service proxy. The information is condensed responsive to condensing metadata and uncondensed using the condensing metadata. In an example embodiment, condensing metadata comprises encoding metadata for tags and compression metadata for other data. In a first described implementation, a mobile internet service proxy effectuates a static installation of condensing metadata to the mobile device from the internet service. In a second described implementation, the internet service lacks condensing metadata. The mobile internet service proxy therefore retrieves the schema defining the relevant information and dynamically generates condensing metadata. This dynamically-generated condensing metadata is copied to the mobile device so that condensed data may be communicated at least between the mobile device and the mobile internet service proxy.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08667179&OS=08667179&RS=08667179
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 08667179
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050429
---
This disclosure relates in general to accessing internet services with a mobile device and in particular by way of example but not limitation to dynamically utilizing condensing metadata when accessing internet services with a mobile device.

Communication networks are inherently bandwidth limited. This is especially true for wireless communication networks that operate using a finite and often governmentally limited amount of the electromagnetic spectrum. The capacity of wireless communication networks has been effectively expanded by implementing cellular wireless networks. Cellular wireless networks divide an area geographically into cells to enable the reuse of spectrum resources in different cells.

The capacity of wireless communication has been expanded in other manners as well. For example digital packetization and time division has enabled a given spectrum band to be more efficiently used from a temporal perspective by enabling multiple mobile devices to use the same spectrum in different time slots. Code division spread spectrum technology has enabled temporally simultaneous spectrum sharing using mobile devices that employ different codes. Other approaches have also been utilized to increase the efficiency of spectrum use.

These various approaches have been responsible in part for the proliferation of different wireless standards and communication protocols. The different standards and communication protocols have created a very heterogeneous wireless environment. Furthermore in addition to different standards being developed and adopted around the world multiple generations of wireless standards and protocols are currently in use. Moreover there are different wireless service providers and multiple mobile device manufacturers that add to the diversity of existing wireless communication parameters that can impact internet related communications in the context of wireless networks.

Thus two important facets of wireless communication are i bandwidth limitations are a relevant factor to consider when interfacing with wireless networks and ii many different wireless standards and protocols may be encountered during wireless network communications. Unfortunately not only is the former partly responsible for begetting the latter but the latter exacerbates attempts to mitigate the effects of the former. Accordingly there is a need for schemes mechanisms techniques etc. that can facilitate communication bandwidth reduction with respect to wireless networks while being capable of accommodating various wireless network standards and communication protocols.

Dynamic utilization of condensing metadata is enabled by condensing information being communicated to from a mobile device. The overall communication exchange occurs between a mobile device and an internet service but it can also involve a mobile internet service proxy. The information being communicated is condensed responsive to condensing metadata and uncondensed using the condensing metadata. In an example embodiment condensing metadata comprises encoding metadata for tag portions of the information and compression metadata for other data portions of the information.

In a first example described implementation a mobile internet service proxy effectuates a static installation of condensing metadata to the mobile device from the internet service. In a second example described implementation the internet service lacks condensing metadata. The mobile internet service proxy therefore retrieves from the internet service the schema defining the organization structure formatting etc. of the information. The mobile internet service proxy dynamically generates condensing metadata based on the schema. This dynamically generated condensing metadata is copied to the mobile device so that condensed data may be communicated at least between the mobile device and the mobile internet service proxy along the communication path toward from the internet service.

Other method system approach apparatus device media procedure API arrangement etc. implementations are described herein.

As described generally herein above there are inherent constraints imposed by wireless wide area networks WANs e.g. GPRS EDGE 1xRTT 1xEVDO UMTS etc. and mobile devices that operate in conjunction with them. Consequently it can be extremely challenging to deliver rich web services to embedded and other mobile applications without having a tight binding between the client and server deployments. This limits extensibility reduces flexibility and prevents rapid development of new services to meet market demands. To overcome these challenges there is a need for schemes mechanisms techniques etc. that not only efficiently compress internet service protocols but that also enable service extensions to be seamlessly integrated into existing internet service protocols.

Current mobile devices interact with internet services by communicating tightly with a specific service provider to enable an internet service for use by the end user. One reason for the close coupling is that the client mobile device usually needs to understand the compression if any used by the service provider and any proprietary or other special extensions made by the service provider to the standard internet service protocols.

In an example described implementation a mobile internet service proxy is employed. The mobile internet service proxy selectively interfaces with the client mobile device and then queries the internet service for the compression decompression or more generally condensation technique of the extensible markup language XML or other formatting language type or internet protocol used by the internet service. The condensation technique is then used by the client mobile device to directly or by the mobile internet service proxy to dynamically perform condensation on behalf of the client mobile device. Specifically for the latter embodiment the mobile internet service proxy copies the schema of the internet service generates corresponding condensing metadata e.g. encoding metadata and or compression metadata and communicates the condensing metadata to a mobile application at the client mobile device. The mobile application can then access the internet service through the mobile internet service proxy using a dynamically encoded and compressed internet service protocol.

To facilitate understanding this description is separated into four sections in addition to this Introduction section. A first section references and is entitled Example Environments for Dynamic Utilization of Condensing Metadata . A second section references and is entitled Example Static Installation Implementations for Dynamic Utilization of Condensing Metadata . A third section references and is entitled Example Dynamic Generation Implementations for Dynamic Utilization of Condensing Metadata . There is also a fourth section that references and is entitled Example Operating Environment for Computer or Other Device .

As illustrated telecommunications network environment is shown to include one or more wireless telecommunications networks . However it may also include one or more wired telecommunications networks. Internet environment is shown to include at least one internet . Wireless telecommunications network can communicate with internet via one or more gateways . A single gateway can enable communication between wireless telecommunications network and internet or multiple gateways may be employed. In either case such gateway s may be part of wireless telecommunications network internet both networks or neither network from a technological and or a service provider perspective.

In a described implementation internet environment includes an internet service IS that is coupled to including being a part of internet . In a real world setting multiple such internet services can be and most likely are coupled to internet . Internet service may be any general internet service such as personal computer based applications embedded applications so called web services some combination thereof and so forth. Internet service enables access to information in response to or as a result of some kind of request. Such requests include specific requests transaction related requests generally inquiries some combination thereof and so forth.

Examples of internet services include but are not limited to database accessing scheduling information accessing email sending receiving product service ordering web site information retrieval game playing and online game data managing and organizing social networking data searching and retrieving contact list managing group membership managing media metadata e.g. music album information movie production and cast information etc. managing and organizing some combination thereof and so forth. Examples of information include but are not limited to information from a database entry calendar appointment information an email and or an attachment of an email invoice information weather or news information game information social information e.g. social networks search engine information e.g. indexed data search history etc. contact information group information media metadata data catalogues some combination thereof and so forth.

Telecommunications network environment includes a mobile device that is coupled to wireless telecommunications network via a wireless communication link . In a real world setting multiple such mobile devices can be and most likely are being supported by wireless telecommunications network . Mobile device typically comprises a mobile telephone a personal digital assistant PDA or another hand held wireless device. Nevertheless mobile device may alternatively comprise any device having a wireless communication capability. Mobile device includes a mobile application . Mobile application is capable of enabling a user of mobile device to access internet service .

The access of internet service by mobile application entails a communication flow from mobile device to wireless telecommunications network via wireless link and from wireless telecommunications network to internet via at least one gateway . The communication flow also extends to internet service which is coupled to internet .

Thus the providing of internet service to a user of mobile device involves communications across wireless communications link . Unfortunately because communications link is wireless it is a particularly bandwidth limited channel . Accordingly the bandwidth limited channel of wireless communication link can be better utilized if internet services communications propagating thereon are condensed in order to reduce bandwidth consumption.

As illustrated example mechanism also includes a mobile internet service proxy . In a described implementation mobile internet service proxy may be located anywhere along a communication path stretching between mobile device and internet service from wireless telecommunications network to internet service . For example mobile internet service proxy may be located at a node operated by a telecommunications entity or an internet related entity. The node may be for routing for providing a gateway for providing another service dedicated to being a mobile internet service proxy some combination thereof and so forth. Additionally the node may be located within wireless telecommunications network internet or both or it may be distributed anywhere along the communications path.

Mobile device includes mobile application . Mobile application includes a condenser that is capable of condensing and uncondensing communications including communications received wirelessly via communications link . As is described further herein below mobile application may be shipped with mobile device or subsequently downloaded and installed to mobile device . In either case mobile application may inherently include condenser functionality or have a capability to utilize a condenser after one has been loaded and installed. In the example used to describe mechanism mobile application initially lacks condensing metadata as is indicated by the block formed from dashed lines.

Internet service includes in addition to information a condenser and condensing metadata . Specifically internet service includes original condensing metadata O . In a described implementation condensing metadata includes encoding metadata and compression metadata . However condensing metadata may alternatively be comprised of fewer or more and or of different types of metadata. Typically information is organized structured and or formatted in accordance with a schema not explicitly shown in . The original of condensing metadata O can be derived fully or partially from the schema using a manual approach e.g. by the developer a programmatic approach e.g. by development tools or similar and so forth. Metadata O may be stored in the same file as the schema or in a separate file.

In operation generally internet service applies condenser to condense information responsive to condensing metadata O . Specifically but by way of example only information is condensed responsive to condensing metadata i by encoding the e.g. extensible markup language XML tags of information responsive to encoding metadata and ii by compressing the associated element attribute data of information responsive to compression metadata . Information may be condensed in other alternative manners such as by compressing the entirety of information .

As illustrated mobile internet service proxy is capable of communicating with mobile device via a communications channel B and with internet service via a communications channel A . These communication channels A and B are formed from the various communication components described herein above with reference to in dependence on the location of mobile internet service proxy . For example if mobile internet service proxy is located within internet then communications channel B may comprise wireless communications link wireless telecommunications network gateway and part of internet . Communications channel A may thus comprise part of internet .

In a described implementation mobile internet service proxy includes a condensing metadata provider . Condensing metadata provider includes an internet service interrogator . Internet service interrogator is adapted to dynamically interrogate internet service to determine if it has condensing metadata O . Condensing metadata provider is adapted to provide condensing metadata to mobile application .

In operation if internet service is dynamically determined by internet service interrogator to include original condensing metadata O then condensing metadata provider is capable of having it statically installed at mobile device as statically installed condensing metadata SI as indicated by static installation arrow . The static installation of condensing metadata may be effectuated by mobile internet service proxy so as to occur directly between mobile device and internet service . Alternatively mobile internet service proxy may first retrieve a copy of condensing metadata from internet service and then forward the copy of condensing metadata to mobile device to be installed for mobile application as statically installed condensing metadata SI .

Condenser of mobile device and or internet service may be versioned. Thus condenser may be capable of being dynamically replaced in order to support upgrade and or new installation scenarios. The new condenser in a general replacement scenario may be to change an existing condensing technology or to provide a new condensing technology. An example is described herein below with particular reference to .

At block proxy responsibility for a mobile device is acquired. For example proxy responsibility for mobile device may be acquired by mobile internet service proxy . The acquisition may occur as a result of a mobile device request an assignment by a telecommunications network provider a prompting after receipt of an initial communication request at an internet service some combination thereof and so forth.

At block a communication attempt with an internet service is detected. For example mobile internet service proxy may detect that mobile device is attempting to communicate with internet service . The detection may occur because mobile internet service proxy is monitoring outgoing communications from mobile device because mobile device is constrained to make internet related requests through mobile internet service proxy and so forth.

At block the internet service is interrogated with respect to condensing metadata. For example internet service interrogator of mobile internet service proxy may interrogate internet service to determine if internet service has condensing metadata . This interrogation may be general with regard to any condensing metadata or specific with regard to condensing metadata that is associated with requested information .

At block it is determined that the internet service has condensing metadata and that the mobile device lacks such condensing metadata. For example mobile internet service proxy may determine that internet service does have original condensing metadata O and that mobile application of mobile device lacks such condensing metadata . Mobile internet service proxy may already be aware of which condensing metadata algorithms mobile device includes or mobile internet service proxy may elect to interrogate mobile device with respect to condensing metadata.

At block condensing metadata is provided to the mobile device. For example condensing metadata provider of mobile internet service proxy may provide condensing metadata to mobile device from internet service for installation as statically installed condensing metadata SI . If mobile device is also lacking condenser mobile internet service proxy may also provide condenser to mobile application . Thereafter mobile application can engage in communications with internet service that are condensed responsive to condensing metadata and uncondensed using condensing metadata .

At block a request for information is sent toward an internet service by a mobile device. For example mobile device may send a request for information to internet service via communications channel either directly or via mobile internet service proxy . After a mobile device has statically installed condensing metadata SI it may optionally bypass mobile internet service proxy and directly communicate with internet service .

At block the request for information is received from the mobile device at the internet service. For example internet service may receive the request for information from mobile device .

At block the information is condensed responsive to condensing metadata. For example internet service may condense information responsive to condensing metadata by applying condenser . Blocks and illustrate actions for an example implementation of the action s of block . At block tags of the information are encoded. At block other data of the information is compressed. For instance tags of information may be encoded responsive to encoding metadata and data of information may be compressed responsive to compression metadata .

At block the condensed information is sent toward the mobile device. For example internet service may send a condensed version or format of information toward mobile device .

At block the condensed information is received from the internet service at the mobile device. For example mobile device may receive the condensed version of the requested information from internet service .

At block the condensed information is uncondensed using the condensing metadata. For example mobile device may uncondense the condensed version of information using statically installed condensing metadata SI . Blocks and illustrate actions for an example implementation of the action s of block . At block encoded tags of the condensed information are decoded. At block compressed data of the condensed information is decompressed. For instance encoded tags of a condensed version of information may be decoded using encoding metadata and compressed data of a condensed version of information may be decompressed using compression metadata .

At block the uncondensed information is utilized. For example mobile application of mobile device may utilize the requested information by storing it displaying it manipulating it some combination thereof and so forth.

Mobile device includes a mobile application and mobile application includes a condenser . Although the reference numerals differ for the mobile applications of for the sake of clarity mobile application and mobile application may have essentially similar functionality. After operation of mobile internet service proxy as described further herein below mobile device also includes a copy of dynamically generated condensing metadata C . It should be noted that condenser and or dynamically generated condensing metadata C may be separate from mobile application .

Internet service includes information and a schema . Specifically internet service includes the original of schema O . Schema O describes how information is organized structured and or formatted. Consequently schema O can be used to generate condensing metadata. However internet service does not include any condensing metadata at least none that is associated with the requested information .

In a described implementation mobile internet service proxy includes a condenser and a metadata generator . During operation mobile internet service proxy gains a copy of schema C and the original of dynamically generated condensing metadata O . Metadata generator is adapted to accept a schema and to programmatically produce dynamically generated condensing metadata.

Condenser is capable of condensing information that is received at mobile internet service proxy from internet service prior to its transmission to mobile device . Condenser is also capable of uncondensing condensed information after receiving it from mobile device and prior to sending it onward to internet service . Condensing or uncondensing by condenser entails application of condensing metadata to uncondensed information or condensed information respectively. In the example of mechanism however internet service does not provide any condensing metadata . Hence metadata generator is employed to produce the original of dynamically generated condensing metadata O based on a copy of schema C .

To implement the shunting aspect of mobile internet service proxy and to detour the communications between mobile device and internet service mobile device and internet service communicate with each other via mobile internet service proxy . Specifically mobile device and mobile internet service proxy communicate over communications channel B and mobile internet service proxy and internet service communicate over communications channel A .

Example realizations for communications channels A and B are described herein above. As another example if mobile internet service proxy is located within wireless telecommunications network then communications channel B may comprise wireless communications link and part of wireless telecommunications network . Communications channel A may thus comprise part of wireless telecommunications network gateway and internet . Regardless mobile internet service proxy is located such that it may engage in condensed communications with mobile device and engage in corresponding uncondensed versions of such communications with internet service .

In an example operation of mechanism mobile internet service proxy acquires proxy responsibility for mobile device . When mobile device attempts to communicate with internet service in the context of information mobile internet service proxy determines that internet service lacks condensing metadata that is associated with information .

Consequently mobile internet service proxy attains a copy of schema C over communications channel A as indicated by copy arrow . Metadata generator generates the original of dynamically generated condensing metadata O based on schema C . Dynamically generated condensing metadata may be produced programmatically by metadata generator .

A copy of dynamically generated condensing metadata C is provided to mobile device over communications channel B as indicated by copy arrow . If mobile application lacks the capability mobile internet service proxy can also provide condenser to mobile device . Condenser of mobile application is then empowered to uncondense the condensed information that is received from mobile internet service proxy using dynamically generated condensing metadata C . Condenser is also capable of condensing information which is to be sent to mobile internet service proxy responsive to dynamically generated condensing metadata C .

As described above with particular reference to condenser of mobile device and internet service may be versioned. Likewise condenser of mobile internet service proxy may be versioned. Moreover dynamically generated condensing metadata and condensing metadata of may also be versioned. This enables mobile device internet service and mobile internet service proxy to cache condensing metadata and for future usage.

The versioning allows mobile device internet service and mobile internet service proxy to remain synchronized with internet service capabilities and subsequently developed schemas as well as the condensing metadata used to support condensing and uncondensing. For example if mobile device detects that a version of dynamically generated condensing metadata C fails to match a version of schema O mobile device may ask mobile internet service proxy to generate new dynamically generated condensing metadata O after requesting a copy of new schema O . Alternatively mobile internet service proxy may make such a detection request the new schema O and forward new dynamically generated condensing metadata to mobile device without receiving instructions from mobile device .

Hence condensed communications between mobile device and mobile internet service proxy are enabled in which mobile internet service proxy acts an intermediary. As a communications intermediary mobile internet service proxy can enable bandwidth reducing condensed communications at least during the wireless communications link portion of the communication path between mobile device and internet service even when internet service lacks intrinsic condensing capabilities.

Mobile internet service proxy has acquired proxy responsibility for a mobile device . Mobile internet service proxy detects that the protocol being used by internet service is not compressed. It indicates to mobile application that it can dynamically condense the protocol. Mobile application may then opt to condense the protocol and indicate to mobile internet service proxy that it should dynamically condense the protocol.

At block it is determined or verified that the internet service lacks condensing metadata. For example after an inquiry or by consulting a stored table mobile internet service proxy may determine that internet service lacks condensing metadata at least with respect to associated information that is identified by a mobile device in an internet service access request.

At block a schema for the identified information is requested from the internet service. For example mobile internet service proxy may request from internet service over communications channel A a copy of schema that is associated with the identified information . At block the schema is received from the internet service. For example mobile internet service proxy may receive a copy of schema C from internet service over communications channel A .

At block condensing metadata is dynamically generated based on the schema. For example metadata generator of mobile internet service proxy may produce the original of dynamically generated condensing metadata O based on schema C . Blocks and illustrate actions for an example implementation of the action s of block . At block encoding metadata is generated. At block compression metadata is generated. For instance encoding metadata and compression metadata e.g. encoding metadata and compression metadata as shown in may be generated based on schema C by metadata generator .

At block the dynamically generated condensing metadata is sent to the mobile device. For example a copy of dynamically generated condensing metadata O may be transmitted over communications channel B to mobile device . At mobile device the copy of dynamically generated condensing metadata C may be loaded for use by mobile application . 

At block the condensing metadata is utilized in a communication exchange between the internet service and the mobile device. For example the dynamically generated condensing metadata C and O may be utilized in a communication exchange between internet service and mobile device . For instance mobile internet service proxy may act as an intermediary between mobile device and internet service such that those communications traveling the portion of the communication path between mobile device and internet service that extends between mobile device and mobile internet service proxy can be condensed.

Accordingly unidirectional or bidirectional communications between mobile device and internet service to the point along their communication path at which mobile internet service proxy is shunted may be condensed to reduce the bandwidth consumed by the communications. An example of a condensing operation between a mobile device and a mobile internet service proxy for communications between mobile device and an internet service is described further herein below with particular reference to .

At block the dynamically generated condensing metadata is optionally stored for future use. For example mobile internet service proxy may elect to store for future use dynamically generated condensing metadata O in association with internet service mobile device and or the related information . If mobile device or another mobile device subsequently requests information from internet service mobile internet service proxy may condense information without having to dynamically regenerate the condensing metadata O or re retrieve schema . Alternatively mobile internet service proxy may store schema so that dynamically generated condensing metadata may be re produced without repeating the retrieval. Versioning of condenser condensing metadata and and or schema can facilitate this caching and subsequent reuse of metadata and or schema C .

At block a request for information is sent to an internet service. For example mobile application of mobile device may send a request for information to internet service . As indicated by cloud the request may be sent from mobile device to internet service directly or by way of mobile internet service proxy .

At block the requested information in an uncondensed form is received from the internet service at the mobile internet service proxy. For example mobile internet service proxy may receive information in an uncondensed form from internet service via communications channel A .

At block the received information is condensed responsive to condensing metadata to produce condensed information. For example condenser of mobile internet service proxy may condense information responsive to dynamically generated condensing metadata O to produce a condensed version of information .

At block the condensed information is sent to the mobile device. For example mobile internet service proxy may send the condensed version of information to mobile device over communications channel B .

At block the condensed information is received at the mobile device from the mobile internet service proxy. For example the condensed version of information may be received from mobile internet service proxy at mobile device via communications channel B which includes wireless communications link .

At block the condensed information is uncondensed using condensing metadata. For example condenser of mobile application may uncondense the condensed version of information using dynamically generated condensing metadata C to reproduce information . At block the uncondensed information is utilized. For example mobile application may process store display modify some combination thereof etc. information .

It should be understood that the condensing and uncondensing principles described herein above with particular reference to e.g. with regard to communications between a mobile device and an internet service that each have condensing metadata are applicable to communications between a mobile device and a mobile internet service proxy that function with dynamically generated condensing metadata .

Additionally the actions of are described in the context of a request for information and a receipt of the requested information as partially indicated by block . However the information condensing with condensing metadata implementations that are described herein are also applicable in other context scenarios along with the communication flows thereof. By way of example only push pull scenarios may be supported. For instance a mobile device may first receive condensed information from an internet service possibly by way of a mobile internet service proxy . Afterwards mobile device may asynchronously request condensing metadata and optionally a condenser that are to be used to make the condensed information accessible by uncondensing it.

The devices actions aspects features functions procedures modules data structures components etc. of are illustrated in diagrams that are divided into multiple blocks. However the order interconnections interrelationships layout etc. in which are described and or shown is not intended to be construed as a limitation and any number of the blocks can be modified combined rearranged augmented omitted etc. in any manner to implement one or more systems methods devices procedures media apparatuses APIs arrangements etc. for dynamic utilization of condensing metadata. Furthermore although the description herein includes references to specific implementations including a general device of the illustrated and or described implementations can be implemented in any suitable hardware software firmware or combination thereof and using any information organization s schema format s condensing algorithm s network type s communication protocol s and or metadata generation approach es and so forth.

Example operating environment is only one example of an environment and is not intended to suggest any limitation as to the scope of use or functionality of the applicable device including computer network node entertainment device mobile appliance general electronic device etc. architectures. Neither should operating environment or the devices thereof be interpreted as having any dependency or requirement relating to any one or to any combination of components as illustrated in .

Additionally implementations for dynamic utilization of condensing metadata may be realized with numerous other general purpose or special purpose device including computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known devices systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use include but are not limited to personal computers server computers thin clients thick clients personal digital assistants PDAs or mobile telephones watches hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics video game machines game consoles portable or handheld gaming units network PCs videoconferencing equipment minicomputers mainframe computers network nodes distributed or multi processing computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices some combination thereof and so forth.

Implementations for dynamic utilization of condensing metadata may be described in the general context of processor executable instructions. Generally processor executable instructions include routines programs protocols objects functions interfaces components data structures etc. that perform and or enable particular tasks and or implement particular abstract data types. Realizations for dynamic utilization of condensing metadata as described in certain implementations herein may also be practiced in distributed processing environments where tasks are performed by remotely linked processing devices that are connected through a communications link and or network. Especially but not exclusively in a distributed computing environment processor executable instructions may be located in separate storage media executed by different processors and or propagated over transmission media.

Example operating environment includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer which may comprise any e.g. electronic device with computing processing capabilities. The components of computer may include but are not limited to one or more processors or processing units a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including processor to system memory .

Processors are not limited by the materials from which they are formed or the processing mechanisms employed therein. For example processors may be comprised of semiconductor s and or transistors e.g. electronic integrated circuits ICs . In such a context processor executable instructions may be electronically executable instructions. Alternatively the mechanisms of or for processors and thus of or for computer may include but are not limited to quantum computing optical computing mechanical computing e.g. using nanotechnology and so forth.

System bus represents one or more of any of many types of wired or wireless bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a point to point connection a switching fabric a peripheral bus an accelerated graphics port and a processor or local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example such architectures may include an Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus a Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus an Enhanced ISA EISA bus a Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus a Peripheral Component Interconnects PCI bus also known as a Mezzanine bus some combination thereof and so forth.

Computer typically includes a variety of processor accessible media. Such media may be any available media that is accessible by computer or another e.g. electronic device and it includes both volatile and non volatile media removable and non removable media and storage and transmission media.

System memory includes processor accessible storage media in the form of volatile memory such as random access memory RAM and or non volatile memory such as read only memory ROM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules instructions that are immediately accessible to and or being presently operated on by processing unit .

Computer may also include other removable non removable and or volatile non volatile storage media. By way of example illustrates a hard disk drive or disk drive array for reading from and writing to a typically non removable non volatile magnetic media not separately shown a magnetic disk drive for reading from and writing to a typically removable non volatile magnetic disk e.g. a floppy disk and an optical disk drive for reading from and or writing to a typically removable non volatile optical disk such as a CD DVD or other optical media. Hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are each connected to system bus by one or more storage media interfaces . Alternatively hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive may be connected to system bus by one or more other separate or combined interfaces not shown .

The disk drives and their associated processor accessible media provide non volatile storage of processor executable instructions such as data structures program modules and other data for computer . Although example computer illustrates a hard disk a removable magnetic disk and a removable optical disk it is to be appreciated that other types of processor accessible media may store instructions that are accessible by a device such as magnetic cassettes or other magnetic storage devices flash memory compact disks CDs digital versatile disks DVDs or other optical storage RAM ROM electrically erasable programmable read only memories EEPROM and so forth. Such media may also include so called special purpose or hard wired IC chips. In other words any processor accessible media may be utilized to realize the storage media of the example operating environment .

Any number of program modules or other units or sets of processor executable instructions may be stored on hard disk magnetic disk optical disk ROM and or RAM including by way of general example an operating system one or more application programs other program modules and program data . These processor executable instructions may include for example one or more of a mobile application a condenser information schema condensing metadata metadata generator mobile internet service proxy condensing metadata provider some combination thereof and so forth.

A user may enter commands and or information into computer via input devices such as a keyboard and a pointing device e.g. a mouse . Other input devices not shown specifically may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish serial port video camera scanner and or the like. These and other input devices are connected to processing unit via input output interfaces that are coupled to system bus . However input devices and or output devices may instead be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port a game port a universal serial bus USB port an infrared port an IEEE 1394 Firewire interface an IEEE 802.11 wireless interface a Bluetooth wireless interface and so forth.

A monitor view screen or other type of display device may also be connected to system bus via an interface such as a video adapter . Video adapter or another component may be or may include a graphics card for processing graphics intensive calculations and for handling demanding display requirements. Typically a graphics card includes a graphics processing unit GPU video RAM VRAM etc. to facilitate the expeditious display of graphics and performance of graphics operations. In addition to monitor other output peripheral devices may include components such as speakers not shown and a printer which may be connected to computer via input output interfaces .

Computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computing device . By way of example remote computing device may be a peripheral device a personal computer a portable computer e.g. laptop computer tablet computer PDA mobile station etc. a palm or pocket sized computer a watch a gaming device a server a router a network computer a peer device another network node or another device type as listed above and so forth. However remote computing device is illustrated as a portable computer that may include many or all of the elements and features described herein with respect to computer .

Logical connections between computer and remote computer are depicted as a local area network LAN and a general wide area network WAN . Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets the Internet fixed and mobile telephone networks ad hoc and infrastructure wireless networks mesh networks other wireless networks gaming networks some combination thereof and so forth. Such networks and logical and physical communications connections are additional examples of transmission media.

When implemented in a LAN networking environment computer is usually connected to LAN via a network interface or adapter . When implemented in a WAN networking environment computer typically includes a modem or other component for establishing communications over WAN . Modem which may be internal or external to computer may be connected to system bus via input output interfaces or any other appropriate mechanism s . It is to be appreciated that the illustrated network connections are examples and that other manners for establishing communication link s between computers and may be employed.

In a networked environment such as that illustrated with operating environment program modules or other instructions that are depicted relative to computer or portions thereof may be fully or partially stored in a remote media storage device. By way of example remote application programs reside on a memory component of remote computer but may be usable or otherwise accessible via computer . Also for purposes of illustration application programs and other processor executable instructions such as operating system are illustrated herein as discrete blocks but it is recognized that such programs components and other instructions reside at various times in different storage components of computing device and or remote computing device and are executed by processor s of computer and or those of remote computing device .

Although systems media devices methods procedures apparatuses techniques schemes approaches procedures arrangements and other implementations have been described in language specific to structural logical algorithmic and functional features and or diagrams it is to be understood that the invention defined in the appended claims is not necessarily limited to the specific features or diagrams described. Rather the specific features and diagrams are disclosed as exemplary forms of implementing the claimed invention.

