---

title: Time and location-based non-intrusive advertisements and informational messages
abstract: Systems and methods for sending and receiving ads from a server to a client device are disclosed. The ads can be sent based on the location of the client device and/or a designated time window. An ad manager on the client device can display, store and manage the received ads and activated additional applications based on the content of the ad.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08014762&OS=08014762&RS=08014762
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 08014762
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050331
---
The present invention generally relates to communications between remote computing devices and servers. More particularly the invention relates to the creation sending and viewing of messages across a network to a remote client device based on the location of the client device.

Advances in technology have resulted in smaller and more powerful personal computing devices. For example there currently exist a variety of portable personal computing devices including wireless computing devices such as portable wireless telephones personal digital assistants PDAs and paging devices that are each small lightweight and can be easily carried by users. More specifically the portable wireless telephones for example further include cellular telephones that communicate voice and data packets over wireless networks. Further many such cellular telephones are being manufactured with relatively large increases in computing capabilities and as such are becoming tantamount to small personal computers and hand held PDAs. However these smaller and more powerful personal computing devices are typically severely resource constrained. For example the screen size amount of available memory and file system space amount of input and output capabilities and processing capability may each be limited by the small size of the device and in particular the small size of the user input unit e.g. the keyboard. Because of such severe resource constraints it is often typically desirable for example to maintain a limited size and quantity of software applications and other information residing on such remote personal computing devices client devices .

Some of the personal computing devices utilize application programming interfaces APIs sometimes referred to as runtime environments and software platforms that are installed onto their local computer platform and which are used for example to simplify operations of such devices such as by providing generalized calls for device specific resources. Further some such APIs are also known to provide software developers the ability to create software applications that are fully executable on such devices. In addition some of such APIs are known to be operationally located between the computing device system software and the software applications such that the computing device computing functionality is made available to the software applications without requiring the software developer to have the specific computing device system source code. Further some APIs are known to provide mechanisms for secure communications between such personal devices i.e. clients and remote devices i.e. servers using secure cryptographic information.

Examples of such APIs some of which are discussed in more detail below include versions of the Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW developed by QUALCOMM Inc. of San Diego Calif. BREW can cooperate with a computing device s e.g. a wireless cellular phone operating system and can among other features provide interfaces to hardware features particularly found on personal computing devices. BREW can also provide these interfaces on such personal computing devices at a relatively low cost with respect to demands on device resources and with respect to the price paid by consumers for devices containing the BREW API. Additional features of BREW include its end to end software distribution platform that provides a variety of benefits for wireless service operators software developers and computing device consumers. At least one such currently available end to end software distribution platform includes logic distributed over a server client architecture where the server performs for example billing security and application distribution functionality and the client performs for example application execution security and user interface functionality.

In current wireless server client systems information can be transmitted to the wireless devices such as a cellular telephone by short messaging service SMS or other over the air methods known in the art. SMS messages typically result only in a disruptive notification e.g. popup window to the user before the message goes to a generic inbox or else the message may be temporarily displayed before being deleted. Conventional SMS messages do not take advantage of the advances in the enhanced computing and display capabilities of the wireless clients.

The foregoing description of the related art is merely intended to provide an overview of some of the known uses of APIs and as an introduction to the BREW platform which can be used in embodiments of the invention. However the invention is not to be construed as being limited to a specific implementation operating platform or environment.

Exemplary embodiments of the present invention are directed to a system and method for sending and receiving advertisements ads on a portable communication device.

At least one embodiment of the invention includes a wireless advertisement ad delivery system comprising a server configured to generate and transmit an ad containing location data that defines a geographic area and a client device including a carrier announcement manager CAM wherein the CAM is configured to receive the ad and wherein the ad is directed to the client device based on a location of the client device and the geographic area defined in the ad.

Another embodiment of the invention includes a method for wirelessly communicating advertisements comprising generating an ad containing location data identifying a client device to receive the ad based on the location data in the ad and a location of the client device and transmitting the ad to the client device.

Another embodiment of the invention includes a wireless client device comprising a user interface and a carrier announcement manager CAM configured to receive an ad containing location data that defines a targeted area and configured to store the ad on the client device if the client device is within the targeted area.

Another embodiment of the invention includes a method for wirelessly receiving an advertisement at a client device comprising receiving an ad containing location data determining a geographic location of the client device and determining if the client device is within a geographic area defined by the location data contained in the ad based on the geographic location of the client device.

Another embodiment of the invention includes a computer readable medium on which is stored a computer program for wirelessly communicating location based ads the computer program comprising instructions which when executed by at least one computing device causes the computing device to perform the process of generating an ad containing location data identifying a client device to receive the ad based on the location data in the ad and a geographic location of the client device and transmitting the ad to the client device.

Another embodiment of the invention includes a computer readable medium on which is stored a computer program for wirelessly communicating location based ads the computer program comprising instructions which when executed by at least one computing device causes the computing device to perform the process of receiving an ad containing location data at a client device determining a geographic location of the client device and determining if the client device is within a geographic area defined by the location data contained in the ad based on the geographic location of the client device.

Another embodiment of the invention includes a server for wirelessly communicating ads comprising means for generating an ad containing location data that defines a geographic area means for identifying a client device to receive the ad based on the geographic area and a geographic location of the client device and means for transmitting the ad to the client device.

Another embodiment of the invention includes a client device for wirelessly receiving ads comprising means for receiving an ad containing location data that defines a geographic area and means for storing the ad on the client device if a geographic position of the client device is within the geographic area.

Aspects of the invention are disclosed in the following description and related drawings directed to specific embodiments of the invention. Alternate embodiments may be devised without departing from the scope of the invention. Additionally well known elements of the invention will not be described in detail or will be omitted so as not to obscure the relevant details of the invention.

The word exemplary is used herein to mean serving as an example instance or illustration. Any embodiment described herein as exemplary is not necessarily to be construed as preferred or advantageous over other embodiments. Likewise the term embodiments of the invention does not require that all embodiments of the invention include the discussed feature advantage or mode of operation.

Further many embodiments are described in terms of sequences of actions to be performed by for example elements of a computing device. It will be recognized that various actions described herein can be performed by specific circuits e.g. application specific integrated circuits ASICs by program instructions being executed by one or more processors or by a combination of both. Additionally these sequence of actions described herein can be considered to be embodied entirely within any form of computer readable storage medium having stored therein a corresponding set of computer instructions that upon execution would cause an associated processor to perform the functionality described herein. Thus the various aspects of the invention may be embodied in a number of different forms all of which have been contemplated to be within the scope of the claimed subject matter. In addition for each of the embodiments described herein the corresponding form of any such embodiments may be described herein as for example logic configured to perform the described action.

One or more embodiments of the invention can be used in conjunction with a runtime environment e.g. API executing on the computing device. One such runtime environment API is Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW software previously discussed. However one or more embodiments of the invention can be used with other types of runtime environments APIs that for example operate to control the execution of applications on wireless client computing devices. Additionally API is intended to be construed broadly as a stand alone program or portion of a program that is used to achieve a particular function and can be used interchangeably with the terms application program routine instructions and applet .

The application download server is shown here on a network with other computer elements in communication with the wireless network . There can be a stand alone server and each server can provide separate services and processes to the client devices across the wireless network . There is preferably also at least one stored application database that holds the software applications that are downloadable by the wireless devices . However those skilled in the art will appreciate that the configuration illustrated in is merely exemplary. Accordingly embodiments of the invention can include one or more servers that can each perform all the described functions and contain all necessary hardware and software or can contain only selected functionality.

In a block diagram is shown that more fully illustrates system including the components of the wireless network and interrelation of the elements of the exemplary embodiments of the invention. System is merely exemplary and can include any system that allows remote client devices such as wireless client computing devices to communicate over the air between and among each other and or between and among components connected via a wireless network including without limitation wireless network carriers and or servers. The application download server and the stored application database along with any other servers such as ad dispatch server which are used to provide cellular telecommunication services communicate with a carrier network through a data link such as the Internet a secure LAN WAN or other network. In the embodiment shown a server can include the application download server ad dispatch server and the stored application database . However these servers can also be independent devices. The ad dispatch server can provide additional ad services based on the configuration of each of the client devices .

The carrier network controls messages typically sent as data packets sent to a messaging service controller MSC . The carrier network communicates with the MSC by a network the Internet and or a public switched telephone network PSTN . Typically the network or Internet connection between the carrier network and the MSC transfers data and the PSTN transfers voice information. The MSC can be connected to multiple base stations BTS . In a similar manner to the carrier network the MSC is typically connected to the BTS by a network the Internet and or PSTN for data transfer and or voice information. The BTS can broadcast data messages wirelessly to the client devices such as cellular telephone by short messaging service SMS UDP datagrams or other over the air OTA methods known in the art. The terms API direct directed SMS and BREW directed SMS are used interchangeably in the following description to indicate an OTA message that includes coding to launch an application resident on the client device. Likewise the terms advertisement ad announcement and message are used interchangeably to indicate the information and or instructions sent to a client device.

The client device here a wireless client computing device such as cellular telephone has a computer platform that can receive and execute software applications and or commands transmitted from the application download server ad dispatch server and or server . The computer platform can include an application specific integrated circuit ASIC or other processor microprocessor logic circuit or other data processing device. The ASIC or other processor executes the application programming interface API layer that interfaces with any resident programs in the memory of the wireless device. The memory can be comprised of read only or random access memory RAM and ROM EEPROM flash cards or any memory common to computer platforms. The API also includes a Carrier Announcement Manager module CAM containing logic configured to process special OTA e.g. SMS ads transmitted from the carrier network . The computer platform also includes a local database that can hold applications not actively used in memory . The local database is typically a flash memory cell but can be any secondary storage device as known in the art such as magnetic media EPROM optical media tape soft or hard disk or the like.

The wireless client computing device such as cellular telephone has installed on it or otherwise downloads one or more software applications such as games news stock monitors and the like. For example the cellular telephone may receive one or more software applications downloaded from the application download server . The software applications may be stored on the local database when not in use. The cellular telephone or other wireless computing device may upload resident applications stored on the local database to memory for execution on the API when so desired by the user or invoked by another API.

As used herein client device wireless device or client computing device includes for example one or more processing circuits executing resident configured logic where such computing devices include for example microprocessors digital signal processors DSPs microcontrollers portable wireless telephones personal digital assistants PDAs and paging devices or any suitable combination of hardware software and or firmware containing processors and logic configured to at least perform the operations described herein directed to ads communicated between a client device and a server. The client computing device can be serviced by at least one remote server with respect to at least such ads. Some examples of wireless computing devices which may be used in accordance with embodiments of the present invention include cellular telephones or other wireless communication units PDAs paging devices navigation devices e.g. GPS based systems handheld gaming devices music or video content download units and other like wireless communication devices.

The wireless communication between the client device and the BTS can be based on different technologies such as code division multiplexed access CDMA time division multiplexed access TDMA frequency division multiplexed access FDMA the global system for mobile communications GSM or other protocols that may be used in a wireless communications network or a data communications network. The data communication is typically between the client device BTS and MSC . The MSC can be connected to multiple data networks such as the carrier network PSTN the Internet a virtual private network and the like thus allowing the client device access to a broader communication network. As discussed in the foregoing in addition to voice transmission data can be transmitted to the client device via SMS or other OTA methods known in the art.

However in addition to delivering basic messages embodiments of the invention can utilize APIs to access the enhanced functionality of the client devices. Further these API directed SMS messages that allow access to underlying APIs can be separated from the conventional SMS messages and stored in a separate inbox to allow for the easy organization storage and retrieval of the relevant enhanced SMS messages. Accordingly one aspect of embodiments of the invention includes a specialized API for managing these enhanced SMS messages hereinafter referred to as a Carrier Announcement Manager CAM .

In an example of the system interaction with the Carrier Announcement Manager CAM architecture is illustrated. CAM can be installed into a client device also including a user interface e.g. display keypad . In at least one embodiment of the invention server e.g. residing on a carrier network can act as the Short Message Service Center SMSC server or other OTA system and ad server. However the SMSC server and ad server can also reside on independent devices and or networks. Server can send enhanced ad messages to the CAM using a variety of techniques. For example server can send an API directed SMS message that contains data to be inserted into a predefined HTML template that is already resident on the client device . The ad can then appear on the user interface e.g. the main screen of the client device without any action from the end user. Accordingly the client device can display an attractive and interactive ad using only the limited data sent in the SMS message. The SMS message can be text a URL or both. For example the SMS message can contain text and an associated URL that allows a user of the client device to connect to a specific site for additional information and or to purchase the article advertised. For example a one step feedback mechanism e.g. touchscreen pen input softkey hardkey or other programmed selection for response to the ad e.g. Buy Now can be provided that allows the user to connect to the specific site associated with the ad to purchase the article.

In another example the server e.g. using the ad dispatch server and SMSC server can send an API directed SMS message containing a URL and or code to perform a call back to server or other remote server. For example CAM can receive the message and call an appropriate API e.g. a browser to initiate the connection to the server and download an associated HTML page document e.g. advertisement to client device . After the HTML page has been downloaded the page can be displayed on the client device . In this embodiment the HTML callback allows server stored graphic advertising e.g. on the ad dispatch server to be placed on the main screen of the client device instead of a simple SMS text only advertisement. Those skilled in the art will appreciate that embodiments of the invention are not limited to HTML documents and that a document retrieved may include any format to convey the desired advertisement such as XML HDML WML XHTML and or graphic formats such as PNG GIF JPEG BMP and the like. This aspect of the API directed SMS for CAM advertisement placement can be referred to as an Announcement Download Request ADR . Unlike the pure SMS methods the ADR does not contain the ad itself. Instead its payload is a URL pointing to an ad located on the server e.g. contained in the ad dispatch server . CAM downloads the ad from the URL given by the ADR and can present it according to a predefined rule set. Separate HTML ads can be cached on the server for each client device type e.g. specific handsets PDAs and the like or the server can have an application that builds HTML ads on the fly tailoring the ad to the capabilities of the client device . In addition to the SMS and HTML ads ads can be of any type of text based message and or graphic based message e.g. pdf XML JPEG MPEG and the like .

Optionally the CAM can report the response to the ad e.g. the advertisement was discarded a purchase was made and the like to a server e.g. ad dispatch server . This ad response data can be accumulated and sent on a periodic basis or can be sent on each event. The ad dispatch server can then collate the reported responses e.g. from one or more client devices and send the collated responses e.g. using an XML feed back to server . The server can interpret the received data and utilize the data to design new advertisements based on the data received from ad dispatch server . Those skilled in the art will appreciate that ad dispatch server can be integrated into server or can be a plurality of separate servers that perform functionally as described. In addition to using the feedback for advertisement improvement the data supplied by CAM can be used for billing the advertisers e.g. based on number of times an ad is viewed clicked on and the like . Further ad viewing data can be tracked and reported in the ad response data such as information regarding whether all pages of an ad were viewed whether some links were followed and the like.

To allow for greater flexibility carriers can choose between direct SMS ads which minimize download times network load and storage space or HTML callback ads which are of higher quality with richer environments but can have greater download times and increase network load. Additionally the costs of ads can be tiered based on ad type. In these situations the HTML ads featuring richer environments typically would cost more than SMS text only ads.

Although graphic ads can be desirous for their visual and marketing impact the ads can also be distracting to the user. Accordingly an unobtrusive method of delivering ads can aid in the ultimate marketing of the product or application. To facilitate this marketing a sticky ad i.e. an ad that is not easily deleted can be placed in a special location so that it is easily retrievable at a later time by the user or automatically retrieved based on predefined criteria. Accordingly a further embodiment of the invention can include a CAM inbox for storage of the ads. For example the CAM inbox can present the user with two softkey options when an ad is presented buy the subject of the ad now Buy Now or don t buy the subject of the ad now Not Now . Choosing the Buy Now option can direct the user to a purchase page for the advertised application or product. Not Now closes the ad and pushes it to the CAM inbox which can be an ad cache that is part of the CAM application data space and can be separate from the standard SMS inbox. Ads can be stored in the CAM inbox based on available data space for example thirty SMS text based ads. In one example of this embodiment the ads are listed from newest to oldest. Additionally when caching the next ad would exceed available storage the oldest ad is deleted to make room for the newest. Further stored ads can be manually retrieved and opened from the CAM inbox.

The CAM inbox can present the ads as a series of scrolling one line headlines. The ad itself can define an intelligible headline. For example the default headline can be the initial characters of the SMS payload. The end user can use the up down arrow keys on typical client devices or other navigational keys to go between ads. Two softkeys can be presented for a selected ad headline such as Check it out and Delete. The headline can also be presented on the external screen of clamshell style phones. Deletion or caching of the full page ad will result in deletion of the external screen ad as well.

To enhance the possibility that the ad will be viewed and acted upon in one embodiment the ad cannot be deleted at the initial presentation notification and can only be sent to the CAM inbox. The ad can be deleted from the CAM inbox screen or in the normal maintenance of the CAM inbox. When an ad has been cached it typically will not be re presented unless the user starts CAM manually and views it.

If a new ad is sent to the client device before an ad is viewed or cached the new ad can be presented and the old ad can be buffered in the CAM Inbox. Buffered ads including ads not yet presented can presented in last in first out LIFO order. Further when the end user hits Not Now or similar function a minimum amount of time such as five minutes can be established as delay before the next ad is presented. Carrier usage guidelines may dictate longer or shorter durations between ad presentations.

Additionally the user has the option to access the CAM manually in order to view or delete any cached ads. Starting the CAM manually presents the ad stack as a scrollable set of one line ad headers in one embodiment. Clicking on the ad header can open and display the full ad. Additionally in another embodiment the CAM can compile and store operations of the end user such as the manual opening of the CAM viewing of ads and deleting of ads. This data can then be used to monitor user behavior and to refine the targeted marketing. Further this system allows for the evaluation of the CAM system s effectiveness. Also CAM can report this data to a remote server e.g. an ad dispatch server in a CAM usage report as discussed in the foregoing description of . The server can collate and parse these reports. Relevant ad viewing and application or content purchase information can be collated and can be included in a report to additional servers and or the ad senders.

In a further embodiment of the present invention carriers can offer both opt in and opt out options to end users. Opt in indicates that at some point the end user has agreed to install and or use the CAM system. For example when the CAM is started for the first time on the client device it can query the end user e.g. Do you wish to receive carefully screened advertisements on this phone Opt out indicates that the end user has the ability to refuse to receive ads. A reasonably accessible opt out procedure can save expensive customer service calls from end users who do not wish to receive ads.

Purchase data related to ads e.g. application content purchases can provide some of the most valuable data to measure and leverage additional Average Revenue Per User ARPU generated by CAM ads. This information can be tracked and used to provide carriers and or vendors with data regarding the profitability of the CAM system. Additionally methods of tracking CAM effectiveness can also be used. For example the time of the ad placement can be noted and correlated with spikes in purchases of the advertised content at that time. A CAM usage report can also note what type of ad was used. For example if a SMS or HTML ad was received by the end user that data can be reported in the report.

In another aspect of the present invention HTML ads can also be cached on the client device for future viewing. Because each HTML ad can include up to 2 k 3 k of data or more additional restrictions on the storage of HTML ads can be used. For example only the most recent ads or ads that have been deliberately viewed by the user are stored. When the newest ad is pushed onto the ad stack the oldest HTML ad can be deleted and replaced with an ADR directing the CAM system to a location containing the HTML ad e.g. ad distribution server . Cached ads can thus be displayed more quickly and at the will of the user. Additionally older HTML ads e.g. ADRs can still be viewed. When clicking on the titles of the older ads an HTML callback can be initiated for the selected ad. Thus the system provides great flexibility in viewing previous ads.

In another embodiment of the invention a SMS ad ADR ad or HTML ads can be downloaded in the background and not directly activate any ringers buzzers or other notifications. After the ad has been downloaded an initial ad presentation can be passive with no user notification thus eliminating untimely or undesired noises vibrations and the like. After the ad is received there are a variety of options for initial presentation of the ad. For example a first option can use a small and optionally blinking icon on the main screen to notify the end user to open the CAM inbox.

Another option can include a one line caption that can be delivered to the main screen. For example the caption can be the same as the ad headline in the CAM inbox. A softkey press can then open the ad. This option would not take up much physical space on the screen but it would grab the attention of the end user. Additionally full viewing of the ad would be only one softkey press away.

Another option is to have the ad presented on the full screen. This option presents the most immediate opportunity for end user viewing. In this scenario a single button push could change the screen from the ad back to the normal background. However in a further option the ad may be incorporated as smart wallpaper and viewed as ad wallpaper on the background of the screen. The ad wallpaper can overwrite all or a portion of the current wallpaper on the main screen for a fixed period of time or until an action from the user saves or discards the ad.

Another option can include presenting the ad after a predefined event has occurred for example the ad can be presented after the END key is depressed which indicates a task has been completed. In this embodiment the ad can be received in a background mode such that the user is unaware of the receipt downloading of an ad. Once received and stored the ad can be retrieved and displayed on the predefined event. This would prevent ads from intruding during conversations or other such operations and ensure that the user is present to view the ad. Other predefined events can include ending a communication e.g. call or data pressing a key on the client device e.g. END key exiting an application on the client device starting activating the client device e.g. powering up unlocking coming out of a standby mode and the like and opening the client device e.g. opening a flip phone slider phone PDA and the like. .

Those skilled in the art will appreciate that the foregoing options can be combined in whole or in part with each other. Additionally in any of the above discussed options user response to the ad can be limited to a small number of choices connected to softkeys. For example there could be two options e.g. Later or Check it out or other similar options presented for each ad displayed for the user to select. For example Check it out can take the user to a purchasing page or other informational page. However if the user selects the Later softkey or a similar End Off Clear or similar hardkey the ad can be pushed to the CAM inbox and cached for possible later perusal.

Additionally the user can be presented with a Go to Ad Manager or similar option that allows for easier access to the CAM inbox to view and or delete cached ads and set preferences such as opting out of the system. If the automatic caching of ads is not desired a Delete Ad option can be presented to the user at the initial ad display. This option would allow for the user to immediately delete an ad rather than have it sent to the CAM inbox.

In one embodiment of the present invention the Carrier Announcement Manager CAM is pre installed on a client device such as a wireless phone enabled with QUALCOMM s BREW Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless . However other APIs and devices can be used and the invention is not limited to a specific platform or device. Additionally the CAM system can be optionally downloaded to the client device as part of a purchased bundle. Also the end user can voluntarily download the CAM system. This can be accomplished by sending an OTA message e.g. SMS to the client device containing the URL of the download location. Further flyers or direct mailings can be used to distribute downloading information. Once the CAM is installed the device can receive and present ads and marketing information to the end user as described in the foregoing.

Although the invention is not limited to a specific device knowing the type device that the CAM is installed on can aid in the effective presentation of the ads. For example the device specific features such as the screen size input devices memory resident APIs and versions and the like dictate how much information can be displayed and how rich the content of the information can be.

To send the ad to the client device the CAM can rely on any of a number of push mechanisms that enable the device to receive messages. In one exemplary embodiment of the present invention a directed SMS can be used as the push mechanism. For example a BREW directed SMS can include the class ID of a BREW application and the data that the application will be able to retrieve when it receives the SMS. The data sent in the SMS can contain the text to be displayed on the ad page and the ID of the application which will be used for example to bring the end user to a page where purchases can be made.

In another exemplary embodiment of the invention a network connection to a server can be used as the push mechanism. The CAM in this embodiment can connect to the server automatically on a periodic basis e.g. every five minutes or when manually activated to check if there is a new ad. This embodiment can allow the direct download of richer ads that can incorporate graphics text hyperlinks multimedia and the like.

In another exemplary embodiment of the invention a combination of both directed SMS and a network connection can be used as the push mechanism. The directed SMS tells the CAM application to wake up and connect to a server e.g. ad dispatch server . The application can then connect to the server and retrieve the detailed ad data such as text pictures video audio and or application ID.

Further while most client platforms e.g. all versions of BREW support directed SMS and network connectivity advanced platforms e.g. BREW 2.0 can contain an HTML viewer API that aids in the display of ads in richer environments such as those depicted in . Using the advanced client platforms the ad can be received in an HTML format including at least one of rich formatted text pictures video audio hyperlinks e.g. to online shops and the like. Including hyperlinks to online shops can allow online purchases to be made directly from the ads.

In another embodiment an optional reminder screen such as illustrated in can prompt the end user to read the ad after it has been received and or saved to the CAM inbox. For example in if the end user activates the Read Now option the ad is displayed to the user. If the user activates the Remind Me Later the ad is stored in or remains in the CAM inbox. The CAM then can set a future time to display the ad or reminder screen. If the user clicks on Discard the CAM deletes the ad.

In another exemplary embodiment of the invention the foregoing features of the CAM system can be leveraged to provide time and location based non intrusive advertising and promotions. For example the CAM system can be used to send low priority location and or time limited coupons and or special promotions to end users based upon location of the end user and or time of day. Accordingly the location of the client device can be used to determine which client devices should receive the ad.

For example a typical format to call an application on a BREW enabled device is BREW . The App ID is a unique number that identifies the BREW application. Payload is the data for the called application. Accordingly at least one embodiment of the present invention can include a CAM specific call App ID and payload. For example a system notification to users of a CAM enabled device of a discount at restaurant can include a format such as BREW X Y R T Popup Text URL where and are separators X and Y define center of a circle of interest R is the radius of the circle of interest T can be expiration time date of the ad Popup Text is the message shown to the user e.g. XYZ Lunch Special all items 20 off and URL is a URL e.g. http www.XYZ.com 2004 12 09 lunch.html to which the client device will connect to retrieve the additional information regarding the ad e.g. current lunch menu . Those skilled in the art will appreciate that other configurations of the ad can be used and a variety of the different data types can be used to define the geographic area of interest. For example the payload can contain an ad ID so that delivery of the ad can be tracked and additional coding to activate features of the CAM system discussed herein such as a calling predefined HTML templates audible signals indicator lights and the like. Further the location information can be any type of information that defines a targeted area and is not limited to latitude and longitude coordinates.

Position location capabilities have been increasingly incorporated into wireless client devices and carrier networks such as the E911 system. Additionally the accuracy of the position location features has been increased with each new generation of device. A variety of systems are known for providing wireless position location information such as network based location information client based location information and hybrid location information. Network based solutions rely on the signal transmitted from the client device and received at multiple fixed base stations using Angle of Arrival AOA and Time of Arrival TOA to determine position. Client based solutions make use of the Global Positioning System GPS a worldwide system of twenty four satellites and their ground stations. By accurately measuring the distance from four or more satellites the receiver can obtain its position anywhere on earth. Hybrid solutions such as QUALCOMM s gpsOne provide a combination of network based and GPS solutions. For example in rural and suburban areas not many base stations can receive signals from the handset but a GPS receiver can often receive data from four or more satellites. Conversely in dense urban areas and inside buildings GPS receivers may not detect enough satellites but the wireless handset can contact two or more base stations.

Regardless of the technology used for determining the location of the wireless client device the location information can be accessed typically by APIs designed to access the location position data. Accordingly an API directed SMS announcement can initiate a location API or other location application in the client device to determine the client device location. Alternatively the client device location can be determined from data previously stored at the server.

The sender can be a carrier operator or trusted partner e.g. application developer merchant and the like with network access. The sender can determine the target audience based upon the location of the user and or the time. For example the sender can specify latitude and longitude and a radius for a desired targeted audience. Accordingly all active client devices that are within the location range specified by the sender can receive the ad. For example all active clients within a two mile radius of a restaurant could receive a discount coupon ad that can be redeemed at the restaurant. As a further refinement the discount coupon could be offered only a specific time window e.g. during lunch time 11 30 am to 1 30 pm . Alternatively the active client devices can be identified by a specific landmark and or immediate adjacent areas. For example a particular shopping mall could be designated and all client devices in the shopping mall complex can receive the ad.

In at least one embodiment of the invention an ad can go directly to the CAM inbox and cause no disruption to the end user s action. For example a small and optionally blinking icon can be placed on the main screen client device to notify the end user to open the CAM inbox. Also if available on the client device an external indicator light can be flashed instead of or in addition to the icon. Alternatively more aggressive notification actions can also be initiated such as scrolling messages activating buzzers and the like as described in the foregoing. Upon notification the end user can launch the CAM system and access the CAM inbox to view the ads. The end user can also select an ad for display as previously discussed. For example the end user can select coupons he is interested in and redeem them at a related store that sent the coupons. Further the response to the ad at the CAM can be configured at the installation of the CAM by the user and or can be indicated as part of the payload of the message. For example a priority field can be used in the payload to indicate the level of obtrusiveness of each ad.

Additionally to further enhance the unobtrusiveness and functionality of the ads the ads can be location and time sensitive after they have been received at the CAM inbox. For example the ads can be automatically deleted from the CAM inbox when the client device is no longer within the desired location parameters e.g. the end user has left the mall or has left the general area of the restaurant . Further the ad can also be automatically deleted based on temporal conditions. For example the ad can be automatically deleted after a certain time e.g. the coupon expires in 30 minutes or at a predetermined date time e.g. close of business end of week and the like . The automatic deletion of non relevant ads can greatly reduce the annoyance and maintenance of the CAM inbox.

Alternatively if the CAM console is located at the carrier network the ad generation system can be integrated into one computer based system which can include the CAM console and ad dispatch server functionality. Further a Short Message Service Center SMSC can be part of the ad generation system and can be used to send directed SMS messages to the client device . However other OTA data transmitting techniques can be used and SMSC is not required in all embodiments of the invention.

Referring to an alternative embodiment of the invention is illustrated in which a remote CAM console is operably coupled to at least one additional ad dispatch server. Further as illustrated each ad dispatch server not illustrated is coupled to or contained within a different carrier networks . The configuration of allows for one common CAM console to access different carrier networks and ultimately the different client devices in communication with each network. This feature can allow a central CAM console to access multiple client devices e.g. residing on multiple carrier networks e.g. which simplifies the dissemination of the ad to multiple carriers and can increase the delivery to the desired client devices. For example client devices in communication with a first carrier and client devices in communication with a second carrier may be within the targeted geographic area. Accordingly generating a targeted ad at CAM console and sending it to the first carrier network and the second carrier network can greatly increase the number of client devices that receive the ad. The carrier networks can be connected to CAM console by a secure links to limit the potential for unauthorized access to the ad dispatch servers and client devices. Accordingly links can be connections via the Internet virtual private network VPN public switched telephone network PSTN and or a wireless link using secure transmission capabilities as is known in the art. Likewise those skilled in the art will appreciate that more than one CAM console can be connected to a carrier network ad dispatch server.

The client device location can be determined for example based on data contained at the client device data contained at the carrier and or location data communicated to the carrier or other remote server. For example in an external location system can be accessed by the client device . Specifically CAM can acquire position data from visible GPS satellites once received the position data can be relayed to a position determination entity PDE e.g. a server in the carrier network. The PDE can then analyze the position data and determine the location of the client device . The location e.g. longitude latitude and optionally altitude coordinates of the client device can then be stored at a remote server and or communicated to the client device for storage and or use by CAM . For example CAM can use the longitude and latitude coordinates to determine if the client device is within the designated geographic area defined by the location data in the ad.

Alternatively the device location can be determined at the client device and external servers do not need to know the specific location of the client device which may provide more privacy for the end user. For example the location of the client device can be determined from visible GPS satellites solely at the client device using known techniques. In this embodiment there is no need to transmit location data or related information to a remote server for further processing. Accordingly the location information associated with the ad can be used by the client device to determine whether the client device is within the targeted geographic area defined by the location information transmitted in the ad. If the client device determines that it is not within the targeted area the ad can be discarded without interrupting the end user.

Alternatively in another embodiment of the invention an ad contains location information that can be used to define a geographic area. Client devices within the targeted area i.e. the defined geographic area can be identified from the location information stored on a server in the carrier network. For example a CAM enabled client device can periodically report the location of the client device or execute an application to provide location data to a remote server that can calculate the location of the client device. The stored location information can be a table for example containing longitude and latitude coordinates for each client device. When an ad is generated containing location information to define a geographic area of interest e.g. longitude and latitude coordinates of four points defining a rectangular area a server can use the stored client location information to identify the client devices in the targeted area. Then the ad can be sent to the client devices that are identified. Although the ad location information does not have to be transmitted to the client device in this embodiment the location information can still be used by the CAM system on the client device for inbox maintenance e.g. to delete messages when the client device is out of the targeted area as discussed above. Alternatively if the client device location is monitored at a remote server then the ad generation system can generate another message that directs the CAM system on the client device to delete the previously sent ad when the client device location is outside the targeted area. Additionally a message that directs the CAM system on the client device to delete a specific previously sent ad can be event based such as deleting a promotional ad once all available promotional items are sold. Accordingly this aspect can be used regardless of whether the client device location data is maintained locally or remotely.

The process of identifying the client device location can include many variations and sub processes. For example the device location can be determined by accessing client device location information. Then the client device location can be used to determine if the client device is within a geographic area defined by the location data in the ad. The location information can be stored locally at the client device and or remotely e.g. at a server on the carrier network . Likewise the determination as to whether the client device is within the geographic area can be determined at either the client device or a remote server. The client device location information can include longitude and latitude coordinates of the client device. Likewise the location data in the ad can include center longitude and center latitude coordinates and a radial distance. The geographic area can then be determined as longitude and latitude coordinates that are within the radial distance from the center longitude and the center latitude coordinates. Alternatively the location data in the ad can include at least three longitude and latitude coordinates which define an area e.g. triangle square and rectangle . The geographic area can then be determined as longitude and latitude coordinates that are within the area defined by the at least three longitude and latitude coordinates.

Further depending on the accuracy desired base stations and or communication towers can be used to determine the targeted client devices. In this embodiment the location data generated in the ad can be used to define a geographic area as discussed above. Then client devices communicating with base stations communication towers within the defined geographic area can be considered to be within the targeted geographic area and would be sent the ads. However this aspect can be used in combination with the previously discussed methods for delivering location based ads.

For example instead of transmitting the ads directly a wake up message can be sent to the client devices that invoke the CAM system on each client device which reports the location of the client device. The updated location information can be used by the server to then target only those devices that are actually within the targeted geographic area. Alternatively client devices communicating with the identified base stations communication towers can be sent the ad and the CAM system on the client device can use the local geographic location data or obtain a geographic location. Using its geographic location and the geographic area defined in the ad the client device can determine if it is within the targeted area as discussed above. Using the base station communication tower as a first level of granularity to identify a client device can further reduce the network traffic and focus the ads to client devices that are most likely within the targeted geographic area.

In view of the foregoing disclosure those skilled in the art will recognize that embodiments of the invention include methods of performing the sequence of actions operations and or functions previously discussed. For example as illustrated in a method for wirelessly communicating ads can include generating an ad containing location data at block . A client device to receive the ad is identified based on the location data in the ad and the location of the client device in block . Further the ad can be transmitted to the client device in block . The ad can be received at the client device block and the ad can be displayed on the client device block . Those skilled in the art will appreciate that the flowchart illustrated is not limited to sequential execution and block elements may be reordered as desired. For example block can be inserted between block and block to represent the relevant operations when the client device determines whether or not it is within the geographic area defined in the ad.

For example illustrates an embodiment of the invention where the client device determines if it is in the targeted geographic area. In this configuration as discussed above the sequence of actions are different than illustrated in in that the ad is received at the client device e.g. before the client device is identified e.g. as being in the targeted geographic area. Alternatively the client device can be identified at a first level such as by base station communication tower city region or other generally broad geographic zones in block . Then the process illustrated in can be a further refinement performed at the client level after the ad has been received.

In describing like functions will retain the same reference number. Accordingly blocks and operate as discussed above however at the client device. If the client device receives an ad but it is not in the targeted geographic area the ad is discarded block . If the client device is in the targeted geographic area than the ad is displayed or the associated instruction is executed e.g. start browser and download specified page block . The term display can include any type of notification such as text and or graphic display on a display unit indicator lights audible signal e.g. buzzer ringer voice message and the like vibration and combinations of the foregoing. The message can be stored for recall at a later time in block . Once stored the ad can be recalled automatically on a periodic basis or at a user s request. Further the ad can be stored in a designated inbox for management by the user and or automatic inbox management by the CAM as previously discussed.

Once stored in the CAM inbox the ad can be managed as discussed in the foregoing by the CAM system. illustrates an exemplary process for automatically managing the CAM inbox. For example a first ad or selected ad in the inbox can be accessed in block . If the ad is a location based ad the system can determine the targeted geographic area as discussed above in block . The current location of the client device can be obtained and compared to the targeted area in block . If the device is in the targeted area then any relevant time information contained in the ad can be checked in block . For example an expiration time date an elapsed time and the like can be included in the ad as discussed in the foregoing description. If the time window defined in the ad is still valid then a check is made to see if all messages have been examined in block . If not the next ad is selected in block and the process is repeated. If the end of the inbox is reached then the automatic management process is ended in block .

If either of the spatial or temporal checks in blocks and result in a negative determination i.e. the client device is outside the targeted area or the ad has expired then a check is made to see if the ad is locked in block . If the ad is locked by the user and or by the system e.g. set by a priority code or separate lock code in the payload of the ad then the process reverts back to block . If the ad is not locked then the ad is deleted in block and the process continues to block to check for additional ads in the inbox. Accordingly the CAM system can automatically manage the CAM inbox on a periodic basis when the memory used reaches a predetermined threshold and or when the user manually accesses the CAM inbox to ensure that relevant ads information are stored in the CAM inbox. This feature can reduce interruptions of the user or other client device activities due to managing the ads received and stored on the client device. However the user can still manually access and manage the CAM inbox to view delete and lock the ads as discussed herein.

In further embodiments those skilled in the art will appreciate that the foregoing methods can be implemented by the execution of a program embodied on a computer readable medium such as the memory of a computer platform. The instructions can reside in various types of signal bearing or data storage primary secondary or tertiary media. The media may comprise for example RAM accessible by or residing within the client device and or server. Whether contained in RAM a diskette or other secondary storage media the instructions may be stored on a variety of machine readable data storage media such as DASD storage e.g. a conventional hard drive or a RAID array magnetic tape electronic read only memory e.g. ROM or EEPROM flash memory cards an optical storage device e.g. CD ROM WORM DVD digital optical tape paper punch cards or other suitable data storage media including digital and analog transmission media.

While the foregoing disclosure shows illustrative embodiments of the invention it should be noted that various changes and modifications could be made herein without departing from the scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims. The functions steps and or actions of the method claims in accordance with the embodiments of the invention described herein need not be performed in any particular order. Furthermore although elements of the invention may be described or claimed in the singular the plural is contemplated unless limitation to the singular is explicitly stated.

