---

title: Control of the fresnel maximum of an aperture antenna
abstract: The maximum peak power density of an aperture antenna that occurs in the near field region relative to the average power density concentration at other ranges within the entire near field is increased by lowering the aspect ratio of the aperture antenna, whereby the transmitter power can be increased and the operating range and performance of the system improved for applications that operate in the near field.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07295164&OS=07295164&RS=07295164
owner: The United States of America as Represented by the Secretary of the Air Force
number: 07295164
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051110
---
The conditions under which this invention was made are such as to entitle the Government of the United States under paragraph I a of Executive Order 10096 as represented by the Secretary of the Air Force to the entire right title and interest therein including foreign rights.

The invention relates generally to the field of aperture antennas and more specifically provides a means of reducing the maximum peak power density of an aperture antenna that occurs in the near field region relative to the average power density concentration at other ranges within the entire near field.

Microwave transmitting antennas of the aperture type operating at millimeter wavelengths have an equivalent aperture diameter of many wavelengths that defines a near field region extending as far as hundreds of meters. Applications that operate in the near field such as Active Denial Technology ADT require antennas that produce power density characteristics that are compatible with the application requirements. There is a difficulty with applications that require a power density that lies between a minimum level Pand a maximum level P in that there exists a peak power density at a range in the near field commonly referred to as the Fresnel maximum that sets the limit at Pand constricts the depth of ranges that will remain above the minimum level P. The power density in the near field is calculated using scalar potential theory which is well understood by those skilled in the art. A plot of the power density on the boresight of a square aperture antenna with uniform illumination vs. range is shown in . The aperture is one meter square with a total illumination of 1 kW at a frequency of 100 GHz. The phase front at the aperture has zero curvature corresponding to an infinite focal length. The range of the near field boundary RNFB at which the field of the antenna transitions from the near field to the far field is typically approximated by the relation 

In the Fresnel peak is at a range of about 125 meters and amplitude of about 3250 W m. It is obvious that the maximum allowable peak power density of the system is determined by the Fresnel peak. This in turn determines the ranges over which the minimum required power density is available. Clearly if the peak power density at the Fresnel maximum could be reduced without significant changes to the remainder of the power profile then the transmitter power could be increased and the operating range and performance of the system would increase.

The aspect ratio of an aperture antenna of any shape is increased to reduce the maximum peak power density in the near field. For applications that operate in the near field a reduced peak power density Fresnel maximum permits an increase in transmitter power and a consequent improvement in operating range and performance of the system.

If instead of a square aperture a rectangular shape as shown in is used calculations show that the position and relative magnitude of the Fresnel maximum change as the aspect ratio of the rectangle is changed. The aspect ratio Rxy is defined as the ratio of the larger dimension Mx of the aperture to the smaller dimension My. When Rxy 1 the aperture is a square. For simplicity in the examples described x is taken as the larger and y as the smaller however the reduction of the Fresnel maximum depends only upon the ratio and not the orientation or rotation of the aperture.

The calculated boresight power density as a function of range is shown in for values of aperture ratio Rxy of 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 and 1.5. The aperture area is held at 1 mat a frequency of 95 GHz and it is uniformly illuminated with 1 kW.

The data in clearly shows that as the aspect ratio increases there results a significant decrease in the peak power density at the Fresnel maximum. In addition the power density levels at other ranges remain approximately within the previous bounds established by the square aperture Rxy 1. At ranges greater that the Fresnel Maximum the beam consists of a single central peak that falls off in intensity with smooth side lobes. This is true for all aspect ratios. The aspect ratio does relate to the cross sectional shape of the spot in that it displays an aspect ratio similar to the aperture at the Fresnel Peak and transitions into an aspect ratio that is also similar to the aspect ratio of the aperture but rotated by 90 degrees as the range approaches the RNFB and greater ranges.

At ranges less than the Fresnel Peak the beam pattern develops mode patterns that consist of multiple peaks grouped within a cross sectional area that has an aspect ratio similar to the aperture. These multiple mode peaks do not develop peak power intensities that exceed that which is developed at the peaks on the boresight axis. An example of the multiple mode peak structure is shown in in a three dimensional representation of the aperture of at a range of 30 meters and an aspect ratio of Rxy 1.4. The aperture dimensions are Mx 1.183 m and My 0.845 m. The aspect ratio of the beam pattern in has about the same aspect ratio being about 1.4 meter in the x dimension and 1 meter in the y dimension.

The decrease of the Fresnel maximum with increasing aspect ratio occurs with any shape aperture not only the rectangular shape as discussed above. To illustrate the characteristics of a circular aperture that is progressively shaped into an ellipse are shown in . In the plot of power density vs. range is for an aperture area of 1 Mfor aspect ratios of Rxy 1.0 circle 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 and 1.5 all ellipses . is a 3 D representation of the multi peak beam profile of the elliptical aperture antenna in at a range of 62 meters and an aspect ratio of Rxy 1.4. The behavior of the elliptical type of antenna is shown to be similar to a rectangular antenna in terms of the Fresnel Peak being lower by comparison of and . Also the multiple mode patterns of the beam minor peaks and the over all aspect ratio of the beam is similar as shown by and .

In fact increasing the aspect ratio of any geometric or other shaped aperture antenna will result in lowering the Fresnel peak without producing significant changes to the remainder of the power profile of the antenna. As a consequence the transmitter power can be increased thereby increasing the operating range and performance of the system.

