---

title: Stacked packaging designs offering inherent anti-tamper protection
abstract: An electronic device includes a die, a first circuit substrate connected to the die, and a second circuit substrate closely coupled to the first circuit substrate. The die is located between the first and second circuit substrates and is protected from tampering by the close coupling of the first and second circuit substrates. The circuit substrates may be circuit carrying elements (e.g. circuit boards) or may be additional die, may be any number of other substrates, and/or may be a combination of substrates. The device may include a cavity such that the die is located in the cavity. The cavity could be formed by any number of means. The device may also include a second die connected to the second substrate such that the first die and second die are located in proximity to each other on opposite sides of the cavity.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07638866&OS=07638866&RS=07638866
owner: Rockwell Collins, Inc.
number: 07638866
owner_city: Cedar Rapids
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050601
---
The U.S. Government has a paid up license in this invention and the right in limited circumstances to require the patent owner to license others on reasonable terms as provided for by the terms of Contract No. F04701 03 C 0025 relating to the MUE program.

Individual die packaged as separate components offer little inherent anti tamper protection when sensitive information needs to be passed between the components. In the past to improve the protection of the die and the interfaces between the die individual die have been directly applied to a single substrate and packaged as a multi chip module MCM system in package SiP . Next an over coating or over mold was applied to the MCM to improve the security of the sensitive data internal to the MCM on die and between the die . In some instances these over coatings and over molds detrimentally impacted the cost manufacturability and reliability of the MCM. In other instances these over coatings and over molds did not significantly improve the security of the MCM. Additionally this packaging technique could result in a rather large module ranging in size from over a square inch to several square inches

An alternate approach is to combine all of the individual die into a single ASIC as a system on chip SoC design. SoC designs offer a high degree of inherent anti tamper protection and size reduction but may present significant risk to the design and development team. The combination of all the functions needed to create the SoC may be extremely complex. There may be incompatibilities between the memory needed or other features of the die and the die manufacturers capabilities. Additionally a single error in the ASIC may cost 250 000 for a metalization layer change to 1 000 000 for a complete respin to correct.

Another alternative approach is to stack the die within a single package. Current stacked die packaging techniques address size reduction but most offer little inherent anti tamper protection. Packaging options for stacked die packages come in many forms. The two basic options for intra package interconnect is bond wiring and bumping flip chip packaging . Wire bonding may connect the die to a laminate substrate using small wires from the top active face of the die down to the substrate. Multiple die are then stacked on top of each other and wire bonded down to a substrate. A flip chip package may basically include a thin core laminate substrate with the die inverted and soldered down using solder bumps on the die. The active face of the die may be directly connected to the substrate using a small solder bump. Multiple substrates are then stacked on top of each other either by ball grid array attachment or by wire bonding them down to a single bottom substrate.

A device offers inherent anti tamper protection. Anti tamper protection does not necessarily mean that tampering can be prevented altogether but rather that the ability to tamper is hindered by the construction of the device. One method of providing anti tamper protection involves configuring a multi layer device in a manner that hinders access to die carrying the sensitive information.

These devices may have application to any number of different types of systems where protection of certain information is desired. Such systems may include GPS location determining devices communications devices and or other types of devices.

Other principle features and advantages of the invention will become apparent to those skilled in the art upon review of the drawings the detailed description and the appended claims.

An electronic device is packaged in a manner that allows a higher degree of inherent anti tamper protection. The inherent anti tamper protection offered by the manner in which the device is packaged may reduce the need to rely on protective over coatings and over molds to prevent tampering with the die that are to be protected.

One method of protecting the die from tampering is to package the die in an area that is difficult to access without tampering with and or at least partially destroying the package particularly if it requires tampering with an active face of the die. The device may include the ability to monitor whether the package has been tampered with and may be configured to take precautionary measures e.g. removing data from the device halting operation of the device etc. in response to detection of tampering.

To achieve protection from tampering with a die an electronic device may include a first substrate connected to the die and a second substrate closely coupled to e.g. directly connected to or separated by few intervening bodie from the first substrate. The die is located between the two substrates. The close coupling of the first substrate and the second substrate makes access to the die more difficult without tampering with the connection between the two substrates. The device may also include underfill and or other potting material which material may create a stronger physical bond between the die the first substrate and the second substrate. Further the loss of interconnect between the first substrate and the second substrate may result in the device detecting the tampering and taking precautionary measures e.g. removing data from the device halting operation of the device etc. .

Either or both of the first and second substrate may be circuit carrying elements e.g. printed circuit boards flex circuits etc. that include electrical connections conductive paths conductive traces vias etc. and are configured to carry circuit elements e.g. the die and electrically connect them to other circuit elements by way of the electrical connections. Either or both of the substrates may be formed from a laminate material and or from some other material e.g. silicon .

The electronic device may be a component of a system such as a GPS receiver system. The electronic device may include information related to decoding tracking data algorithms relating to determining a location from the tracking data and or to other information. The electronic device may additionally include information related to the encryption and decryption of sensitive data as a component in a system such as a banking system handling sensitive account information. The electronic device may additionally include information related to the encryption and decryption of sensitive data as a component in a system such as a communications system handling digital communications such as email audio data files and other digital data. This information may be contained in one or more die which is are protected from tampering as discussed above.

The GPS device may further include an antenna and or a receiver configured to receive data which data would likely be received from GPS satellites. The GPS device may also contain a data output portion such that data relating to the position of the GPS device may be distributed to another system e.g. a navigation system a display etc. .

A banking system may further include a mechanism for remote data entry a means to transmit the data and a server.

Referring to one electronic device whose packaging provides inherent anti tamper protection comprises a first laminate circuit board closely coupled here directly connected to a second laminate circuit board . Laminate boards include sides that are built up towards each other and form a cavity when boards are placed in close proximity to each other here connected by a ball grid array . Board is configured to be placed in a larger assembly and communicate information by way of ball grid array .

Die are located in space between boards and which form cavity . Locating die in cavity may tend to inhibit access to die unless an intruder tampers with at least one other portion of device e.g. boards ball grid array and so on . One of die may be configured to monitor for tampering with another portion of device and may be configured to remove data from and or halt operation of one or more die if tampering is detected.

Die are located on an opposite side of cavity than die . Die are flip chip connected to board and die are flip chip connected to board . Die have an active face that faces board and die have an active face that faces board . None of die are directly connected to any of die although they may be operatively connected by way of boards and or ball grid array . Die and may be fixed in locations with respect to each other by an underfill or other potting material that is directly or indirectly connected to one or more of the die.

As illustrated in the built up portions of sides extend around substantially the entire here the entire perimeter of cavity . Thus die are substantially enclosed in cavity . In this embodiments boards are substantially planar and formed substantially in the plane of the paper. Die partially overlaps each of die and in a plane orthogonal to the plane of boards e.g. the plane of the paper in .

While a single chamber is shown in cavity in the device may include a plurality of separate chambers as illustrated in . Each chamber may include one or more die.

Referring to another electronic device whose packaging provides inherent anti tamper protection comprises a first laminate circuit board closely coupled to a second laminate circuit board . Device also includes a laminate ring disposed between boards and . In some versions of this embodiment ring may be thinner than boards and . Ring is electrically connected to board by way of ball grid array and is electrically connected to board by ball grid array . Board is configured to be connected to an assembly and communicate information by way of ball grid array .

Die are located in the space between boards and which form cavity . Locating die in cavity may tend to inhibit access to die unless an intruder tampers with at least one other portion of device e.g. boards ring ball grid arrays etc. . Die are at least partially located in a common plane e.g. a plane parallel to the plane of the paper in with ring . One or more of die may be configured to monitor for tampering with other portions of device and or may be configured to remove data from one or more die and or halt operation if tampering is detected.

Die are located on an opposite side of cavity than die . Die are flip chip connected to board and die are flip chip connected to board . Die have an active face that faces board and die have an active face that faces board . None of die are directly connected to any of die although they may be operatively connected by way of boards ring and or ball grid arrays . Die and may be fixed in locations with respect to each other by an underfill or other potting material that is directly or indirectly connected to one or more of the die.

In some embodiments ring may be a circuit carrying element and or may be configured to facilitate electrical connection of boards and . In some of these embodiments ring has electrical connections that are passed directly from board to board in the same pattern as received from boards and . In other embodiments ring may be used to reroute some or all of the electrical connections such that the connections are arranged differently on boards and . A different arrangement could include a same arrangement of connectors balls with different components of boards and associated with the same connector location in arrays and may include a different arrangement of connectors in the array may include some combination of these features and or may include some other additional features.

Referring to ring may extend around substantially the entire perimeter of boards . In some embodiments the width of the sides of ring may be substantially less than the overall width of ring . In some embodiments the width of the edges is no more than about or of the width of the ring . In other embodiments the width of ring may be large compared to the width of ring and or boards .

Referring to ring may extend around substantially the entire perimeter of boards . Ring may be a polygonal e.g. rectangular shape and may have a polygonal e.g. rectangular hole. The width of the sides of ring may be uniform or may be differently shaped. The hole in ring may be centered in ring or may be located closer to one side than another side.

Ring is shown in as being formed from a single piece but ring could be formed by a plurality of pieces that when placed in device form a ring structure. Also while ring is shown being placed near the periphery of boards in ring may be located anywhere such as closer to the center in a corner etc. Additionally while ring is shown having a circular interior portion ring may have any number of interior shapes ring may have a diamond shaped interior portion a rectangular interior portion or some other shaped interior portion. Ring may have several different interior spaces in a similar manner to the built up portions of .

Referring to another electronic device whose packaging provides inherent anti tamper protection comprises a first laminate circuit board directly connected to a second laminate circuit board which is directly connected to a third laminate circuit board . Board is electrically connected to board by way of ball grid array and is electrically connected to board by ball grid array . Board is configured to be connected to an assembly and communicate information by way of ball grid array .

Die are located in space between boards and . Die are located in space between boards and . Die and are located on board and are mounted facing an exterior of device . Underfill may be used to fill in any of the spaces not taken up by die .

Die are all mounted on a common circuit carrying board . Die are located on a first face of board . Die are located on a second face of board opposite first face . Die are flip chip connected to board . Die have an active face that faces the first face of board and die have an active face that faces the second face of board .

Board may carry various circuit traces that electronically connect two or more of die to each other. Board may be used to transfer data between die and on board and other die and or other parts of a system.

Locating die in spaces and making the circuit connections using a board surrounded by other boards may tend to inhibit access to die and may inhibit knowledge of their interconnection unless an intruder tampers with at least one other portion of device e.g. boards ball grid arrays and so on . One or more of die may be configured to monitor for tampering with another portion of device and or may be configured to remove data from one or more die and or halt operation if tampering is detected. Die and may be left unprotected or may be protected by other means.

Referring to another electronic device whose packaging provides inherent anti tamper protection comprises a first laminate circuit board directly connected to a second laminate circuit board by a ball grid array . Board is configured to be connected to an assembly and communicate information by way of ball grid array . A space is created in ball grid array where die is located.

Die are located in space between boards and . Die and are located on board and are mounted facing an exterior top side of device . Die is located on board and is mounted facing an exterior under side of device . Die is located on die and is located in a cavity space created in board . Underfill may be used to fill in any of the spaces not taken up by die particularly the space not taken up by die in cavity .

Die and are all mounted on a common circuit carrying board . Die are located on a first face of board . Die is located on a second face of board opposite first face . Die and are flip chip connected to board . Die and are located over and cover here entirely cover cavity in board . Cavity is substantially enclosed by board die and die . Die is flip chip connected to die . Die have an active face that faces the first face of board die has an active face that faces the second face of board and die has an active face that faces die which is an active face of die .

Board may carry various circuit traces that electronically connect two or more of die and to each other. Board may be used to transfer data between die and on board and other die and or other parts of a system.

Locating die in cavity mounted to die and covered by die may tend to inhibit access to die unless an intruder tampers with at least one other portion of device e.g. board die and and so on . One or more of die may be configured to monitor for tampering with another portion of device and or may be configured to remove data on one or more die and or halt operation if tampering is detected. Die and may be left unprotected or may be protected from tampering by other means.

Die and may be comprised of any number of components. For example these die may consist of memory flash Ram etc. processing circuits such as one or more microprocessors a GPS engine an ASIC a battery power supply e.g. Li thin film battery and or recharging circuitry configured to assist in recharging a battery. In one embodiment the die include an ASIC which may comprise one microprocessor a pair of microprocessors or multiple microprocessors in addition to other processing components configured to execute GPS tracking functions and a flash memory configured to contain sensitive data pertaining to GPS tracking operation.

Devices and may be formed in any size. According to some embodiments the devices may have a length and or width of up to about two inches one inch and or of up to about one half of an inch. According to some embodiments the devices may have a height of up to about one half of an inch and or of up to about one quarter of an inch. Boards and may include blind vias configured to transfer electronic data from one face of the board to another face of the board. The packaging of the substrates and the die may be configured to be monitorable to determine if tampering is occurring.

According to most embodiments the die to be protected are completely enclosed by the substrate structures. According to many of these embodiments the die to be protected are potted using a rigid underfill material to further hinder access to the die.

Referring to a global positioning device includes a receiver configured to receive data from a global positioning system transmitter such as global positioning satellites. Receiver may include an antenna to aid in receiving the data. Receiver is coupled to a processing circuit which processes data received from receiver to derive data indicative of a location of global positioning device . In many embodiments receiver is part of processing circuit thus a reference to a processing circuit and a receiver does not necessarily mean that they are distinct components unless stated otherwise. Processing circuit can include various types of processing circuitry digital and or analog and may include a microprocessor microcontroller application specific integrated circuit ASIC field programmable gate arrays FPGA and or other circuitry configured to perform various input output control analysis and other functions to be described herein. Processing circuit can digitize the data can filter the data can analyze the data can combine the data and or can process the data in some other manner. Processing circuit may also include a memory volatile or non volatile that stores data. Processing circuit may be contained in a single unit or may include several distinct parts. Processing circuit may include a device also carrying die that are inherently protected from tampering based on the packaging configuration of device . Global positioning device may also include a user interface .

Data from processing circuit may be transferred to a navigation system and or display . Navigation system and or display may be components of global positioning device . For example processing circuit may be configured to process location data and provide navigation information based on the processed location data.

Device of processing circuit may be configured to carry information such as classified data pertaining to GPS tracking operation and or other data necessary to determine location data based on the data received from receiver .

One embodiment is directed to an electronic device. The device includes a die a first substrate connected to the die and a second substrate coupled to the first substrate with few or no intervening structures e.g. merely a ring ball grid array and or etc. . The die is located between the first substrate and the second substrate and is protected from tampering by the arrangement of the first substrate and the second substrate in close proximity to each other. In many of these embodiments the first and second substrates are circuit carrying elements such as printed circuit boards. In some of these embodiments one or more of the first and second substrates may be another die. In some of these embodiments the first and or second substrate may be formed from a laminate material. In some of these embodiments the die may be located in a cavity. The cavity may be formed using the first and second substrates and or may be formed using another material e.g. a ring or some other structure which does not substantially separate the first and second substrates.

Another embodiment is directed to an electronic device that includes a first die a second die in proximity to the first die but not directly electrically connected to the first die a first substrate connected to the die and a second substrate closely coupled to the first substrate. The first die and the second die are located between the first substrate and the second substrate. The first die and the second die are not directly electrically connected to a same substrate.

Another embodiment is directed to an electronic device that includes a first die a second die in proximity to the first die but not directly electrically connected to the first die a first substrate connected to the die and a second substrate closely coupled to the first substrate. The first die and the second die are located between the first substrate and the second substrate. The first substrate is located along a first plane and the first and second die are both at least partly included in a second plane that is orthogonal to the first plane.

Another embodiment is directed to an electronic device that includes a first die and a second die connected to different faces of a first substrate. A second substrate is connected to the first substrate and the die is located between the first substrate and the second substrate. The device may further include a third substrate that is connected to the first substrate and the second die may be located between the first substrate and the third substrate.

Another embodiment is directed to an electronic device that includes a first die connected to a second die a first substrate closely coupled to the second die and a second substrate having a hole. The second die is connected to the second substrate such that the first die is located in the hole in the second substrate. The first substrate covers the hole in the second substrate such that the first die is located between the second die and the first substrate.

Another embodiment is directed to an electronic device that includes a first circuit carrying element substrate a second circuit carrying element substrate closely coupled to the first circuit carrying element a first die connected to the first substrate a second die connected to the second substrate and a space located between the first substrate and the second substrate. The first die and the second die are located in the space. The space may be a cavity located between the first substrate and the second substrate. The cavity may be formed by a ring located between the first and second substrates.

The devices of any of the above described embodiments may be incorporated in a GPS system. The GPS system may include the device a receiver a display and or any number of other components. One or more of the protected die may include a processing circuit configured to contain algorithms or other information relating to interpreting tracking data received by the receiver from the GPS system.

The devices of any of the above described embodiments may be incorporated in some other type of system to inhibit tampering with information contained in a protected die. For example the device may be used to protect proprietary algorithms used in an airplane control or display system used in a cell phone used in radios used in hand held devices and or used in some other device system.

While the exemplary and illustrative embodiments illustrated in the Figs. and described above are presently preferred it should be understood that these embodiments are offered by way of example only.

While offering packaging with inherent anti tamper protection may reduce the need for an over coatings or over molds of the electronic devices discussed above an over coating or over mold could still be applied to the electronic devices.

Any appropriate underfill material may be selected for devices if underfill or some other potting material is used in the device. The underfill may also be selected to help dissipate heat.

While flip chip connections and ball grid arrays have been shown as the primary means of interconnecting various components other types of connections e.g. wire bonds may also be used in some embodiments.

While the electronic devices described above are suited for GPS devices they may also be used for any number of other devices where it is desirable to protect information from tampering. For example a proprietary software algorithm may be protected from tampering by placing the software on a die that is protected from tampering as discussed above.

Accordingly the present invention is not limited to a particular embodiment but extends to various modifications that nevertheless fall within the scope of the claims or the invention as a whole

