---

title: Computer graphic display visualization system and method
abstract: An improved human user computer interface system, providing a graphic representation of a hierarchy populated with naturally classified objects, having included therein at least one associated object having a distinct classification. Preferably, a collaborative filter is employed to define the appropriate associated object. The associated object preferably comprises a sponsored object, generating a subsidy or revenue.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07574659&OS=07574659&RS=07574659
owner: 
number: 07574659
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050304
---
The present application is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 579 217 filed May 26 2000 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 868 525 which claims benefit of priority from U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 179 577 filed Feb. 1 2000.

The present invention relates to the field of human computer interface systems and more particularly to the field of improved graphic user interfaces for information retrieval systems.

For almost as long as computers have existed their designers and users have sought improvements to the user interface. Especially as computing power has increased a greater portion of the available processing capacity has been devoted to improved interface design. Recent examples have been Microsoft Windows variants and Internet web browsers. Graphic interfaces provide significant flexibility to present data using various paradigms and modern examples support use of data objects and applets. Traditional human computer interfaces have emphasized uniformity and consistency thus experienced users had a shortened learning curve for use of software and systems while novice users often required extensive instruction before profitable use of a system. More recently intuitive adaptable and adaptive software interfaces have been proposed which potentially allow faster adoption of the system by new users but which requires continued attention by experienced users due to the possibility of interface transformation.

While many computer applications are used both on personal computers and networked systems the field of information retrieval and database access for casual users has garnered considerable interest. The Internet presents a vast relatively unstructured repository for information leading to a need for Internet search engines and access portals based on Internet navigation. At this time the Internet is gaining popularity because of its universal access low access and information distribution costs and suitability for conducting commercial transactions. However this popularity in conjunction with the non standardized methods of presenting data and fantastic growth rate have made locating desired information and navigation through the vast space difficult. Thus improvements in human consumer interfaces for relatively unstructured data sets are desirable wherein subjective improvements and wholesale adoption of new paradigms may both be valuable including improved methods for searching and navigating the Internet.

Generally speaking search engines for the World Wide Web WWW or simply Web aid users in locating resources among the estimated present one billion addressable sites on the Web. Search engines for the web generally employ a type of computer software called a spider to scan a proprietary database that is a subset of the resources available on the Web. Major known commercial search engines include such names as Yahoo Excite and Infoseek. Also known in the field are metasearch engines such as Dogpile and Metasearch which compile and summarize the results of other search engines without generally themselves controlling an underlying database or using their own spider. All the search engines and metasearch engines which are servers operate with the aid of a browser which are clients and deliver to the client a dynamically generated web page which includes a list of hyperlinked universal resource locators URLs for directly accessing the referenced documents themselves by the web browser.

A Uniform Resource Identifier RFC 1630 is the name for the standard generic object in the World Wide Web. Internet space is inhabited by many points of content. A URI Uniform Resource Identifier is the way you identify any of those points of content whether it be a page of text a video or sound clip a still or animated image or a program. The most common form of URI is the Web page address which is a particular form or subset of URI called a Uniform Resource Locator URL . A URI typically describes the mechanism used to access the resource the specific computer that the resource is housed in and the specific name of the resource a file name on the computer. Another kind of URI is the Uniform Resource Name URN . A URN is a form of URI that has institutional persistence which means that its exact location may change from time to time but some agency will be able to find it.

The structure of the World Wide Web includes multiple servers at distinct nodes of the Internet each of which hosts a web server which transmits a web page in hypertext markup language HTML or extensible markup language XML or a similar scheme using the hypertext transport protocol http . Each web page may include embedded hypertext linkages which direct the client browser to other web pages which may be hosted within any server on the network. A domain name server translates a top level domain TLD name into an Internet protocol IP address which identifies the appropriate server. Thus Internet web resources which are typically the aforementioned web pages are thus typically referenced with a URL which provides the TLD or IP address of the server as well a hierarchal address for defining a resource of the server e.g. a directory path on a server system.

A hypermedia collection may be represented by a directed graph having nodes that represent resources and arcs that represent embedded links between resources. Typically a user interface such as a browser is utilized to access hyperlinked information resources. The user interface displays information pages or segments and provides a mechanism by which that user may follow the embedded hyperlinks. Many user interfaces allow selection of hyperlinked information via a pointing device such as a mouse. Once selected the system retrieves the information resource corresponding to the embedded hyperlink.

One approach to assisting users in locating information of interest within a collection is to add structure to the collection. For example information is often sorted and classified so that a large portion of the collection need not be searched. However this type of structure often requires some familiarity with the classification system to avoid elimination of relevant resources by improperly limiting the search to a particular classification or group of classifications. Another approach used to locate information of interest to a user is to couple resources through cross referencing. Conventional cross referencing of publications using citations provides the user enough information to retrieve a related publication such as the author title of publication date of publication and the like. However the retrieval process is often time consuming and cumbersome. A more convenient automated method of cross referencing related documents utilizes hypertext or hyperlinks. Hyperlink systems allow authors or editors to embed links within their resources to other portions of those resources or to related resources in one or more collections that may be locally accessed or remotely accessed via a network. Users of hypermedia systems can then browse through the resources by following the various links embedded by the authors or editors. These systems greatly simplify the task of locating and retrieving the documents when compared to a traditional citation since the hyperlink is usually transparent to the user. Once selected the system utilizes the embedded hyperlink to retrieve the associated resource and present it to the user typically in a matter of seconds. The retrieved resource may contain additional hyperlinks to other related information that can be retrieved in a similar manner.

A well recognized problem with existing search engines is the tendency to return hits for a query that are so incredibly numerous sometimes in the hundreds thousands or even millions that it is impractical for user to wade through them and find relevant results. Many users probably the majority would say that the existing technology returns far too much garbage in relation to pertinent results. This has lead to the desire among many users for an improved search engine and in particular an improved Internet search engine.

In response the garbage problem search engines have sought to develop unique proprietary approaches to gauging the relevance of results in relation to a user s query. Such technologies employ algorithms for either limiting the records returned in the selection process the search and or by sorting selected results from the database according to a rank or weighting which may be predetermined or computed on the fly. The known techniques include counting the frequency or proximity of keywords measuring the frequency of user visits to a site or the persistence of users on that site using human librarians to estimate the value of a site and to quantify or rank it measuring the extent to which the site is linked to other sites through ties called hyperlinks see Google.com and Clever.com measuring how much economic investment is going into a site Thunderstone.com taking polls of users or even ranking relevance in certain cases according to advertiser s willingness to bid the highest price for good position within ranked lists. As a result of relevance testing procedures many search engines return hits in presumed rank order or relevance and some place a percentage next to each hit which is said to represent the probability that the hit is relevant to the query with the hits arranged in descending percentage order.

However despite the apparent sophistication of many of the relevance testing techniques employed the results typically fall short of the promise. Thus there remains a need for a search engine for uncontrolled databases that provides to the user results which accurately correspond the desired information sought.

Therefore the art requires improved searching strategies and tools to provide increased efficiency in locating a user s desired content while preventing dilution of the best records with those that are redundant off topic or irrelevant or directed to a different audience.

Advertisers are generally willing to pay more to deliver an impression e.g. a banner ad or other type of advertisement to users who are especially sensitive to advertisements for their products or are seeking to purchase products corresponding to those sold by the advertisers and the economic model often provides greater compensation in the event of a click through which is a positive action taken by the user to interact with the ad to receive further information.

This principle of course actually operates correspondingly in traditional media. For example a bicycle manufacturer in generally is willing to pay more per subscriber to place advertisements in a magazine having content directed to bicycle buffs than in a general interest publication. However this principle has not operated very extensively in the search engine marketplace partly because there is little differentiation among the known characteristics of the users of particular search engines and because even after a search inquiry in submitted there may be little basis on which to judge what user s intention or interest really is owing to the generality or ambiguity of user s request so that even after a search request is processed it may be impossible to estimate the salient economic demographic purchasing or interest characteristics of the user in the context of a particular search. In fact some cookie based mechanisms provide long term persistence of presumed characteristics even when these might be determined to b clearly erroneous. Thus the existing techniques tend to exaggerate short term ignorance based or antithetical interests of the user since these represent the available data set. For example if a child seeks to research the evils of cigar smoking for a school class project a search engine might classify the user as a person interested in cigar smoking and cigar paraphernalia which is clearly not the case. Further the demographics of a cigar aficionado might tempt an advertiser of distilled liquors to solicit this person as a potential client. The presumed interest in cigars and liquor might then result in adult oriented materials being presented. Clearly the simple presumptions that are behind this parade of horribles may often result in erroneous conclusions.

Although a few search engines for the mass market exist that charge a fee for use this model has not been popular or successful. Instead most search engines offer free access subject to user tolerating background advertising or pitches for electronic commerce sales or paid links to sites that offer goods and services including the aforementioned banner ads. These advertisements are typically paid for by sponsors on a per impression basis each time a user opens the page on which the banner ad appears or on a click through basis normally a higher charge because user has decided to select the ad and open it up by activating an underlying hyper link . In addition most search engines seek partners with whom they mutually share hyperlinks to each other s sites. Finally the search engines may seek to offer shopping services or merchandise opportunities and the engines may offer these either globally to all users or on a context sensitive basis responsive to a user s particular search.

The current wide ranging use of computer systems provides a relatively large potential market to providers of electronic content or information. These providers may include for example advertisers and other information publishers such as newspaper and magazine publishers. A cost however is involved with providing electronic information to individual consumers. For example hardware and maintenance costs are involved in establishing and maintaining information servers and networks. One source that can be secured to provide the monetary resources necessary to establish and maintain such an electronic information distribution network includes commercial advertisers. These advertisers provide electronic information to end users of the system by way of electronically delivered advertisements in an attempt to sell products and services to the end users. The value of a group of end users however may be different for each of the respective advertisers based on the product or services each advertiser is trying to sell and the class or classification of the user. Thus it would be beneficial to provide a system which allows individual advertisers to pay all or part of the cost of such a network based on the value each advertiser places on the end users the advertiser is given access to. In addition advertisers often desire to target particular audiences for their advertisements. These targeted audiences are the audiences that an advertiser believes is most likely to be influenced by the advertisement or otherwise provide revenues or profits. By selectively targeting particular audiences the advertiser is able to expend his or her advertising resources in an efficient manner. Thus it would be beneficial to provide a system that allows electronic advertisers to target specific audiences and thus not require advertisers to provide an single advertisement to the entire population the majority of which may have no interest whatsoever in the product or service being advertised or susceptibility to the advertisement.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 724 521 expressly incorporated herein by reference provides a method and apparatus for providing electronic advertisements to end users in a consumer best fit pricing manner which includes an index database a user profile database and a consumer scale matching process. The index database provides storage space for the titles of electronic advertisements. The user profile database provides storage for a set of characteristics that corresponds to individual end users of the apparatus. The consumer scale matching process is coupled to the content database and the user profile database and compares the characteristics of the individual end users with a consumer scale associated with the electronic advertisement. The apparatus then charges a fee to the advertiser based on the comparison by the matching process. In one embodiment a consumer scale is generated for each of multiple electronic advertisements. These advertisements are then transferred to multiple yellow page servers and the titles associated with the advertisements are subsequently transferred to multiple metering servers. At the metering servers a determination is made as to where the characteristics of the end users served by each of the metering servers fall on the consumer scale. The higher the characteristics of the end users served by a particular metering server fall the higher the fee charged to the advertiser.

Each client system is provided with an interface such as a graphic user interface GUI that allows the end user to participate in the system. The GUI contains fields that receive or correspond to inputs entered by the end user. The fields may include the user s name and possibly a password. The GUI may also have hidden fields relating to consumer variables. Consumer variables refer to demographic psychographic and other profile information. Demographic information refers to the vital statistics of individuals such as age sex income and marital status. Psychographic information refers to the lifestyle and behavioral characteristics of individuals such as likes and dislikes color preferences and personality traits that show consumer behavioral characteristics. Thus the consumer variables or user profile data refer to information such as marital status color preferences favorite sizes and shapes preferred learning modes employer job title mailing address phone number personal and business areas of interest the willingness to participate in a survey along with various lifestyle information. The end user initially enters the requested data and the non identifying information is transferred to the metering server. That is the information associated with the end user is compiled and transferred to the metering server without any indication of the identity of the user for example the name and phone number are not included in the computation . The GUI also allows the user to receive inquiries request information and consume information by viewing storing printing etc. The client system may also be provided with tools to create content advertisements etc. in the same manner as a publisher advertiser.

In recent years the field of data mining or extracting useful information from bodies of accumulated raw data has provided a fertile new frontier for database and software technologies. While numerous types of data may make use of data mining technology a few particularly illuminating examples have been those of mining information useful to retail merchants from databases of customer sales transactions and mining information from databases of commercial passenger airline travel. Customer purchasing patterns over time can provide invaluable marketing information for a wide variety of applications. For example retailers can create more effective store displays and can more effectively control inventory than otherwise would be possible if they know that given a consumer s purchase of a first set of items the same consumer can be expected with some degree of probability to purchase a particular second set of items along with the first set. In other words it would be helpful from a marketing standpoint to know association rules between item sets different products in a transaction a customer shopping transaction . To illustrate it would be helpful for a retailer of automotive parts and supplies to be aware of an association rule expressing the fact that 90 of the consumers who purchase automobile batteries and battery cables also purchase battery post brushes and battery post cleanser. In the terminology of the data mining field the latter are referred to as the consequent. It will be appreciated that advertisers too can benefit from a thorough knowledge of such consumer purchasing tendencies. Still further catalogue companies can conduct more effective mass mailings if they know the tendencies of consumers to purchase particular sets of items with other sets of items.

It is possible to build large databases of consumer transactions. The ubiquitous bar code reader can almost instantaneously read so called basket data i.e. when a particular item from a particular lot was purchased by a consumer how many items the consumer purchased and so on for automatic electronic storage of the basket data. Further when the purchase is made with for example a credit card the identity of the purchaser can be almost instantaneously known recorded and stored along with the basket data. As alluded to above however building a transaction database is only part of the marketing challenge. Another important part is the mining of the database for useful information. Such database mining becomes increasingly problematic as the size of databases expands into the gigabyte and indeed the terabyte range. Much work in the data mining field has gone to the task of finding patterns of measurable levels of consistency or predictability in the accumulated data. For instance where the data documents retail customer purchase transactions purchasing tendencies and hence particular regimes of data mining can be classified many ways. One type of purchasing tendency has been called an association rule. In a conventional data mining system working on a database of supermarket customer purchase records there might be an association rule that to a given percent certainty a customer buying a first product say Brie cheese will also buy a second product say Chardonnay wine . It thus may generally be stated that a conventional association rule states a condition precedent purchase of the first product and a condition subsequent or consequent purchase of the second product and declares that with say 80 certainty if the condition precedent is satisfied the consequent will be satisfied also. Methods for mining transaction databases to discover association rules have been disclosed in Agrawal et al. Mining Association Rules Between Sets of Items in Large Databases Proc. of the ACM SigMod Conf. on Management of Data May 1993 pp. 207 216 and in Houtsma et al. Set Oriented Mining of Association Rules IBM Research Report RJ 9567 October 1993. See also Agrawal et al. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 615 341 5 796 209 5 724 573 and 5 812 997. However association rules have been limited in scope in the sense that the conditions precedent and subsequent fall within the same column or field of the database. In the above example for instance cheese and wine both fall within the category of supermarket items purchased.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 844 305 expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system and method for extracting highly correlated elements a categorical cluster from a body of data. It is generally understood that the data includes a plurality of records the records contain elements from among a set of common fields the elements have respective values and some of the values are common to different ones of the records. In an initialization step for each of the elements in the records an associated value having an initial value is assigned. Then a computation is performed to update the associated values based on the associated values of other elements. The computation is preferably iteratively to produce the next set of updated values. After the computation is completed or after all the desired iterations are completed the final results i.e. the updated associated values are used to derive a categorical cluster rule. The categorical cluster rule provides the owner of the data with advantageously useful information from the data.

As the amount of information available to a computer user increases the problem of coherently presenting the range of available information to the computer user in a manner which allows the user to comprehend the overall scope of the available information becomes more significant. Furthermore coherent presentation of the relationship between a chosen data unit of the available information to the rest of the available information also becomes more significant with the increase of information available to the user. Most of the existing methods utilize lists e.g. fundamentally formatted character based output not graphic models to indicate the structure of the available information. The main problem associated with the use of lists is the difficulty of indicating the size and complexity of the database containing the available information. In addition because the lists are presented in a two dimensional format the manner of indicating the relationship between various data units of the available information is restricted to the two dimensional space. Furthermore because presentation of the lists normally requires a significant part of the screen the user is forced to reduce the amount of screen occupied by the list when textual and visual information contained in the database is sought to be viewed. When this occurs the user s current position relative to other data units of the available information is lost. Subsequently when the user desires to reposition to some other data unit topic the screen space occupied by the lists must be enlarged. The repeated sequence of adjusting the screen space occupied by the lists tends to distract the user thereby reducing productivity.

One attempt to alleviate the above described problem is illustrated by U.S. Pat. No. 5 021 976 expressly incorporated herein by reference which discloses a system for enabling a user to interact with visual representations of information structures stored in a computer. In a system of this type a set of mathematical relationships is provided in the computer to define a plurality of parameters which may be of interest to the user which mathematical relationships are also capable of indicating a degree of correlation between the defined parameters and segments of information contained in a defined information system. In addition an automatic icon with multiple visual features is provided to enable the user to visualize the degree of correlation between the parameters of interest to the user and the particular data unit stored in the computer that is being examined by computer. As the degree of correlation for a given parameter changes the visual feature representing that parameter will change its appearance.

Another attempt to coherently present a large body of information to a computer user is illustrated by U.S. Pat. No. 5 297 253 expressly incorporated herein by reference which discloses a computer user interface navigational system for examining data units stored in the memory of a computer system. In this navigational system the user interface shows a continuous and automatically updated visual representations of the hierarchical structure of the information accessed. By using an input output device to manipulate icons that appear in a navigational panel the user can navigate through the information hierarchy. As the user traverses the information hierarchy a node icon representing each level in the hierarchy accessed by the user is displayed. The user is also able to directly select any level in the information hierarchy between the entry point and the level at which the user is currently located.

Yet another approach to coherently presenting a large body of information to a computer user is SEMNET described in Raymonde Guindon ed. Cognitive Science and Its Applications for Human Computer Interaction Hillsdale N.J. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc. 1988 201 232. SEMNET is a three dimensional graphical interface system that allows the users to examine specific data units of an information base while maintaining the global perspective of the entire information base. The SEMNET developers propose organizing component data units of an information base into various levels of hierarchy. At the lowest level of hierarchy the most basic data units are organized into various sets or cluster objects of related information. At the next level of hierarchy related cluster objects from the lower hierarchical level are organized into a higher level cluster object. Continuing in this manner SEMNET achieves a hierarchical organization of the information base. In the graphic display related data units within a cluster object are connected by lines or arcs. In addition using a fisheye view graphic presentation SEMNET displays the most basic data units near the chosen data unit but only cluster objects of increasing hierarchy as the distance increases from the chosen data unit. In this manner the user is able to visualize the organization of the information base relative to the chosen data unit. See U.S. Pat. No. 5 963 965 expressly incorporated herein by reference.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 812 134 expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system for interactive dynamic three dimensional presentation of a database structure seeking to allows the user to efficiently navigate through the database to examine the desired information. The system graphically depicts the organization of the information base as molecules consisting of structured parallel threads of connected nodes each encompassing a specific aspect of the overall database. Within a given thread the component nodes which share a commonality of subject are arranged in a natural linear progression that reflects the organizational structure of the information subject represented by the thread thereby providing the user with a visual guide suggesting the appropriate sequence of nodes to be viewed. By providing a hierarchical representation of the organizational structure of the entire database the navigational system provides the user with both the position of the information unit being currently examined relative to the remainder of the database as well as the information regarding the overall size and complexity of the database. The system also provides the user with the capability to define one or more customized navigation paths over the database as well as copy and modify existing units of information. Thus a taxonomy is constructed and employed to assist the user.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 774 357 expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system that is adaptive to either or both of a user input and a data environment. Therefore the user interface itself and or the data presented through the user interface such as a web browser may vary in dependence on a user characteristic and the content of the data.

User modeling means to create a model of the user that contains information about the user that is relevant for a particular system. Thus the user modeling system seeks to define sufficient characteristics of the user to determine the prospective actions or preferences of the user and employ these characteristics to make predictions. Often the user modeling system is used interactively with the user facilitating the use of the system by intelligently predicting the user s inputs. On the other hand a sufficiently accurate and constrained user model may also be used as part of an autonomous intelligent agent i.e. a system that acts on behalf of the user to interact with other systems or persons.

The scope of the user model may include for example characteristics of the user which are independent of content such as language reading level fields of expertise physical impairments and the like as well as content specific characteristics such as the user s taste and interests for motion picture entertainment for example as part of a film recommending system or the user s knowledge of a given academic subject for an educational or testing system.

User preferences may be time dependent and therefore diurnal or seasonal variations may be important factors in defining an accurate model of the user i.e. the prediction of the intent and or desires of the user in a respective context. Linear predictions based on correlations may be useful for extracting these patterns from observed sequences. More complex models such as Markov models may also be employed as appropriate. Often the decision space is segmented into multiple operating regions each defined so that the associated model is linear e.g. MARS. Alternately a nonlinear model such as a neural network may be implemented. Further a combination of arbitrary type models and segmented decision space may be employed. A particular advantage of a segmented space is that the model for each respective segment is comparatively simpler and may often be updated separately from other segments. The segmented architecture is especially advantageous where such models are implemented in applets wherein the respective applet is simplified and its execution speeded by providing a narrower scope. Another advantage of a segmented user model architecture is that when employed in conjunction with a collaborative filtering scheme it may facilitate accounting for a greater range of user characteristics while providing specific preferences.

It is also noted that at a plurality of user models may be employed for example a content independent and a content dependent type with the outputs combined. These models may be segmented along common boundaries or segmented independently.

Different systems use different techniques for constructing and implementing a user model. The simplest and most straightforward is a technique of a user survey requiring some dedicated activity of the user toward defining the user model. A second technique monitors the activities of the user to detect patterns and actions indicative of user characteristics.

Intelligent agents can be constructed by monitoring or observing the user s actions with the system and thereby determining characteristics habits tendencies or features of the user. Frequently visited pages a request for an explanation of a technical term often or seldom used links and functions are examples of things that can be examined. This is closely associated with machine learning which means that the system learns the common actions and preferences of the user. Intelligent agents are often used for machine learning and this is a topic of artificial intelligence. This often requires the user to give the system some initial values about his or her knowledge goals experience etc. The initial values or default values if not explicitly given by the user are used for building a user model that will be altered when the agent discovers new things about the user.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 855 015 expressly incorporated herein by reference proposes a system for retrieval of hyperlinked information resources which does not require a specific user query to locate information resources of interest and which actively explores a hyperlinked network to present interesting resources to a user. Heuristics and relevance feedback may be used to refine an exploration technique or to present resources of interest to a user. The proposed system continually adapts to changing user interests. A system for retrieval of hyperlinked information resources is provided which includes a user interface connected to a programmed microprocessor which is operative to explore the hyperlinked information resources using a first heuristic to select at least one information resource to present the at least one information resource to the user via the user interface based on a second heuristic to accept feedback from the user via the user interface the feedback being indicative of relevance of the lat least one information resource and to modify the first and second heuristics based on the feedback. The patent also proposes a method for retrieval of hyperlinked information resources that includes exploring the hyperlinked information resources using a first heuristic to select at least one information resource presenting the at least one information resource to the user via a user interface based on a second heuristic accepting feedback from the user via the user interface indicative of relevance of the at least one information resource and modifying the first and second heuristics based on the feedback. In one embodiment the system utilizes a series of training examples each having an associated ranking to develop the first and second heuristics that may be the same similar or distinct. The heuristics utilize a metric indicative of the relevance of a particular resource to select and present the most relevant information to the user. The user provides feedback such as a score rating for each information resource presented. This feedback is utilized to modify the heuristics so that subsequent exploration will be guided toward more desirable information resources.

The 015 system actively explores a hyperlinked network and presents a manageable amount controllable by the user of information to the user without a specific information query. Thus the method allows selection of information of interest that may have been excluded by a precisely articulated query. Furthermore rather than inundating the user with information selected from a general broad query the amount of information presented to the user is limited so as to minimize the time and effort required to review the information. This system provides ability to automatically learn the interests of the user based on a number of ranked training examples. Once exploration and presentation heuristics are developed a hyperlinked network may be explored retrieving and presenting information resources based upon the heuristics established by the training examples. The system is capable of continually adapting the exploration and presentation heuristics so as to accommodate changing user interests in addition to facilitating operation in a dynamic hyperlinked information environment.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 890 152 expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a Personal Feedback browser and Personal Profile database for obtaining media files from the Internet. A Personal Feedback browser selects media files based on user specified information stored in the Personal Profile database. The Personal Profile database includes Profile Objects that represent the interests attitude aptitude reading comprehension and tastes of a user. Profile Objects are bundles of key words key phrases having assigned weight values. Profile Objects can be positioned a specified distance from a Self Object. The distance from the Profile Object to the Self Object represents the effect the Profile Object has in filtering and or selecting media files for that user. The Personal Feedback browser includes a media evaluation software program for evaluating media files based on a personal profile database. The Personal Profile database is also adjusted based upon user selection and absorption of media files.

Another way of creating a user model is through the use of collaborative filtering. In this case the user provides some initial information as well. For a collaborative filter the user typically identifies himself or herself with a class of users wither by predefined or adaptive categories. Thus the emphasis of information gathering is not on the user s own knowledge or goals but rather personal data such as age profession or interests. The system then compares this user to other users and looks for users with similar answers to these questions. A user model is then created based on the profiles of similar users. Thus collaborative filtering techniques typically require that a broad range of user characteristics be acquired and stored without aggregation for later analysis and correlation to a given pattern.

According to one embodiment during user interaction with the system either including an explicit programming step such as a user survey or through observation of the user a user s characteristics are determined. Typically it is too much of a burden on the user to explicitly obtain a complete profile. Therefore any such profile is acquired in a goal dependent or context sensitive manner. For example a set of profiles are related by a decision tree. The user then explicitly or implicitly defines the necessary characteristics to traverse the decision tree to define an unambiguous profile or to arrive at a set of compromises to define a hybrid profile. Since these profiles are goal directed the process of defining the profile is inherent in achieving the goal.

The particular profiles are for example defined by a logical analysis of the decision space or defined by an analysis of a population of users with each profile representing a cluster within the scope of the decision space. In the former case it is often difficult to make presumptions about the user outside of the particular decision process in the later case by identifying a set of individuals within the population with broadly correlated characteristics with the user it may be possible to infer user characteristics unrelated to the decision process.

Typically after an explicit process of defining user characteristics the system evolves into an adaptive mode of operation wherein the profiles are modified or updated to more accurately correspond to the specific user. Further as the characteristics of the user become more fully available collaborative filtering may be employed to make better presumptions regarding unknown characteristics of the user. It is also noted that the system preferably does not presume that the user has a consistent set of characteristics and thus allows for changes over time and cyclic variations. Preferably these changes or cyclic variations are analyzed and employed to extrapolate a future state.

A users knowledge of the subject represented in the hypermedia is a particularly important user feature for adaptive hypermedia systems. Many adaptive presentation techniques rely on a model of the users knowledge of the subject area as basis for adaptation. This means that an adaptive hypermedia system that relies on an estimate of the users knowledge should update the user model when the user has presumably learned new things. Further a preferred user model according to the present invention preferably also models decay of memory.

There are two common ways of representing users knowledge in an adaptive hypermedia system. The most often used model is the overlay model that divides the hypermedia universe into different subject domains. For each subject domain in the hypermedia universe the user s knowledge is specified in some way. The user s knowledge of a particular subject domain can be given the value known or unknown or for instance a fuzzy semantic variable such as good average or poor. On the other hand a numeric or continuous metric may be provided. The user s knowledge may also be represented as a value of the probability that the user knows the subject. An overlay model of the user s knowledge can then be represented as a set of concept value pairs one pair for each subject. Overlay models were originally developed in the area of intelligent tutoring systems and student modeling Greer J. E. McCalla G. I. Eds. Student Modeling The Key to Individualized Knowledge Based Instruction NATO ASI Series F Vol. 125 1993 Berlin Springer Verlag but are also very useful for adaptive hypermedia systems. The main advantage of the overlay model is than users knowledge on different topics can be measured independently. See also Gaines Brian R. and Shaw Mildred L. G. Concept Maps as Hypermedia Components Internet Akoulchina Irina and Ganascia Jean Gabriel SATELIT Agent An Adaptive Interface Based on Learning Agents Interface Technology In Anthony Jameson Cecile Paris and Carlo Tasso Eds User Modeling Proc. Of the Sixth Intl. Conf. UM97 Vienna N.Y. Springer Wein New York 1997 Benaki Eftihia Karkaletis Vangelis A. Spyropoulos Constantine D Integrating User Modeling Into Information Extraction The UMIE Prototype In Anthony Jameson Cecile Paris and Carlo Tasso Eds User Modeling Proc. Of the Sixth Intl. Conf. UM97 Vienna New York Springer Wein New York 1997 Maglio Paul P. and Barret Rob How To Build Modeling Agents to Support Web Searchers In Anthony Jameson Cecile Paris and Carlo Tasso Eds User Modeling Proc. Of the Sixth Intl. Conf. UM97 Vienna New York Springer Wein New York 1997 .

The other approach apart from the overlay model is the stereotype user model in which every user is classified as one of a number of stereotypes concerning a particular subject or area. There can be several subareas or subjects so one user can be classified as a different stereotype for different subjects. For instance a novice stereotype an intermediate stereotype and an expert stereotype can be defined for one subject in a system and every user is therefore classified as one of an expert novice or intermediate on that particular subject. This scheme is much simpler to implement but caries the disadvantage of not being able to tailor the appearance of the system to every individual user. Hohl H. B cker H. Gunzenh user R. Hypadapter An adaptive hypertext system for exploratory learning and programming User Modeling and user adapted Interaction 6 2 3 1996 131 156 have shown that overlay modeling and stereotype modeling can be combined in a successful way. The stereotype model is used for new users to quickly create a reasonably good user model. Then the overlay model is used with initial values set by the stereotype model.

Users goals often change from system usage session to session or even within a single session. The user s goal is often highly dependent on the kind of system employed. In educational hypermedia systems the goal is often to learn a particular subject or to solve a problem. In information retrieval systems the goal can be to find a particular piece of information. In an institutional hypermedia system the goal can be simply to do everyday work which may be less easily described in generic terms. In systems where the set of goals is relatively small are unrelated to each other H k K. Karlgren J. Waern A. Dahlb ck N. Jansson C. G. Karlgren K. and Lemaire B. A glassbox approach to adaptive hypermedia User Modeling and User Adapted Interaction 6 2 3 1996 157 184 the system simply includes this goal in the user model. More complex and advanced systems where goals cannot be separated distinctly require more advanced inclusion and distinction of goals in the user model. One way of dealing with this is to create goal value pairs for every possible goal in the user model where the value is the probability that the user has this particular goal.

In some adaptive hypermedia systems the user s background is considered relevant. The user s background means all information related to the user s previous experience generally excluding the subject of the hypermedia system although this exclusion is not necessary in all cases. This background includes the user s profession experience of work in related areas and also the user s point of view and perspective.

The user s experience in the given hypermedia system means how familiar the user is with the appearance and structure of the hyperspace and how easy the user can navigate in it. The user may have used the system before but does not have deep knowledge of the subject. On the other hand the user can know a lot about the subject but have little experience of the hypermedia system. Therefore it is wise to distinguish between the user s knowledge and the user s experience since optimal adaptations for each factor may differ.

The user s preferences are used in adaptive information retrieval systems mostly where they are the only stored data in the user model. Users preferences are considered special among user modeling components since they cannot be deducted by the system itself. The user has to inform the system directly or by giving simple feedback to the system s actions. This suggests that users preferences are more useful in adaptable systems than in adaptive systems. However users preferences can be used by adaptive hypermedia systems as well as shown by Hook K. Karlgren J. Waern A. Dahlb ck N. Jansson C. G. Karlgren K. and Lemaire B. A glassbox approach to adaptive hypermedia User Modeling and User Adapted Interaction 6 2 3 1996 157 184. H k et al. have found that adaptive hypermedia systems can generalize the user s preferences and apply them on new contexts. Preferences are often stored as numeric values in the user profile contrary to the case for other data which is often represented symbolically. This makes it possible to combine several users preferences in order to formulate group user models. Group models are useful when creating a starting model for a new user where this user can define his or her preferences and then a user model is created based on the user models of other users who are in the same preference group .

Adaptive navigation support is used for helping the user to find the right paths through the hyperspace by adapting the link presentation to the user s goals knowledge etc. Brusilovsky P. Methods and techniques of adaptive hypermedia User Modeling and User Adapted Interaction 6 2 3 1996 87 129 has found five different ways of adapting links to a user direct guidance sorting hiding annotation and map adaptation. Direct guidance means that the system suggests which links are best for the user to follow according to the user s goal etc. in the user model. Sorting is an extension of direct guidance all links are given a value according to how relevant they are for the user s goals etc. Hiding simply means that links that are considered not interesting for the user at the moment are hidden. In adaptive annotation systems links are given a sort of comment about the current state of the node behind the link for instance not ready to be read yet . Map adaptation takes into account the human computer interaction part. This is the only technique capable of fully adapting the layout of a page.

Machine learning and use of intelligent agents is a more useful technique than collaborative filtering with respect to adapting the user interface to different users needs. The reason for this is that the same user can have different needs at different times and therefore the system must respond to the user and examine the user s actions in order to understand what the user needs. In other systems that use user modeling for instance in film recommending systems the system already knows what the user wants and the interaction with the user is not as important.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 012 051 Sammon et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system for processing user profiles to determine product choices likely to be of interest.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 006 218 Breese et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a method and apparatus for retrieving sorting and or processing information based on an estimate of the user s knowledge or familiarity with an object.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 012 052 Altschuler et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a method and apparatus for building resource transition probability models for use in various manners.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 014 638 Burge et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system for customizing computer displays in accordance with user preferences. In accordance with the present invention the user displays may thus be customized in accordance with a past history of use including navigational choices and personal characteristics and preferences.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 978 766 Luciw expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system and method for suggesting nodes within a choice space to a user based on explicitly defined and or observed preferences of the user.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 977 964 Williams et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a method and apparatus for automatically configuring a system based on a user s monitored system interaction.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 974 412 Hazelhurst et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to an intelligent query system for automatically indexing information in a database and automatically categorizing users.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 970 486 Yoshida et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a method and apparatus for creating situation dependent keywords based on user characteristics and preferences which are then used to define a query.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 963 645 Kigawa et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system for receiving and employing personalized broadcast program metadata.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 801 747 Bedard expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a method and apparatus for monitoring a user s content consumption to infer user preferences therefrom.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 758 259 Lawler expressly incorporated herein by reference also relates to a user preference profile determination system which monitors user activity.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 945 988 Williams et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference further relates to a similar system for dynamically updating inferred user preferences based on user activity.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 005 597 Barrett et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system and method for monitoring user content consumption and creating a dynamic profile based thereon which is then used to sort future available content.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 973 683 Cragun et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system for the dynamic regulation of television viewing content based on viewer profile and viewer history.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 946 490 Lieberherr et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to an automata theroretic approach compiler for adaptive software. Such a compiler could be used for example to produce customized applets for users representing a set of search results or incorporating user profile data.

Boyle C. and Encarnacion A. O. MetaDoc an adaptive hypertext reading system User modeling and User Adapted Interaction 4 1994 1 21.

Brusilovsky P. Eklund J. A study of user model based link annotation in educational hypermedia Journal of Universal Computer Science Vol. 4 No 4 1998 429 448.

Moore J. D. Swartout W. R. Pointing A way toward explanation dialogue Eight National Conference on Artificial Intelligence 1989 457 464. AVANTI homepage zues.gmd.de projects avanti.html

Fink J. Kosba A. Schreck J. Personalized hypermedia information provision through adaptive and adaptable system features User modeling privacy and security issues zues.gmd.de UM97 Fink Fink.html

Eftihia Benaki Vangelis A. Karkaletsis Constantine D. Spyropoulos Adaptive Systems and User Modeling on the World Wide Web Proceedings of the workshop Sixth International Conference on User Modeling Chia Laguna Sardinia 2 5 Jun. 1997

Brajnik G. Guida G. Tasso C. 1990 User modeling in Expert Man Machine Interfaces A case study in Intelligent Information Retrieval in IEEE Transactions on systems man and cybernetics 20 166 185.

Brajnik Giorgio and Carlo Tasso 1994 A shell for developing non monotonic user modeling systems in International Journal of Human Computer Studies 40 31 62.

Croft B. and Thompson R. 1986 An overview of the IR Document Retrieval System in Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Computer Interfaces and Interaction for Information Retrieval.

Karkaletsis E. Benaki E. Spyropoulos C. Collier R. 1996 D 1.3.1 Defining User Profiles and Domain Knowledge Format ECRAN.

Kay J. 1995 The um toolkit for Cooperative User Modeling in User Modeling and User Adapted Interaction 4 146 196.

J. Orwant For want of a bit the user was lost Cheap user modeling MIT Media Lab Vol. 35 No. 3 4 1996 .

Rich E. 1983 Users are individuals individualising user models in International Journal of Man Machine Studies 18 199 214

Collaborative filtering is a process that seeks to determine common habits for a group of individuals having a common characteristic. The information is commercially valuable for example because knowing what a consumer has purchased it is possible to statistically predict what else he or she might buy and to suggest such a purchase to the consumer. This collaborative filtering is preferably used in conjunction with a past history of the user himself providing a powerful tool for predicting consumer behavior and preferences.

Collaborative filters presume characteristics of the user based on a class identification of the user. A collaborative filter may be adaptive meaning that it is updated based on actions subsequent to the classification of the user relating to the success or quality of the classification. According to an adaptive embodiment of a collaborative filter of the present invention therefore it is preferred that the client system either concurrently with use of the system by the user or subsequently transmit to the server sufficient information to update the collaborative filter for more accurately classifying the user and or for more accurately defining the characteristics of a respective classification.

Collaborative filtering is often used in systems that continuously present new things to their users such as film recommending systems and personally adapted news. If the user does not like one suggestion from the system he or she tells the system that this material is not interesting and the user profile is updated. Typically the weight afforded to adaptive features is low and indeed the feedback from one user is just one input to the system and thus will typically not cause a major change in the user profile since most of it still is valid. Systems that adapt the user interface to different users needs often need to give the user more control over the adaptation process. It is much more difficult to predict the user s preferences correctly in these systems since they may vary with time. For instance the user s knowledge of a subject can be a component in the user model and it is hard for the system to predict exactly when a user has learned something new. The system needs some help from the user and what the user says is more important than the current user model. The user model has to be modified completely to what the user has said. Therefore intelligent agents and machine learning are preferred in these systems.

Collaborative filters and user profiles necessarily require that personal user information be employed. This personal information may include private user information such as demographics preferences past purchase history media consumption habits and the like or confidential information including trade secrets or information otherwise not intended for publication. The unrestricted release and distribution of this private user information or the risk of dissemination is typically undesirable from the user s viewpoint. In the case of collaborative filtering systems this information must be stored centrally thereby creating a risk of breach. In the case of adaptive personal profile systems client side filtering may be employed however this necessarily entails transmission of a greater amount of information to the user than is presented to the user. Client side filtering requires that all information be transferred to the client system which is often expensive or untenable. In general any time valuable personal profile information exists even in when physically in a client system a risk of misuse or misappropriation exists.

The release and distribution of private user information such as demographics preferences past purchase history media consumption habits and the like typically is avoided and may be limited by law or agreement. Therefore one option available for filtering or processing information based on this information is at the client system where the private information need not be released or distributed. For example see U.S. Pat. No. 5 920 477 expressly incorporated herein by reference and Metabyte Inc. www.mbtv.com which disclose systems for determining user preference profiles for television programs implementing a client side filter. However this requires that all unfiltered information be transferred to the client system for subsequent filtering which is often expensive or untenable. Further this requires computational resources at the client for filtering the content. However in various circumstances such techniques may be employed.

The present invention provides a personal services infrastructure which unifies the visual environment through the use of stylized taxonomic trees and timelines maps . The mapping process transcends the cumbersome file folder technology offered for many years by the leading operating systems and browsers with gains in understanding flexibility and compactness. A particular aspect of the present invention is that with an intelligent organization of information supplemental information i.e. information not originally part of the data being organized or displaced from its proper location within a classification system may be presented with properly organized information.

The present invention provides according to a preferred embodiment a method of visualization of a set of elements in a computer graphic interface comprising defining a hierarchy of objects each hierarchal level within the hierarchy having at least one object the at least one element having one parent hierarchal object and optionally a set of child objects with a set of content objects populating the hierarchy defining based on a user input a selected object within the hierarchy for examination and generating a display on the graphic user interface presenting the selected object element and any child objects thereof a representation of parental objects within the hierarchy with a representation of a hierarchal representation thereof wherein each of the parent and child objects is associated with a hyperlink a selection of a respective hyperlink serving to transform that element into the selected element wherein when a content object is selected an associated set of related objects is displayed. Therefore the present invention provides a graphic hyperlink hierarchy providing with a display of a content object a display of an associated object.

Preferably the associated object is defined by a process of collaborative filtering. For example the associated object may be an advertisement offer of a product or service for sale or a set of information. Preferably an economic motivation is present for defining the associated object for example a sponsor or other party might seek based on an identification or special characteristics of the user or the class of content to communicate with the user.

The associated object is preferably contextually appropriate although in some instances the associated object will have no apparent relation. Thus for example political ads may appear in blanket campaigns regardless of the context except that such ads may be directed more toward adults than children.

The present invention also provides a method for a user having found a Web or non Web resource of interest and relevance to find similar resources. According to this method the user selects the preferred resource. That resource is then mined for concepts and phrases of which the most prominent are presented to user as a second step. User selects which concepts are relevant to finding similar resources. A search or metasearch is then carried out in which these particular concepts are searched for.

A parallel process is provided for the user to find a similar product to a preferred product. A special feature of this process is that characteristics of the product or service are mined for including for example nature of product price quality warranty features and service. The user is then asked to rank or rate the importance of those features that are important to user. A search of metasearch is then carried out. The user is presented with a selection of similar products or services. Alternatively or in combination with the above method user s query may be broadcast over a computer network or otherwise and invitations made to potential sellers to make an offer of the same or similar product or service with each seller competing to make the best offer. User would then be offered a selection from these competing offers. As a special feature of this competition offers could be displayed as made with the possibility of a fixed offering period or an open offering period. Generally speaking a user having focused on a particular item that user is considering for purchase the broadcast of this information may lead to a user receiving a better offer in terms of user s preferred ensemble of product characteristics or elicit product alternatives that user may not have known of or could not have accessed. The items offered may be displayed in the portion of the visualization where collaborative filtering content of commercial suggestions are usually displayed.

The object is preferably defined by a query for example a Boolean search of the content represented in hierarchy of objects.

This supplemental information is provided either to enhance the user s experience or results or to provide revenues. Exemplary revenue producing transactions include advertising and electronic commerce opportunities.

The present invention is preferably implemented using a web browser such as Netscape Navigator or Microsoft Internet Explorer using hypertext markup language HTML and or extensible markup language XML and optionally helper applications JAVA applets Visual Basic applets or programs e.g. OCX or other known program constructs. The browser typically resides on a client system having a user interface processor storage and a connection to a communications network. The database server is typically remote from the user and services a large number of users. See The Java Language Environment A White Paper James Gosling Henry McGilton www.quant.ecol.klte.hu java java whitepaper1.html et seq. . The client system is typically capable of storing and processing information locally while the communications network connection may prove rate limiting. Therefore it is preferred to employ the storage and processing capacity of the client system to reduce the information that must be transmitted. Further the browser typically provides a document page model for information display which may be quite limiting. The present invention therefore preferably provides an application or applet for providing advanced display and interaction facilities for interfacing the user with the information from the server.

An applet is a program designed to be executed from within another application for example a JAVA applet executing within the JAVA Virtual Machine JVM . Unlike an application applets typically cannot be executed directly from the operating system in other words the applet typically relies on resources that are not native to the operating system but rather are supplied by the host application. When OLE object linking and embedding techniques are employed an appropriately designed applet can be invoked from many different applications. According to a preferred embodiment of the invention enhanced functionality is provided by a downloadable applet that does not require a user install process or lengthy download times.

The system according to the present invention preferably provides an improved user interface which may include the visual presentation of information in a form that is a hierarchal that is organized in levels of generality according to a scheme b nested that is set together in groups depending upon associated characteristics c zoomable in the sense that a user in varying by at least one degree the level of generality also varies the view not necessarily continuously zoomable like a lens but sometimes stepwise zoomable and or d nodal in the sense that points are presented to user as hyperlinks to a particular level of generality. Such representations including all these characteristics are called zoomable nested nodal networks . A nodal network consists of a set of nodes or discrete and defined objects connected by links each link typically having two ends and defining relationship between the linked objects. The term zoomable infers that the nodal network may be examined and convey useful information on a plurality of different scales and thus may be represented to the user at such different scales. These elements define a hyperlink tree i.e. a nodal network wherein each node represents and identifies an object the object being generally accessible by selecting a respective node and wherein the zoom provides a selective disclosure of underlying nodes based on a degree of scrutiny or zoom . Such zoomable nested nodal networks resemble a traditional botanical taxonomic tree and thus these networks may be called trees . According to the present invention however the rules and tenets of taxonomy are not absolute allowing a greater degree of flexibility for display representation and manipulation of the objects and information represented. Of course a formal taxonomy may be adopted.

One hyperlink tree a Hyperbolic Tree Inxight Software Inc. Palo Alto Calif. developed at Xerox PARC is disclosed in John Lamping Ramana Rao and Peter Pirolli A Focus Context Technique Based on Hyperbolic Geometry for Visualizing Large Hierarchies CHI 95 acm.org sigchi chi95 proceedings papers jl bdy.htm. See also inxight.com inxight.com News Research Papers Files Z GUI Article.pdf .

An alternate hierarchal representation of information is provided by TheBrain.com Santa Monica Calif. 90404 www.thebrain.com which has developed a dynamic information presentation applet showing hierarchal links between data elements which may include hyperlinks to associated resources. More recently TheBrain.com has developed an Open Directory Project search service for presenting search results within their applet framework. This is not believed to be prior art to the present invention.

In additional to multiresolution representation and analysis e.g. zoomable viewing there are other options that may be predefined or defined by the user with respect to information or organizational display. For example the tree structures may be represented as horizontally or vertically oriented taxonomic trees a radially oriented tree an outline with indentations a conceptual map a 3D conceptual map with a virtual third dimension such as height added to the image an n space map with multiple degrees of freedom represented in various visual or other sensory means or the like.

According to the present invention a set of information may be transmitted from the server to the client for presentation to the user. The information may be classified according to the ultimate taxonomy regardless of the level of analysis employed by the user or may be classified only to a lesser level of granularity for example a level specified by the user or adaptively determined based on the user query user profile and the information content retrieved.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 014 671 Castelli et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to an interactive retrieval and caching of multi dimensional data using view elements. According to this patent view elements include node elements and transition elements between nodes.

The present invention proposes a number of means for minimizing the risk of release of personal information. For example the present invention provides a set of Intelligent Agents wherein the private information forming the basis for agent action is encrypted using a secure encryption method either embedded or associated with the Intelligent Agent or securely transmitted to it. The encryption technique may be of any suitable known type for example public key private key techniques RSA algorithms elliptic key techniques etc. The Intelligent Agent preferably is provided as an applet either integral with the user interface applet or associated with it. On the other hand an Intelligent Agent applet may also physically reside at a server location being shielded from interrogation or analysis by a combination of so called firewall protection encryption and logical restrictions on the quantity and nature of information released. The Intelligent Agent further is preferably protected from being probed to methodically determine the included private information such as by generating spurious responses or pseudorandom noise an apparently random yet predictable pattern based on a complex algorithm which may be filtered at the client system and by storing and analyzing a history of usage to detect and thwart hacking. While there may be cryptographic methods for breaching these types of security measures such methods are computationally intensive and therefore may be more difficult than other surreptitious methods of obtaining the private information.

The present invention thus provides an intelligent agent system wherein the user private information is encrypted using a secure encryption method either embedded in a custom intelligent agent for each user interactively and securely transmitted to it. The encryption scheme may be of any suitable known type. In this case the server stores a set of user specific intelligent agent applets or data files which are called upon as required to provide or supplement information about the user. These intelligent agents or data files may be adaptively updated based on recent feedback from the user or respective use with the updated agent or data file encrypted and the raw data purged. Therefore the intelligent agent applet may physically reside at a server location while being shielded from interrogation or analysis by either a secure firewall encryption or both. The intelligent agent further is preferably protected from being probed to determine the private information such as by generating spurious responses or being formulated with a portion of spurious data or producing pseudorandom noise an apparently random yet predictable pattern based on a complex algorithm which may be filtered at the client system based on a knowledge of the complex algorithm and by storing and transmitting a history of usage to detect tampering. While there may be cryptographic methods for breaching this security such methods are computationally intensive and therefore may be more difficult than other surreptitious methods of obtaining the private information.

According to the present invention an information retrieval hypermedia system is provided which includes an adaptive user interface in which presented search results contain hierarchal associations of sets of documents wherein respective hierarchal associations are based on user specific data distinct from the formal query itself. Thus for example according to a user hierarchal schema documents providing similar or related information are classified together wherein this similarity or relatedness is not defined intrinsically in the query. Further the hierarchal schemas may be persistent and applied to results of multiple distinct queries. Alternately a user hierarchal schema may be specifically defined for a particular query or topic of inquiry. By providing an organization of query responses users may define a broad query scope that encompasses a desired topic but may also encompass other topics either intentionally or because the user is unable to a priori precisely define the query scope. Often a query produces a large number of hits and the user has difficulties finding relevant information in an unorganized set of query results. By presenting a linkage between similar documents the user may not have to go through all responses to the query search hits but can skip many documents after having characterized the group or the contents of the group e.g. read one of the documents.

An aspect of the invention therefore provides means for the user to refine the search criteria in order to improve the precision of search results returned. Preferably this is an interactive process in which packets of information are communicated between the client and server although it is possible to conduct this process solely on the client system. Where an interactive scheme is employed it is possible to transmit for example marketing information to the user e.g. banner ads with each downloaded packet or otherwise communicate information in spare or otherwise available bandwidth during this process. These added opportunities may be used for example to subsidize the use of the system that allows the user to define or refine the query.

This intelligent assistance preferably involves an interactive communication between the user and search engine wherein a context e.g. semantic taxonomic placement of the search query is successively defined and refined. Preferably after the context of the query is defined the user is presented with a hierarchal tree of contents i.e. a branched hierarchical graphic representation of the information and linkages for confirmation. In the event that the relayed context is accurate a simple confirmation is accepted. On the other hand where the context is not accurate or of inappropriate scope the user may change or refine the context. In this way the number of complete database searches is reduced and the results tailored to the user s expressed requirements.

By providing a hierarchical tree of contexts the user is prompted to select or accept the narrowest definition scope of the query. In most instances this will result in a narrower search than a simple one or two word query but it may also provide an intelligent means for broadening the scope while avoiding an undue number of returned irrelevant hits.

The hierarchical tree of contexts may be presented to the user in a bounded rectangular box for example showing three levels of hierarchy with a single node at the highest level a set of intermediate level nodes defining a range within the generic highest level taxonomy but not necessarily being exhaustive for that level. A selected set of lower level nodes are also presented which also need not be exhaustive and in fact it is preferred that this level be truncated if necessary in order to reduce visual clutter. The nodes are preferably connected with line segments. In the event that an ambiguity is presented or otherwise the user is to be presented with multiple discontinuous representations of the taxonomy each may be presented in a separate bounded rectangle. It is understood of course that the tree structure need not be presented in a rectangle and indeed alternatives to a visual tree are also possible.

Preferably each node within the structure is active so that a graphic manipulation of the node in a web browser may be detected. This node need not represent a hyperlinked URI however and means are preferably provided for selection of one or more nodes by the user without intermediate screen information refresh. In fact in some embodiments only terminal child nodes of a hierarchal object are hyperlinked for example to URIs or a search results page object with all higher order nodes being locally interpreted at the client system.

In one embodiment the nodal representation is presented as a graphic map wherein a Cartesian coordinate of a pointing device is transmitted to the server to indicate a manipulation thereof. The server correlates the coordinates of manipulation with the graphic element at that point. Alternately an applet may be provided to generate the nodal graphic. In this case the helper application may intercept and process manipulation of the graphic without requiring intervention of the server. Further the applet may locally store a larger portion of the taxonomic structure than is displayed which will allow faster refresh and improved real time interactivity at the potential expense of a longer initial activation latency. Preferably an applet locally stores a set of higher levels of the taxonomic hierarchy as well as a cache of recently used lower levels. As the taxonomy requires updating the applet may communicate with the server. In addition the applet may provide further graphic information to the user for example relevant ads or navigational hints without interrupting the user s interaction with the nodal representation.

Typically the taxonomic contexts will be semantic e.g. a verbal expression of an idea. The hierarchical taxonomy will therefore represent at least in part a linguistic analysis of the proposed query. Typically the taxonomy will include a single linguistic concept which will be distinguished from other concepts even those with an identical literal expression. In some cases a multi term query will represent an attempt to define a single linguistic concept. In that case a single taxonomic classification will be defined and the search formulated to retrieve records corresponding to that concept. Often it is not or will not be possible to determine a context of a record a priori i.e. during the indexing process. In that case the record may be analyzed as a part of the search process to determine if it meets the search criteria or otherwise the ranking it should receive for relevance. On the other hand it may be impossible to determine automatically or manually the context of a record. In that case a set of rules may be applied to deal with this case. For example the user may determine that these records should be retrieved should be ignored should be given a high or low ranking or otherwise. The rules may also take into consideration the quantity and nature of other records retrieved or excluded . Typically it is desired to maintain a stateless condition therefore once the search query is executed the results should be downloaded to the client or explicitly defined in a URI. The database server therefore typically does not retain the query response for an extended period. See e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 6 012 053 Pant et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference. However the server may retain search results for a period of time for example 5 days to allow the user access to prior search results from the server e.g. allowing the user to employ multiple client computers or diskless computers and to provide data for the server to establish user profiles.

In another aspect of the invention the search query need not be limited to linguistic concepts. Therefore the search may involve images video audio or other types of data. In this case the taxonomy may be based for example on characteristic patterns or attributes of the data sought. It is noted that there are a number of systems available that support non verbal data access and retrieval. These include the QBIC system from IBM products from Virage Informix Excalibur Magnifi Muscle Fish LLC and a number of other entities. In fact the interactive search definition according to the present invention is advantageous where a simple verbal search query is untenable such as in searching non linguistic data.

In some instances the context of the query will not be fully or appropriately defined by a predetermined linguistic taxonomy. Therefore the system may define a temporary or artificial taxonomy. This taxonomy may be based for example on an analysis of the records or a select subset themselves or by the user during the interactive process. It is also possible for a user to store a preference profile which may include for example taxonomic or heuristic concepts. The database server therefore may reference this profile in responding to the query. In known manner this profile may be stored locally on a client system e.g. as a cookie or remotely in a server in a file referenced to the user. For example U.S. Pat. No. 5 895 471 expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system for use with mobile storage constrained clients which stores hypermedia links such as Uniform Resource Locators URL used to identify and control access to resources on the network on a server remote from the client device. Another system provides a globally unique identifier GUI to track users across secure and insecure networks. See U.S. Pat. No. 5 966 705 expressly incorporated herein by reference.

A user may for example be provided with a personal web page including a variety of information. In some instances this information will be personal and will therefore be maintained in secrecy for example requiring passwords and or support for encryption e.g. secure socket layer SSL communications . Advantageously the information associated with this web page may be updated and enhanced automatically to represent a history of use by the user. Because this web page is maintained separately from the database server it is accessible to a variety of servers and further may be referenced by URL. Therefore this scheme allows an on line memory and persistence of complex parameters even where the system is otherwise stateless. This scheme differs from the simple use of Internet cookies in that the file may be stored remotely and is therefore not encumbered by the communication link between the user and server. Further it is possible to perform analysis e.g. stochastic analysis of the profiles of a number of users in order to improve the performance of the system. These files are personal which mean they are linked to the identity of the particular user rather than the particular machine from which he communicates.

In the taxonomic representation which as discussed above is preferably a tree structure each node may be a hyperlink meaning that a selection of that node indicates a reference to another data object or URI. See e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 6 018 748 Smith expressly incorporated herein by reference. In some instances the selection of a node will be employed to define a refinement of the taxonomic definition. In other instances the selection of a node may point directly to a data element. Thus for example where the taxonomic definition is sufficiently specific the selection of a node automatically calls a URI which may initiate a search in a search engine or call a specific web page. On the other hand the user may select a group of nodes to define a concept cluster. Graphically the user may circumscribe a set of nodes potentially across multiple taxonomic levels or even discontinuous through the taxonomy to define the context. Where a node or group of nodes represent a search definition the definition may be directly derived from the taxonomy or it may represent the labors of human experts who translate the context of a node into an optimized query. Likewise the query string itself may vary depending on the search engine referenced. Further the search string may also vary in dependence on a sophistication or role of the user.

The user may create de novo modify or extend a predefined taxonomy based on use or particular requirements. Therefore the present invention provides a generic taxonomic structure for the organization of knowledge and in particular computer and Internet platformed information and to which a set of new predefined or extensible definitions may be associated. From a commercial point of view each person s activities and interests could be seen as hot spots on a predefined taxonomic map. To use a visual metaphor a set of transparencies each representing a taxonomic map of a person s interests and activities overlaid upon one another would show darkened areas similar to population clusters in a population map. This metaphor could also be translated into a statistical model of groups of people sharing common interests for the purpose of sales and e commerce. The present invention therefore encompasses the collation and use of such taxonomic maps of the activities and interests of specific populations. These may be used for example to generate custom sales catalogs either printed or on line.

The present invention also encompasses selections of information e.g. customized catalogs generated for individuals or population groups based on the structure or statistical density of populated nodes on a taxonomic classification of interests and activities.

The present invention also encompasses the idea that there are certain domains of knowledge where a user may never have an interest. Thus a child may have little interest in real estate listings. It provides the opportunity for user to exclude certain categories of information on a durable basis. This may be accomplished through a keyword methodology certain keywords are related to real estate listings and suggest non relevance or by taxonomic exclusion so that certain branches of a taxonomic tree are durably or semi durably excluded. This approach to date has been limited to exclusion of adult material but it has a much broader utility. In distinction to smut filters the system according to the present invention is therefore adaptive providing individualized filters and inclusion exclusion or ranking criteria. In fact these criteria may be context sensitive such that application of a criterion is dependent on the history of use recent and or long term data environment of the system e.g. explicitly and or implicitly entered information and automated responses thereto and or status of the system e.g. responsive to the tasks presently executing on the system. Therefore according to the present invention filters need not be absolute such that in the aforementioned example an otherwise relevant response to a query need not be excluded simply because it contains words which are likely indicative of a real estate listing if the response is otherwise material.

This of course raises the issues of competing and cooperative filters. According to the present invention an intelligent decision may be made dependent on outputs of a plurality of semantic taxonomic or other types of filters. Of course a rigid filter rule such as a smut filter may also be established within the same framework.

In some instances a predetermined taxonomy is insufficient to finely granularize the set of results returned. In addition the user may not be able a priori to classify the results without first examining them. In these sorts of instances it may be desired to automatically classify documents into subsets of records of reasonable number. Thus a relatively large set of objects responsive to a query may be automatically analyzed to determine common characteristics and categorized into mutually exclusive or reasonably so subsets thereof. The system may then define these distinctions as temporary or permanent taxonomic classifications. The user may then review these derived classifications generated based on the content of the objects or the objects therein. The automated classifications may also provide extrinsic distinctions e.g. commercially motivated distinctions rather than purely intrinsic content related distinctions.

As discussed above the recently relevant portions of the taxonomy may be cached by an applet or helper application and therefore these cached portions may include the derived taxonomy. Typically the artificial taxonomy may be difficult to automatically integrate into a predetermined taxonomy. In that case the system may offer the user the opportunity to manually define a taxonomic relation of a new or artificial taxonomic classification. Preferably this opportunity is presented asynchronously with other requests of the server. Further the applet may organize and defer such tasks. In fact the applet may assist the user in organizing information extrinsic to the searching system so that the user s available information base from multiple sources is coherently organized.

In a preferred embodiment a taxonomy may be defined based on a commercial or industrial interest. Thus the system according to the present invention may be applied to catalogs and specialized databases. Further the taxonomy may be defined as a set of nodes each node representing a different resource. For example in an electronic on line commerce system each vendor may be represented as a node within the taxonomy based on the products or services offered client profile and other factors such as a priority rating. Therefore the user may be presented with a plurality of potential taxonomic systems depending on an initial interaction with the system. The user may initially indicate that he or she seeks to purchase an item. Therefore the taxonomy selected will relate to goods for sale. In that case a particular item offered within the system may ultimately have a plurality of taxonomic classifications depending on a path the user takes. In other systems the taxonomy is constrained such that no item may be classified more than once. An example would be linguistic searches wherein a single meaning for a search term is desired and the taxonomy defines the meaning.

Certain parts of the taxonomy might be made available on a commercial basis. For example under automobiles American automobiles there might be a portion of the tree with Chrysler under which might be sports utility vehicles SUV trucks cars and under sports utility vehicles might be Durango and Cherokee where this inset in the taxonomy is paid for by the manufacturer or distributor on a fixed fee for view or click through basis or a combination of these approaches. The advertiser would know that a person entering its portion of the taxonomical tree really wants to see this particular product or aspect of its business which should command a premium fee or click through charge. To maintain integrity with the users the paid portions of the taxonomy could be differentiated with a distinguishing typeface or color could be outlined as commercial or otherwise differentiated to separate commercial and non commercial portions of the taxonomy. In other cases the probability of a user responding in the desired way to the ad is not exceedingly high. In that case the cost per impression could be lower or a higher valued ad substituted. The advertising rates may therefore be variable and even computed according to a continuous formula based on the characteristics of the user the present search and past history of the user and possibly other factors for each imprint or user.

In the same manner premium content i.e. information objects that are available only by subscription or through payment may also be highlighted and or segregated from free or basic content.

The taxonomy may also include a hybrid representation especially where commercial subsidies are a factor. Thus where a user is shopping the interactive search process is purely of a commercial nature and is optimized accordingly. This optimization may be such as to maximize revenues for the search engine proprietor or maximize sales profit for the vendor. On the other hand where the user seeks content rather than to purchase the process may be subsidized by seeding the visual displays presented to the user with advertisements. Preferably these advertisements are targeted to the user for example based on the search premise an imputed user profile or set of characteristics or an identification of the user. Thus for example relevant commercial elements may be interposed in the taxonomic structure of the content. Alternately banner ads may be provided associated with the content displayed the user or otherwise to the process in which the user is involved.

This commercially subsidized portion of the information may be subjected to various filters limits and compensation attributes. Thus a user may wish to avoid all extraneous information at the cost of usage fees subscription payments or other model for compensation of the service provider. Likewise the amount of sponsor information may be limited either at the server transmitting the information or at the client system.

A further aspect of the invention relates to revenue models which may be defined based on the advanced functionality of each respective system. For example in the process of defining user characteristics for the system the user conveys valuable information about himself. This information may be used for example to define on a general level a set of products and services in which the user may be interested. This information may be used internally within the system or sold to marketing concerns as permitted by the user usage agreement regulation and law. Advantageously the system tests hypotheses by requesting feedback from the user relating to generalizations and specifications that are made. Thus the function of defining the characteristic of the user may be enhanced through cooperation of the user. The benefit to the user of allowing these characteristics to be ascertained will be tangible and immediate so the user will likely not object. The value of this data in turn may be returned to the user in whole or part by monetary remuneration subsidy for search activities and or reduced search costs for items of interest to the user.

Since a significant cost in Internet searching involved retrieval of query responses by narrowing a scope of a search it is possible to reduce the costs by limiting the information which must be delivered. Further the value of the identification of a user characteristic especially with the confirmation of similar interests based on acceptance of the group presumptions made by the system is high especially for marketing purposes. Therefore given the potential cost savings and information value the system may provide substantial incentives to the user to cooperate with the information gathering process and to frequently use the system. These incentives may take the form of monetary rewards coupons bonuses contests and random drawings or improved content or service. These incentives may be allocated and provided in known manner.

Typically the incentives are allocated according to profit to the proprietor of the database interface system. The greatest opportunities are indeed where the user conducts an e commerce transaction through the portal wherein the portal is compensated for delivering a willing and able purchaser to a vendor or wherein the portal itself is the vendor. Therefore the preferred primary basis for incentives is e commerce transactions completed. A secondary basis for revenue to the portal includes advertising revenues typically on a per ad impression or click through basis. In this case the proprietor desires mere use of the portal and primary incentives may be provided such as a set of useful services as well as secondary incentives such as rewards. These services may include for example personal shopping or information gathering agents news feeds e mail personal home page or web sites electronic wallet services best price services consumer review services on line auction systems or auction monitoring systems chat rooms or chat room monitoring services and the like.

It is well known that by optimizing the presentation of advertising to potential consumers a higher effectiveness of advertising will be achieved termed the ad response rate. It is believed that the probability that a potential consumer will purchase a particular item is correlated with certain personal characteristics including demographic characteristics of the person or family unit. The field is called demographically targeted advertising. Thus by predicting the ad response rate for a person the most highly valued advertisement may be selected for the person. This optimization allows the service provider to charge a higher ad rate while the advertiser gains more effectiveness for marketing dollars.

Accordingly one aspect of the invention provides that a conditional probability of a subsequent action by the user may be assessed for each interaction and that on the basis of that probability an economic parameter altered. Thus for example the selection of a hyperlink by the user through a browser may be associated with a calculated probability that the user will subsequently purchase a good or service. This probability may then be used to calculate an advertiser charge for delivery of an advertisement or to prioritize the advertisements sent to the user in order to for example maximize the utility to the selected advertiser the advertisement serving system operator to the user or some combination thereof. This calculated probability may also be used to adapt the information subsequently presented to the user. This probability may be calculated for example based on a population statistic plus a recent history of the particular user a collaborative filtering scheme a long term monitoring of the user through the use for example of cookies and a database or other scheme or through express input of user characteristics such as demographic profile survey response or a direct user communication. The logic used to predict the probability may be formal Bayesean fuzzy logic a multiple regression equation neural networks or other known logic. Further the probability calculation algorithm need not be completely accurate so long as it produces an output more accurate than a random selection however since an economic valuation is placed on the result a more accurate calculation will likely be considered more valuable in the marketplace.

It is noted that the advertisement need not be limited to efforts to cause a consumer to purchase. In fact advertising as considered herein broadly encompasses seeking to influence a user. Thus the decisions made by the user need not be purchasing decisions. However typically an economic model is appropriate. For example in a corporate Intranet messages transmitted to users may be internal messages from within the network for example informing users of new corporate capabilities resources or initiatives or of changes. According to the present invention these messages may be delivered in a context sensitive manner and based on a user profile. Of course as in standard consumer advertising messages may be targeted even to those persons who subjectively resist being so informed but nevertheless are intended targets of the message. Advantageously such internal messages may be subjected to an accounting system wherein a real or imputed economic transfer occurs for example in the manner of an auction seeking to maximize the efficiency.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 014 634 Scroggie et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system and method for delivering purchasing incentives and the like to a user especially using a cookie and associated personal web page.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 974 398 Hanson et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system that allows advertisers to bid for placement in front of particular users based on customer interest profiles.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 933 811 Angles et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a system for delivering customized advertisements within interactive communications systems.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 991 735 Gerace et al. expressly incorporated herein by reference relates to a computerized system for determining a user behavioral profile. This profile may be used for example to demographically target advertisements.

Guided Browsing The use of this information structure therefore presents another particular aspect of the present invention that of guided browsing. Therefore the user examines objects using known techniques and systems. The system according to the present invention need not replicate or encompass resource for all such objects. The emphasis of this aspect of the present invention is therefore to facilitate identification of relevant objects through intelligent analysis and information presentation techniques including for example hierarchal or taxonomic organization.

It is noted however that the system and method according to the present invention may be integrated with standard object browsing software such as Microsoft Internet Explorer or Netscape Navigator. For example custom frames or codes within the command line may invoke particular functions of the present invention. The hierarchal organizational scheme may preempt the standard favorites organization. Of course the present invention is operable without such integration and indeed is operable in many instances without a standard object browser at all. In either case the user is typically given an option to employ standard tools or those enhancements provided by the present invention. Further many features of the present invention are modular and need not be employed as a complete set. This is especially the case where features are implemented as sets of small applets invoked as necessary.

An important trend in the development of the World Wide Web has been the growth of communities which are web sites organized to encourage communication among groups of people sharing common interests. Such communities have been found to provide an attractive environment for specialized advertising and commercial sponsorship. It can be readily seen that the use of maps and other means for presenting relationships between objects according to the present invention lends itself to the recognition organization and maintenance of communities. Indeed the nodal map could be represented somewhat analogously to a demographic map in which the activity of nodes could be analogized to the size of cities. On an ordinary map an ordinary village would be represented by a tiny dot and a large metropolis represented by a larger dot or circle. Analysis of such a map could help provide users an opportunity to initiate or expand a community or for a service provider with access to such information to stimulate or encourage such a community. Therefore it is an object of the invention to analyze user profiles for example taxonomic maps to define a user s interests or activities which may then be used to identify communities which relate to those topics. The user may then subscribe to those communities.

After a query is defined the system may return a large amount of information. Therefore a proportional burden of information not specifically requested by the user may accompany the download for example banner ads. Advantageously however the user may be provided with options relating to the types and amount of such additional information and its manner of presentation. Therefore a variable cost and or subsidy scheme may be provided.

Once relationships are determined the output may take any of a number of forms. For example a tree structure may be created populated with the available document set. A multidimensional cluster map may also be generated with trivial dimensions collapsed to give the most useful output image. Thus discrete continuous or hybrid techniques may be used for data representation. In a preferred mode a high level analysis segregates documents based on discrete criteria such as a taxonomy although at this level a single document may be represented in multiple discrete segments. Within each segment the documents are represented in a continuous map the presentation of which may be altered by the user as desired to best distinguish the documents of interest.

Using this type of analysis it is also possible to implement an efficient vector quantized data compression scheme based on the common sequences within proximate documents within the hierarchy. Duplicate files would be most efficiently represented. Thus a series of documents representing a series of drafts of a document may be analyzed to produce a representation of the group as an edit history. This edit history may not only represent the entire set but in many instances provides a useful organization of the data including common ancestor documents draft evolution and individual contributions.

In fact some objects according to the present invention include information belonging to third parties or with intrinsic restrictions on redistribution. An example of the first type of information is demographically targeted advertisements which may be defined specifically for the initial user and which may include incentives or other information or rights not intended for the general public. An example of the second type of information is copyright protected data for which a limited license is provided to the original user. In each of these cases a rights management module may be provided to limit the retransmission or reuse of the portions of the object in accordance with the accepted or imposed restrictions. This rights management module may also respect indications of confidential information in the object and either delete modify or substitute information for those restricted portions before transmission.

In many cases the restrictions will encompass an economic interest or otherwise require a relatively simple negotiation to remove the restriction in those cases the rights management module of the transmitter or receiver may negotiate for the rights using for example a known micro payment scheme e.g. Micro Payment Transfer Protocol or other appropriate communication to secure necessary rights for the data. In other cases such as demographically targeted advertising the acquisition of rights may entail substitution of advertising based on the recipient s profile rather than the originator s profile. This later updating may be performed adaptively through use of the object for example by the object during use communicating with an advertising server to provide the appropriate information. Thus a rights management module may be a part of each client system for assuring appropriate and consistent use of data and objects.

The rights management module may be for example embedded within the host operating system within the host application e.g. the JAVA Virtual Machine or Internet browser within a remote server which interacts with the objects or as a separate and possibly obligate applet residing on the client system. Alternately rights management functions may be embedded within each application or applet interacting with objects subject to restrictions.

In fact the rights management module may be a separate system and multiple rights management systems may be present depending on the particular restrictions. In this case the applet which interacts with the object determines a rights status for information as well as a rights management method identification and communicates the necessary information to the appropriate rights management module. In one case an honor system may be implemented in which a user may have access to the information outside the scope of the applet in potential disregard for imposed restrictions. In another case the information is protected and requires successful completion of a rights management clearance for release. In this case the information is typically encrypted with the necessary information for decryption provided only upon rights clearance. Alternately a micropayment scheme may be implemented potentially locally with a secure accounting system. In the micropayment scheme typically a direct communication between creditor and debtor is not required rather the transaction produces a result which eventually results in an economic transfer but which may remain outstanding subsequent to transfer of the underlying goods or services. The theory underlying this micropayment scheme is that the monetary units are small enough such that risks of failure in transaction closure is relatively insignificant for both parties but that a user gets few chances to default before credit is withdrawn. On the other hand the transaction costs of a non real time transactions of small monetary units are substantially less than those of secure unlimited or potentially high value real time verified transactions allowing and facilitating such types of commerce. Thus the rights management system may employ applets local to the client system which communicate with other applets and or the server and or a vendor rights holder to validate a transaction at low transactional costs.

It is also noted that while a user may have to account for rights of third parties in order to use content advertiser or sponsor subsidies may inure to the user based on viewing or access of advertisements click throughs or the like. Therefore while funds transfers may be necessary vis vis sponsors service providers and rights holders the process may be transparent and potentially no cost to the user. In this case the risks of tampering and fraud based on manipulation of client system resident data and applets will generally be low and therefore the level of security and protection of these client resident data and applets may also be low. However as deemed necessary a high degree of security may be implemented such as a hardware dongle secure encryption and watermarking techniques or real time transaction verification.

It is an object of the invention to provide a method of providing a human computer user interface comprising the steps of providing the user with navigational tools for defining and retrieving objects based on a resource locator thereof providing an object search engine for selecting a set of objects according to a user defined content criteria and returning respective resource locators of selected objects and providing an hierarchal organizational structure in graphic format for the set of objects wherein the hierarchal organizational structure is automatically generated based on a content of or linkage between objects. According to one embodiment of the invention objects extrinsic to the user defined search criteria are inserted into the hierarchal organizational structure of the selected objects. These extrinsic objects are for example advertisements communications collaborative filter based supplementation or the like.

According to one embodiment of the invention objects extrinsic to the user defined search criteria are inserted into the hierarchal organizational structure of the selected objects. These extrinsic objects are for example advertisements communications collaborative filter based supplementation or the like.

It is also an object of the invention to provide a hierarchical representation of a taxonomy to the user for interactive definition of a desired search scope.

It is another object of the invention to provide a computer database system comprising a user interface receiving a user input and presenting feedback a memory for storing a user characteristic the user characteristic being defined through the user input and being employed to control a domain of a database operation while not defining a query and a memory for storing a user query defining a range within the domain.

It is a further object of the invention to provide a computer database system comprising a user interface receiving a user input and presenting feedback and a representation of an organization of knowledge presented as feedback to the user to define a contextual scope of a database operation wherein the user interacts with said representation to define and refine a desired context.

It is also an object of the invention to provide a human user computer interface system comprising an object examination interface providing human user access to a selected hypertext object and a graphic portion simultaneously representing at least three hyperlinked objects in a hyperlink hierarchy each hyperlinked object representation being hyperlinked to the respective object for selection thereof the graphic portion being automatically generated to represent a hyperlinkage hierarchy and graphically representing a history of access to the represented objects.

Another object of the invention provides a human user computer interface system comprising a graphic user interface comprising a visual display and a pointing device and a portion of the visual display presenting a hierarchal path representing a resource locator for accessible objects wherein a selection within the portion by the pointing device of a predefined level within the hierarchal path is interpreted to request an object corresponding to the predefined level of the hierarchal path.

It is a further object of the invention to provide an information organizational system comprising a hyperlinked organization of objects wherein a single object may have multiple parent objects and multiple child objects and wherein at least two independent hierarchies are formed by respective subsets of hyperlinkages within the hyperlinked organization and wherein the respective independent hierarchies are distinguishable for each respective hyperlink.

It is a still further object of the invention to provide a human user computer graphic interface system comprising a pointing device producing a signal corresponding to a manipulation by the user and being capable of producing pointing device events and a graphic display generator generating a graphic display representing at least two objects and a linkage therebetween as well as a graphic cursor the graphic display generator selectively altering representation of at least one object in proximity to the graphic cursor and altering a linkage on occurrence of a pointing device event.

Another object of the invention provides an information organizational tool comprising at least two distinct predetermined hierarchical organizations of information each having at least three hierarchal levels for a universe of objects means for defining a relevant hierarchy from among the at least two distinct predetermined hierarchical organizations of information means for defining a set of objects within the universe of objects means for presenting links to the defined set of objects according to the relevant hierarchy and means for storing at least a subset of the presented links within the relevant hierarchy as a recallable structure.

It is also an object of the invention to provide an information organizational system comprising a set of n independent hierarchies each encompassing a universe of objects a user input for selectively defining a respective hierarchy means for selecting a focus within a respective hierarchy means for representing the focus objects within the focus and hierarchal linkages of the objects within the focus means for altering at least one of the universe of objects an organization of the respective hierarchy a scope of a focus and a ranking of objects and means for updating the representation of the focus based on the alteration.

It is a still further object of the invention to provide an information organizational system comprising a set of n independent hierarchies each encompassing a distinct organizational structure of a universe of objects an input for selecting a desired hierarchy means for defining a set of objects within the universe based on characteristics thereof means for representing the set of objects based on the selected desired hierarchy and a ranking algorithm the ranking algorithm ordering objects within the hierarchal classification and means for selecting a hierarchal subset.

A further aspect of the invention provides an intelligent agent system based on a a specific task defined by a user and b a user profile defining general characteristics and preferences of the user. The user profile may advantageously be stored in a personal record in a server as discussed above or be transmitted by the client machine to an agent server directly. The specific task may be defined explicitly or for example employing the interactive communication scheme and taxonomic representations discussed above. Furthermore as a representation on behalf of the user the taxonomic nodes on which the agency is active may be visually distinguished from the remainder of the nodes by color blink rate highlighting or the like. The agent may for example conduct database searches or updates thereof monitor published pricing or on line auction status discover new items which meet a purchasing profile or otherwise conduct transactions on behalf of and using a strategy defined by the user. The invention also provides for customized news magazines whose contents are mapped by the nodal map of a particular user.

A still further object of the invention provides a digital rights management system comprising an index of content having associated digital rights means for searching the index based on a user query digital rights management means for applying a set of digital rights rules to a result of searching the user query in a content sensitive manner and means for transmitting the user query result and applied digital rights rules to the user wherein at least one digital rights rule provides a positive incentive to the user.

The present invention has as an object to provide a system for preserving digital rights in a transmissible object comprising a plurality of distinct elements each having an associated distinct digital rights rule comprising means for analyzing the transmissible object to determine associated distinct digital rights rules for respective distinct elements means for substituting at least one distinct element based on an associated distinct digital rights rule and means for accounting for the substitution.

It is also an object of this invention to allow for monies to be received from commercial interests who wish to obtain an elaborated portion of the directory from which user selects relevant categories a Limb . Such a Limb would present additional material suggested by the advertiser or merchant in a more elaborated way than would otherwise occur for example multiple levels of details about an advertisers products video or audio commercial messages special offers and discounts contests and so forth arranged in the Tree format. Preferably for the purposes of informational integrity commercial content would be separated from non commercial content by a demarcation such as a colored line to avoid confusion with non commercial content. To give a specific example user may touch a node for transportation automobiles US Chrysler Dodge Durango. Everything beyond Chrysler Dodge would represent a Limb a paid service. Such Limbs could also be modified dynamically in relation to characteristics of the user. For example the Limb for a young mother might emphasize safety features while the Limb for a user known to be a male in his twenties might stress the power and handling package.

It is also an object of the invention to provide a human computer interface system comprising a client user interface system a server system capable of communicating with the client user interface system and a user profile wherein the server executes an operation in dependence on an explicit user command and the user profile and wherein user profile is stored in an encrypted form which is resistant to detailed interrogation of the server.

It is a further object of the invention to provide a human computer interface system comprising a client user interface system a server system capable of communicating with the client user interface system and an applet presenting to the user a hierarchal nodal map of relationships of information classes wherein the server executes an operation returning a set of information and wherein the applet populates the hierarchal nodal map with elements of the set of information the based on a relationship of a content of each element with a respective class definition of a respective node.

It is a still further object of the invention to provide a human computer interface system comprising a client user interface system a server system capable of communicating with the client user interface system and an applet presenting to the user an editable hierarchal nodal map of relationships of information classes at a respective level of analysis wherein the server executes an operation returning a set of information and wherein the applet populates the hierarchal nodal map with elements of the set of information based on relationship of a content of each element with a respective class definition of a respective node.

Another object of the invention is to provide a human computer interface system comprising a client user interface system a server system capable of communicating with the client user interface system and an applet presenting to the user a map of relationships of information classes wherein the server executes an operation returning a set of information and wherein the applet populates the map with elements of the set of information the based on relationship of a content of each element with a respective class definition and wherein elements of the set of information within a regional cluster are priority ranked.

It is also an object of the invention to provide a human computer interface system comprising a client user interface system a server system capable of communicating with the client user interface system and a user modeling applet having encrypted user modeling data wherein the server is controlled by a user query and the user modeling applet and wherein a key is required from the user to access the applet.

It is a still further object of the invention to provide a human computer interface system comprising a client user interface system a server system capable of communicating with the client user interface system and an adaptive user profile applet comprising a collaborative filter for initial classification which subsequently is modified based on user observation wherein the server executes an operation returning a set of information based on a user query and the applet.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a method of protecting privacy rights of a user comprising the steps of receiving private user information from the user processing the private user information within a privileged environment to produce a public key private key encrypted algorithm wherein the public key private key pair is associated with a user and transmitting the encrypted algorithm to the user.

A further object of the invention is to provide a method for filtering user queries comprising defining a user taxonomic hierarchy of interests correlating the user taxonomic hierarchy with a set of references taxonomic hierarchies and modifying the user taxonomic hierarchy based on sets of rules associated with a reference taxonomic hierarchies having high correlations.

Another object of the invention is to provide a human computer interface system comprising a client user interface system a server system capable of communicating with the client user interface system and means for defining a hierarchal cluster map of data elements retrieved by the server system and transmitting a cluster density of the cluster map to the client user interface system wherein a hierarchy of the hierarchal cluster map is alterable.

Finally it is an object of the invention to provide a human computer interface system comprising a client user interface system a server system capable of communicating with the client user interface system and means for defining a hierarchal cluster map of data elements and transmitting a cluster density of the cluster map to the client user interface system wherein a hierarchy of the hierarchal cluster map is supplemented by context appropriate advertising.

In many instances the invention according to the present invention builds on themes and concepts of the prior art. It is understood that the herein discussed references therefore disclose elements and implementations of portions of the invention and include disclosure of elements and implementations which could be modified in express accordance with the teachings herein.

These and other objects and features of the present invention will become more fully apparent from the following description and appended claims taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawings in which like numerals refer to like parts.

The invention will now be described by way of the drawings in which corresponding reference numerals indicate corresponding structures in the figure.

The user s query may be used to implement suggested relevance zones which will be in effect zoomed in views of a portion of a taxonomic tree. From these views which will be displayed in the manner of a family tree within bounded areas probably rectangles the user will select portions that are truly relevant to the query. See . These zoomed in views would preferably be arranged in order of apparent descending relevancy. If the views are too numerous to fit on a single visible page they may be allowed to run to further pages with an alert to the user preferably given but the portions most likely to be relevant should preferably be displayed on the first page. Nodes on the taxonomy that are predicted to be potentially relevant could be identified by a difference in color a heavier impression of ink or different style of the same color as for example a large dot concentric circles or other such symbolism. A degree of predicted relevance may also be shown by degree of color saturation or through a color code as in the case of so called heat grids or other pseudocolor representations.

As shown in a user s choice of a particular node s tends to refine away distinguish ambiguity which would otherwise be inherent in the use of most natural language words and phrases and many proper names. As a commercial model this method presents several compelling advantages. First the user has uses two click throughs at a minimum to complete any search. Since the convention of banner advertising on the web tends to pay per impression on a click through basis the search engine business will receive two distinct impression payments in this way. Second and more significantly the second click through tends to define what user really means by excluding at least provisionally other often plausible alternative choices that user might have meant. The implication for context sensitive advertising is that the search engine in principle should be able to charge more for the second click through on a per impression basis as the context of the context is usually much better known in that case which would tend to predict higher than average click through rates on the banner ad in that the ad may likely be more pertinent or less offensive to user s true interest.

In the listed hierarchies have been supplemented with associated advertisements as a means for subsidizing use of the search engine and to possibly meet the need of the user even though not defined by the search query. Thus for Pets Animals petfood.com appears and thereunder for bats belfry bat detector appears. Under sports sporting goods a hyperlink appears while under baseball major league baseball and scores appear. Under education books and school vacation schedules appear while under Science Nature lab supplies appears . Thus in this case there is a contextual relation between the supplemental information and the taxonomic class. This same type of supplemental information appears in C E and in more detail in .

In general this advertising targeting is developed in two ways first based on the context alone. Clearly if the material was directly related to the taxonomy then it would be naturally classified in that position and it would not be supplemental in nature. Rather a set of rules or associations are provided to link sponsored links with taxonomic content.

A second method preferred herein is to employ collaborative filtering to determine which supplemental information to display. In fact this collaborative filtering i.e. predicting the future actions of a particular user based on historical data for a population similar to the user in salient characteristics. In this case the system does a better job of predicting an effect of the presented information. In the best case the system would incorporate both the historical information from the collaborative filtering technology plus the historical information about the user s own history plus information about user s demographic information and known preferences plus information about the content and context of user s current query or session. In terms of a multivariate equation the probability that user will buy a particular product could viewed as predicted these three factors plus an error term. Thus in a collaborative filter based system the nodal supplementation may be but need not be based on the context as well as a set of actions by other persons similar to the user. Therefore as shown in users whose interests include sky diving may have interest in purchasing life insurance and therefore the contextual relation may be distant but nevertheless strong.

In one embodiment a visual screen display generated during interactive use of the system to define a context within the taxonomy. Dual panes are provided for example to represent an ambiguity for example between the word bat meaning a flying rodent and bat a piece of sports equipment. In the left pane a biological taxonomy is represented with bats being one class of lying rodents while certain squirrels being considered another class. Individual species are defined at the lowest level. In the right pane the highest level is sports while the middle level is represents distinct sports that employ bats e.g. hardball and softball. At the lowest level is sports equipment which would include bats. It is noted that the relevant taxonomy need not represent the context at the same level in each instance i.e. bats are at the mid level on the left and lowest level on the right. Further on the right a bat might be represented as sports equipment under both hardball and softball even though the bat itself might be identical. Thus a formal rule of taxonomy that each object has a single classification is not required.

In the case of certain other search engines offering taxonomic categories such as Yahoo.com the user may entering a query having large numbers of hits receive back a list of categories and subcategories from which user may make a selection. For example if one types in steel in the clue box one is offered a choice of directory topics such as the one that follows 

These categories allow users to select a portion of the taxonomically organized materials to access. However they do not allow user through any gesture to see additional siblings or children. In contrast the invention in a preferred form allows user through a gesture to open up the categories in order to see corresponding siblings additional descendents and or more remote ancestors. Preferably this viewing is provided by a very simple gesture of which an effective one would be that a pointing device if roaming over a portion of the taxonomy pauses for a certain interval of time such as one second would then cause siblings to open up. For example suppose according to View of that one wishes to see companies other than construction one would hold the pointing device over Construction until siblings appeared as shown in View of . In this way the taxonomic categories rather than being analogous to a dumb computer terminal view are actively available to explore new knowledge from the taxonomy itself rather than through hyper link to the stated categories. Such exploration of the taxonomy particularly in conjunction with the knowledge of the size of each node as illustrated in provide valuable information and feedback to the user.

According to an aspect of the present invention the user may hover or hold the graphic cursor near a screen object to trigger a change in display such as a change in local detail rather than requiring a mouse click or other discrete event. With such hovering the user can increase displayed detail to see siblings parents and dependents. This isn t possible in fact is inherently impossible perhaps in a single root file folder paradigm. When a mouse click is triggered a new range of vistas may be brought into view which also can be hovered over.

In contrast to the Yahoo.com approach the present invention suggests the improvement of creating an outline or conceptual cluster map to eliminate many redundancies and therefore improve readability while creating a less crowded screen through the device of displaying a zoomable nested nodal network. See .

Another approach slightly different from is shown in . In zoomed in taxonomic views are only conjoined when more than one possibility exists for a relevant node at a single level of generality.

The invention may also provide that user s choice of a node or nodes within a taxonomic tree provides a useful discrimination not only as to indexed materials classified by that taxonomy but also relating to other materials not indexed in that or associated taxonomies but nevertheless digitally retrievable. This bonus discrimination is preferably implemented by intelligent selection of concepts and keywords from nodes the user selects or from pages or web resources corresponding to or near those nodes from which keywords and concepts are extracted for example by a summarization procedure which will be used to enhance a user s prior search query or define a new one. Therefore for example user s query might be sports but user selects the taxonomic node baseball or a web page in which the word baseball is prominent user s query string might profitably be expanded to sports AND baseball or just baseball for the purpose of a search of other materials for example through a metasearch procedure of other search engines. By a like procedure OR conditions and NOT dissimilarity might be appended to user s query or used to modify user s query or replace user s query to enhance such a follow on search. Thus for example by beginning with a process of directory selection user gives valuable information that powerfully amplifies and specifies searching outside of that directory.

In a preferred form the tree views presented to viewer are expandable. For example under the same string where Yahoo.com gives

The user of a system in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention is presented with a zoomable nested nodal network in which metals is the bottom node. See . In View of each level of the hierarchy holds one instance. The user decides what he is really interested in exploring is various company types. The user gestures for example by holding a pointing device over the word construction the child until a view appears of the siblings of company as shown.

This functionality requires within a traditional browser an applet that responds to pointing device actions in the absence of events button depressions. The applet may present for viewing locally cached hierarchal data or automatically request this from the server. See e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 5 964 836 expressly incorporated herein by reference.

As to nodes of the taxonomy the preferred embodiment of the invention provides that one two or three of the following numbers be present at all or many nodes of the taxonomy a the total number of instances of database elements corresponding to this node either real time count or a recent number b the total number of database elements apparently relevant to the query corresponding to this node and c the total number of apparently relevant instances in sum within any of the nodes. These numbers could be presented as a couplet as in with the total number of relevant instances presented a single time for example in a box above the taxonomic tree. These numbers might be of great value to a user in determining when to open up hits. If the number of all instances or of apparent relevant instances is just right user may then turn to opening it if too few back up a step or two if too many carry on with further steps. This technique is relatively efficient with respect to database server usage wherein retrieving hits incurs a major cost while tallying potential numbers of hits is relatively low cost that is identifying a number of potentially relevant hits references the index volume only while retrieving records requires access to the entire database.

The invention also contemplates as an alternative to a strict full zoom view of a portion of a taxonomic table a hybrid zoomed in fish eye view as with the fish eye lens of a camera. Such a representation may include hierarchical clustering whereby nodes are grouped into clusters and clusters may themselves be placed into other clusters. Users can then navigate these clusters until a desired level of resolution or scope of content is reached. The fish eye view can then be produced by a special variable zoo m algorithm as described in D. Schaffer et al. Navigating hierarchically clustered networks through fisheye and full zoom methods ACM Transactions on Computer Human Interaction Vol. 3 No. 2 June 1996 pp. 162 188.

The present system not only permits visualization of multiple roots simultaneously but can also use visual tricks to create an impression of focus just as with ordinary vision. This could be a fish eye effect blurring on the edges like peripheral vision bolder type or larger size or different colors for focal points. Several focal points may be viewed simultaneously. Further focus can be changed by a hovering action rather than generating a pointer event mouse click .

Of course the process by which a user defines a node or nodes of interest within the taxonomic categories need not be limited to a single step. See . As the user selects nodes of interest further taxonomic choices are presented. These choices could be more detailed instances of the subject that fall below the visible entries shown and are opened up for more detailed examination. Alternatively these new taxonomic representations could be miscellaneous elements of the database that may be of interest to the user. One basis for predicting such collateral elements that might be of interest to user would be a model based on collaborative filtering of others users interests for example of those users who have shown interest this node these nodes what other nodes were of interest to them The contributions from such other users might be based on their explicit or implicit recommendation. The process of laddering down or around categories would be limited either by exhaustion of the user s needs or interest by exhaustion of the database resources or by an arbitrary limit such as number of steps allowed. Such arbitrary limits prevent abuse of the system while providing most normal users full access. It is also possible that the limits applied are dependent on compensation for example a subscription level acceptance of advertising e.g. banner advertising filling out a demographic profile permitting tracking to other sites etc.

The storage at server level of user patterns of search both informational and commercial and particularly the pattern of items purchased or sold becomes particularly valuable as a database in itself. Because an aspect of the invention creates a process for allowing the user to carefully define a search the value of the resulting data about the search becomes correspondingly greater. In relation to particular advertisers and merchants the data can become a goldmine of insight into the segmentation of their product that is what kinds of individuals or groups or geographical areas favor this product. The value also runs in the opposite direction that is as the search engine is familiar with the habits of particular users as individuals or as members of groups it can direct context sensitive advertising to such group with greater efficiency than a less accurate search engine.

A context sensitive facility is provided for relating advertising content and possibly compensation scheme to the query nodal position within a hierarchal tree search results past searches past activities or individual or group characteristics of the user. Thus the advertising may be optimized in some manner to best appeal to the user while producing the maximum perceived benefit to the advertiser.

In another embodiment of the invention a user has a choice of a series of general or categorically organized web databases of increasing size in terms of web documents encompassed. Each increasingly large set will have greater size but lower overall measured quality where quality is defined as predicted relevance for queries propounded by most uses. The user could make the tradeoff himself or herself. Alternatively a query may be processed first through a small high quality database and if the resulting set of found documents is too small measured either subjectively or objectively then user would be bootstrapped up to a higher level of size and lower level of average quality. This method differs from techniques that perform a search on a complete database and then return a limited number of records ranked in order of relevance in that the distinct databases provided are preselected for quality level. Both techniques may therefore be separately applied i.e. selection of database and ranking with truncation of displayed records.

Another aspect of the invention provides a system and method wherein a user finds a site or document of interest. A Summary is automatically prepared which may then be edited or modified by the user. The user may then ask the search engine to search for like documents on the web based on keyword or phrases from this Summary. Likewise the summary may define a predetermined or ad hoc taxonomy which may then be edited or modified by the user the system then populating the taxonomy with defined or referenced objects.

Because aspects of the present invention envision displaying useful information in a pictorial format and because this format may sometimes require the use of small type size or may be used by the visually impaired the invention preferably provides that as one passes a cursor over an area of interest that area may be enlarged as if passing a magnifying glass over that area. This technology is known and at the present time can most readily be applied via the browser. In an extreme case even an entire taxonomic tree could be presented at once and one could zoom in on certain highlighted areas of potential interest as an alternative to the model of separate zoomed in areas representing portions of the taxonomy. See . This scheme effectively allows multiple scale representations of the taxonomy without further reference by the client to the server.

A user may also wish to adjust certain settings for relevancy as provided in U.S. Pat. No. 5 966 126 the sliding controls or mixing preamp visual representation . As explained therein such factors as conceptual relevancy proximity linkages blockmodeling presence in title popularity of site duration an average users stays on the site or others may be weighted by a user as to their proper importance in the relevancy model for this inquiry or group of inquiries. If the user for example strongly favors the popularity model user might set this control to the maximum and others at zero or lesser levels in order to see the most popular sites first. In the case of a search for commercial content other factors such as price quality availability guarantee consumer or expert ratings could be the critical relevance variables.

Also in the course of a metasearch a user may wish to determine the weighting of individual search engines or search approaches in which the user may be given the option to do based on 1 an explicit weighting of individual search engines 2 through a weight of search approaches associated with individual search engines 3 through a ranking of certain desired qualities such as speed of search comprehensiveness of database or richness in certain content such as video. For example the Google Internet search engine is associated with linkage analysis Alta Vista with keyword analysis and Direct Hit with popularity analysis. A user may thus rank as follows Google 10 Alta Vista 7 and Direct Hit 6. Alternately a user might select Popularity Analysis 10 Linkage Analysis 9 and Keyword Analysis 6. The numbers cited could correspond to explicit input or for example positions of sliding controls or other analog like devices as illustrated in U.S. Pat. No. 5 966 126 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 353 305 expressly incorporated herein by reference. Similarly the user may have in mind other variables that may be controlled by sliding controls normally expressing continuous or analog variation or stepped variation but in some cases also bipartite choice. For example a search for a certain manuscript could be by length rated originality and keyword proximity a commercial search might be by price quality reliability a chemical search might be by core chemical structure substitutions from a generic structure atomic weight hardness or valence.

Yet another improvement provided by the present invention involves the separation of web documents with adult content particularly erotic content. The nature of this problem is binary in most cases a user either is or is not searching for erotic content generally not both simultaneously is not well dealt with today by conventional search engines. A search of the phrase dog AND pony on many sites brings forth significant bestiality content but also information on pets and animal husbandry. The present invention may provide as is known in the art a technique for filtering out most erotic sites. Such techniques typically involve searching for sexually oriented key words. However the present invention might also provide for the filtering out of violent content through a search for repeated violent key words. By analyzing not only the words on or embedded in the web page but also the surrounding context including other pages within the site cross references from or to the subject page and possibly non semantic content attributes of the page filtering decisions may be made. Thus the hierarchies may serve the purpose of both pass and reject filtering of information.

The user then proceeds to submit the search request. This will be in the form of a natural language inquiry or for advanced users preferably through the Boolean graphical interface described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 966 126. During the latency period while user waits for results which typically would be about ten to twenty seconds the user will be prompted as to whether there is a category under which any useful results should be saved either as pages or as hyper links. In order to provide compatibility with normal web browsers this intermediate function may be implemented by an applet or helper application so that the HTTP communication session is not interrupted nor the available bandwidth hogged by ancillary activities. Alternatively the user may choose from categories suggested by the server those categories being driven by the portion of the taxonomy from which user selected a sub domain for the search. As the user progresses with this and other searches he or she will be encouraged to develop one or more personal zoomable nested nodal networks around which the user may organize useful web or other resources including files from the user s own computer. It may be suggested to the user that a useful model for such organization may be different vocational avocational and familial interests of the user alternatively the organization might be by subject matter fields by chronology by alphabet or some combination thereof. A taxonomic hierarchy based on a known classification of knowledge may also be provided which optionally may be modified by the user. The user would be free to draw links among segments of the tree both horizontally and vertically and the lines could have various meanings and graphic characteristics e.g. solid and dotted depending on a characteristic of a connection and indeed the nodes and lines may have multiple graphic characteristics which are either continuously or selectively viewable representing more complex organizational principles. This organizing device will henceforth be called the Little Tree .

However as the latency period between the submission of the refined search request and the receiving of information from the server may be quite short owing either to the advantages of the present invention in refining the query or owing to the availability of massive processing power as for example now experienced at the site of Fast Search whose URL is www.alltheweb.com then the activity of saving web favorites and other files can be usefully postponed until the Postsearch process. In this case the user could be apprised of a very short waiting period through the use of a clock in which the estimated brief waiting time could be given. The invention also envisions that Little Tree can be a freestanding web appliance or licensable module to save one s favorites.

Thus the functionality of Little Tree may be provided as a separate application that is usable in conjunction with the web browser and operating system and indeed which treats both local files and URIs as objects to be organized and represented.

Further although preferably a user is presented with hits after completing the definition process the invention also provides means in which hits can be provided at each stage of definition based on a best guess of user s intent up to that point. Thus very common queries or tasks may be accomplished through a single search interface. Thus for example maps telephone and address directories personal information e mail and the like may all be integrated into a single interface or portal.

Concerning the process of saving favorites and other files and materials in the user s personal tree format the invention also preferably involves in its so called Big Tree format giving the user the ability to translate the user s computer directories such as may be stored for example on a hard disk or elsewhere into a zoomable nested nodal network format. This application could be run at any time online or offline and would provide an improvement over functionality of such tools as the Microsoft Windows Explorer or NT Explorer or equivalent services of other operating systems such as Macintosh Linux and Unix by allowing user to add move delete review and revise contents using a tree format rather than such other formats as file folders and sub folders. Once again the entire tree could be navigated on as if a big map as user moves a pointing device to explore or certain zoomed in areas could be identified for exploration by a user command or gesture or by response to a user query. Preferably the user could set the pointing device in a move mode when user wished to facilitate moving items without keeping a mouse button or analogous device depressed so that items could be picked up and a dropped off with single clicks to facilitate ease of use and accuracy. See . The user could therefore take web favorites from a search result and embed them in user s Big Tree . Thus a seamless integration of the personal computer and Web resources can be achieved visually. It is noted that the Big Tree may be persistent or transient for example a Big Tree may be constructed for a project and eliminated from the user s current sphere when the project is completed. The Big Tree may be formulated as an object which may be transmitted and thereby permit exploration and or modification by various users. See . In addition for topics of common interest the server may store preformulated zoomable nested nodal networks which are transmitted to the user. Thus in contrast to present systems for conveying information such as Lotus Notes a zoomable nested nodal network organization can be transmitted with data files such that the receiver of information has an experience analogous to opening up a private web site custom tailored for a particular purpose indeed the present invention also provides that such zoomable nested nodal networks could then be saved in a form from which they can be publicly or privately retrieved from a specific URI i.e. a web site. The invention also envisions that the Big Tree application or a Little Tree Big Tree combination could be a free standing or licensable web appliance or application that would offer an alternative to services provided by such appliances as Internet Explorer and NT Explorer with the enhanced functionality offering an improvement over those alternative appliances.

Advantageously a user may be given the option to have a Summary prepared of the user s own files for example as residing on the hard disk of a computer or on peripheral device or stored remotely through the Intranet or an extranet either as a useful precis in itself to be saved or disposed of as needed or also as a way to generate keywords and key phrases that can facilitate automatic organization and placement of objects in a taxonomic scheme or tree or other conceptual map.

One advantage of the present invention is that in contrast to the file folder metaphor provided by known graphic user interface operating systems the present tree based metaphors permit an n root visualization and therefore overcomes many of the inherent limitations of the prior systems. File folders encompass only a single root and if viewed from a different root the entire view changes. An n root visualization of a tree metaphor provides the ability to visualize multiple parents and children simultaneously. In the case of a radial organization multiple centers may be visualized. Further the tree metaphor is consistent between the file operating system and the Internet with URIs and local files being treated potentially equivalently. File folders also are limited to a single hierarchy with the possibility of cumbersome aliasing. In contrast the tree metaphor according to an aspect of the present invention permits multiple distinct hierarchies to be represented.

The present invention also permits replacement of a user s virtual desktop in a graphic user interface operating system with a different paradigm for accessing objects. This paradigm is represented by a hierarchal tree in which references to objects of various types as well as navigational linkages between objects are defined. The structures represented in this paradigm may themselves be transmitted as objects. In this system the hierarchal linkages between various objects can all be represented on a single plane or level facilitating visualization of the interrelations. Further each object of the hierarchy may be an iconic hyperlink allowing direct relation between the visualization and implementation. This is similar in some senses with the nested menus as implemented by Microsoft in Windows 95 98 systems however according to the present invention rather than being a part of a program or operating system these are used dynamically by applications and employ data files that are transmitted.

Another aspect of the present invention is that the taxonomic structures represented need not be limited or controlled by an operating system file organization. Therefore elements in different locations may be viewed together or vice versa. In addition singular files treated as a single object under an operating system may be analyzed and segmented and represented as a flexible aggregation of objects within the zoomable nested nodal network. Thus the taxonomy may be applied to subset portions of files or pages in the manner of a cross file table of contents. In turn this allows a taxonomic analysis on a fine grained level facilitating classification of the subset portions. The tree organization may therefore be an adjunct or partial replacement for portions of traditional computer operating systems. Alternatively the invention may be embedded in an operating system such as Windows 2000 Macintosh 8.0 or the like thereby enhancing such systems. Such embedding may be in the manner of OCX DLL or other known operating system extension formats.

Although the taxonomic tree format is a preferred visual embodiment of the invention it can be seen to those skilled in the area that other visual representations can accomplish all or various of the schemes of the present invention as illustrated in . Possible visual representations include a traditional outline lower portion of and a hub and spokes or star upper portion of . References herein to taxonomic representations encompass these alternative formats.

Another possible visual representation is the idea of conceptual clusters. Certain nodes can be represented as close to one another without the formalism of logical branching. For example these clusters can be mapped into groups based on linguistic visual auditory or tactile associations in the manner of a scatter plot or of regular or irregular geometric figures representing constellations of such nodes. Further just as one can move from a taxonomic view to a more refined or detailed taxonomic view one could touch on a cluster to get a similar effect either more or less general or make a lateral gesture to sweep laterally. See . In a preferred embodiment horizontal placement would indicate conceptual distance across a similar level of generality with upper portions representing high generality and lower portions representing low generality. Obviously many other principles of organization can be employed. Further in such a map a height dimension could be used to represent frequency or relevancy although one would then have to be able to see through or around raised objects for example by means of translucency or cutaways or by visually or virtually walking around the blocking objects.

Responding directly to this need the present invention a field of improvements for a user s experience through so called Site Mapping . See . In this process large groups of web sites can be organized through either a human librarian or an automated process into entities having common mapping and navigation characteristics these pre mapped sites would be updated frequently to take into account any changes. Alternatively individual sites can be so organized in real time on the fly prior to navigation of such sites or in close to real time with the result returned as a batch file via e mail instant messaging or via a web site retrieval process. Site Mapping in effect provides a familiar organized overlay to the user as he or she visits different sites with their various contents organizations and means of navigation. Features of Site Mapping might include availability of a desired visual organization of the contents such as Table of Contents Index or a hierarchical structure such as a tree hub and spokes nested groups arranged as files or might preferably be arranged as conceptual clusters. In most cases a branched network similar to conventional site maps now present on web sites would be preferable. Preferably the nodes on the map would be hyper links leading directly to the relevant page of a site s content rather than necessarily to the home page. The status of the system e.g. the page presently being visited by the user may be indicated within the site map for example by a change in typestyle color size or attribute of the associated text for the distinguished URI.

Site Mapping differs from the site maps found at some web sites today however. First the site map would be intended to provide a unifying model by which the user can view countless different web sites. In generating such site maps a so called web spider may crawl all or select portions of the web and create a ready made set of such site map overlays for convenient or rapid use. Such maps could be built by human librarians or automated by special site mapping software. As a business model these maps could be subsidized by advertising by usage charges to consumers or businesses by usage charges to the sites indexed or by e commerce or commission splitting generated or facilitated through the convenience and appeal of the site map. The Site Mapping scheme dovetails with the concept of receiving revenues from advertisers seeking to offer elaborated commercial content in a hierarchical form such as in clustered nests or as part of a taxonomic tree by providing a suggested preliminary or final model for such content. The Site Mapping facility could in itself be sold or licensed as software that operates independently of the other features of this invention and which might be used by users of the web or by other search engines browsers and or portals. Site Mapping may also be a valuable service meriting the payment of licensing or use fees for the following groups of users librarians of data collections whether human or electronic censorial groups that exist in organization that monitor improper use of proprietary electronic resources and or commercial intelligence.

Site Mapping on an automated basis requires overcoming certain technical obstacles. First although some web sites have built in site maps not all do and those that do may not have them up to date or they may be difficult to use or interpret. Second many sites do not offer a search engine or index and those that do may be unfamiliar ineffective inefficient or difficult to use. Third many sites have subdomains related to them that are difficult to identify. For example Widgets Warranty Terms may be easy to identify but domain Service.Widgets Warranty Terms would probably be difficult to locate. Fourth may sites have anti robot technology that may bar queries from an Internet address that appears to be scanning the site automatically and rapidly.

The Site Mapper could also include a facility for input or feedback from the underlying web site proprietors or users. This feedback could be in the form of corrections to the Site Mapper s previous work. Web proprietors could also be encouraged to submit a proper site map of their site with correct linkage and hierarchy according to a consistent format accepted by the Site Mapper . A site map developed on a fly could also be the basis for the proprietor of a web site to post a map of its own site including after refinements and edits. Conceivably such a format could tend to influence the development of a web standard for site mapping and related software that could be sold commercially or offered as freeware.

The algorithms driving the Site Mapper engine that can produce a site map of web sites that are otherwise incompatible would exploit certain key clues in inferring a site structure. First it could open a site and explore all hyper links found from the site page forward and seek to connect those links links to links and so on so as create a drawing of the links. Second it could distinguish between links to outside sites from links within the site. Third it could seek clues to hierarchy in the use of the slash and dot . symbolism of unique URI s to infer apparent seniority. For example IBM Patent Recent and IBM Patent pre 1963 show an apparent structure based on two children of IBM Patent and grandchildren of IBM. Dot symbolism also creates seniority to the left in many instances. Fourth the Site Mapper could treat the matter within the site as a domain to be organized and it could use the technology of automated indexing to create an Index including an alphabetized and searchable index.

In another implementation of Site Mapper the search engine being asked to map a certain site has recourse to a set of indexed documents and generates the site map based on the indexed links. The Site Mapper engine may also map individual web sites on the fly to determine their internal structure. In this case dead or empty links may be discovered and indicated to the user for example with an indication of the amount of data at any web page.

Preferably Site Mapping also provides either as a feature to be saved and associated with particular nodes of the Site Map or in real time or both a Summary of the contents of materials referenced by the Site Map. The invention also contemplates that the Site Mapper could be a freestanding or licensable web appliance.

It is also possible for the search engine to return search results from a query to the user in the form of a tree object e.g. a zoomable nested nodal network. The user may then probe or investigate the object without referencing the specific contents thereof to determine the relevant portions thereof. Therefore as is known a search engine retrieves an over inclusive result it is often considered inefficient to attempt to provide a narrow yet complete search result due to the extensive processing time required. Thus by returning both the search hits and data defining various relevance criteria in a single data object the user is permitted to investigate the result as a whole.

The tree object also provides a substantial opportunity for the integration of advertising content. The user in identifying the restrictive search criteria necessarily reveals an area of interest. To the extent that commercial interests overlap with the expressed area of interest which are defined by the taxonomic representation advertisements may be represented as nodes or groups of nodes in the tree. See . In some cases commercial intrusion is unwanted or unwarranted and might be effectively ignored but should at least handled consistently i.e. the user must view banner advertisements during use of the tree object viewer. On the other hand in many instances the user is commercially motivated and seeks useful information from product or service providers. In this case substantially deeper content may be made available within the context of the tree. To obtain a separation of commercial and non commercial content the commercial portion of a taxonomy could be identified by an outline a special color or other demarcation. Thus for example the user may write the sentence in a clue box I want to buy a Durango. Using a method presented by this invention the user may then be presented with a series of zoomed in views of a taxonomic tree one of which might show in decreasing levels of generality 1. autos 2. US 3. Chrysler 4. sports utility vehicles 5. Durango in this case everything below Chrysler may be elaborated commercial content of the taxonomy in the sense just described. The user could go directly then to a desired part of Chrysler s web site for example without the discouraging factor of needing to navigate that site.

In fact each result may also be organized as a presentation or group of presentations. Such an object is relatively easy to use as the user may be a passive observer during a presentation. The cost of preparing high quality presentations may be offset by commercial providers in the form of commissions on sales advertising or sponsorship fees or the like. By preparing these objects using multivendor information a service is provided which no single vendor could or would supply in the manner of a trade publication. By linking the final preparation of an object with the search query and search engine results a customized object is available. The object it is noted need not contain the entire presentation or full content merely the required hyperlinks to access the content and preferably information relating to a taxonomic linkage of the hyperlinks and also preferably information defining relationships between the search query and or content referenced by the hyperlinks. In this sense the tree object may provide sequence and timing information for the presentation in the manner of Synchronized Multimedia Interface Language SMIL or HYTIME.

According to another aspect of the invention a revenue model is provided whereby advertisers may bid for placement in a list of relevant results in the manner of the bidding process used for relevance ranking used as www.goto.com. However in distinction to the model employed by www.goto.com this model may provide for the isolation of the paid relevant rankings from the objectively relevance rankings. Such an area of associated commercial content could be represented by a parallel taxonomic tree or a list. Such associated commercial content is distinguished from banner ads and like promotions in that the content would consists of hyperlinks rank ordered by an economic criterion that is highest utility however measured e.g. price paid by the advertiser. Thus the present invention provides a useful revenue model for the subsidy of its many useful features thereof while avoiding the problem of contamination of the objectively ranked or ordered results which has been a frequent criticism of the practice followed most prominently by the business associated with the web site www.goto.com.

The term agent refers to a smart software construct that can act intelligent on behalf of the user to accomplish tasks. The term is sometimes used in a strong sense to refer to a process where user gives power of attorney to a computer agent to buy or sell goods or carry out other tasks. Such agency services could include finding the best price for a good or service placing or buying a good or service in auction checking on availability providing product updates providing news updates and other services. These agency services in many cases may reinforce or facilitate business models of the search engine i.e. the user s economic goals are generally allied with the business interests of the search engine or portal provider. In many cases the user may provide a personalized profile to be located at the client level as a cookie or at the server level in a mass storage device in order to better carry out the agency role. The user may also be identified through a username password scheme allowing a single user to employ multiple computers or guest computers. The server may also provide a personal and or personalized home page function.

The present invention serves not only consumers looking for products but also products and services that is manufacturers service providers and distributors looking for consumers. The product providers may further subscribe to a service that customizes their portion of the taxonomy in relation to known characteristics of the user. For example if the advertiser sells luxury sedans it might situate its commercial messages ads within a portion of the taxonomy having a high probability of being presented to mothers by emphasizing safety features. It might also situate its commercial messages ads within a portion of the taxonomy having a high probability of being presented to a young man by emphasizing special branches relating to power and performance. Pages from the same or a different linked commercial web site could be opened directly as hyperlinks. In this way just as one speaks of interactive advertising there could be an interactive taxonomy.

Another potentially valuable service of the search engine is an aggregation of many discrete charges for e commerce including purchase or leasing of premium information content as well as goods and services. Since these payments for premium content tend to be small this aggregation service would be convenient for many users. These charges could be repaid through many means including direct billing credit card or via the local telephone company or ISP provider bills. The advertiser subsidies may be used to offset charges which are typically accounted for in a micropayment scheme such as MPTP Millicent etc.

After identifying a role in society or profession of an individual a template may be retrieved defined or created for that individual. The template may be customizable and indeed the customization by the user may be a valuable source of information for the database to improve the performance of the system with respect to the queries propounded by all users having the common role or profession. Ideally a user registers with the system once and is subsequently identified with a cookie from the Internet browser or username password that calls up a user specific file which controls user specific performance of the system.

Many aspects of the present invention employ known techniques although employed in different contexts herein. Therefore it is understood that these known techniques and those associated with them may be employed in conjunction with the present invention to the extent consistent therewith.

It is also understood that the various aspects of the invention may be employed together individually or in subcombination. Further it is understood that the present techniques are not limited to use on the Internet as presently known and may be applied to a large number of human computer interface systems.

While the above detailed description has shown described and pointed out the fundamental novel features of the invention as applied to various embodiments it will be understood that various omissions and substitutions and changes in the form and details of the system and method illustrated may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit of the invention. Consequently the full scope of the invention should be ascertained by the appended claims.

