---

title: Method and apparatus for forwarding messages among multiple radio networks
abstract: Techniques to forward unsolicited messages from an (IS-2000) CDMA radio network via an HDR radio network to an access terminal. A session is first established between the access terminal and the HDR radio network. During session establishment or thereafter, the access terminal indicates to the HDR radio network an interest in receiving unsolicited messages from the CDMA radio network. The access terminal typically also registers with the CDMA radio network. Thereafter, unsolicited messages can be sent from a mobile station controller (MSC) to the HDR and CDMA radio networks, or sent from the MSC to the CDMA radio network, which then forwards the messages to the HDR radio network. The HDR radio network encapsulates the unsolicited messages and sends the encapsulated messages to the access terminal. The forwarding of unsolicited messages allows the CDMA radio network to communicate with an access terminal.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08139545&OS=08139545&RS=08139545
owner: Qualcomm Incorporated
number: 08139545
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051031
---
The present Application for Patent is a Continuation and claims priority to patent application Ser. No. 09 593 289 entitled METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR FORWARDING MESSAGES AMONG MULTIPLE RADIO NETWORKS filed Jun. 13 2000 now issued as U.S. Pat. No. 6 961 329 and assigned to the assignee hereof and hereby expressly incorporated by reference herein.

The use of code division multiple access CDMA modulation techniques is one of several techniques for facilitating communication in which a large number of system users are present. Although other multiple access communication system techniques are known in the art such as time division multiple access e.g. TDMA and GSM frequency division multiple access FDMA and AM modulation schemes such as amplitude companded single sideband ACSSB the spread spectrum modulation techniques of CDMA have significant advantages over these other modulation techniques for multiple access communications systems.

The use of CDMA techniques in a multiple access communications system is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 4 901 307 entitled SPREAD SPECTRUM MULTIPLE ACCESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEM USING SATELLITE OR TERRESTRIAL REPEATERS issued Feb. 13 1990 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 103 459 entitled SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR GENERATING SIGNAL WAVEFORMS IN A CDMA CELLULAR TELEPHONE SYSTEM issued Apr. 7 1992. A newer generation CDMA communications system designed to efficiently transmit packet data is disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 08 963 386 entitled METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR HIGH RATE PACKET DATA TRANSMISSION filed Nov. 3 1997 hereinafter the HDR system now U.S. Pat. No. 6 574 211. These patents and patent application are assigned to the assignee of the present invention and incorporated herein by reference.

CDMA systems are typically designed to conform to one or more particular CDMA standards. Examples of such CDMA standards include the TIA EIA IS 95 B Mobile Station Base Station Compatibility Standard for Wideband Spread Spectrum Cellular Systems hereinafter the IS 95 standard the TIA EIA IS 98 A B and C standards entitled Recommended Minimum Performance Standard for Dual Mode Spread Spectrum Cellular and PCS Mobile Stations hereinafter the IS 98 standard and the TIA EIA IS 2000.1 through 2000.6 and TIA EIA IS 2000 A.1 through A.6 standards entitled . . . Standards for cdma2000 Spread Spectrum Systems hereinafter collectively the IS 2000 standard . New CDMA standards are continually proposed and adopted for use.

Given the ever growing demands for wireless data communication for a variety of applications multiple radio networks may be concurrently deployed to cover a particular geographic area. One radio network e.g. an IS 2000 CDMA radio network may be deployed to provide voice services and another radio network e.g. an HDR radio network may be deployed to provide packet data services. Theses radio networks may interact via a network interface such as the one defined by the Inter operability Specification IOS for cdma2000 Access Network Interfaces hereinafter the Inter operability Specification .

A multi mode access terminal can be designed to communicate with multiple radio networks. To simplify the design the access terminal is typically in active communication with or is tuned to only one radio network at any given moment. For enhanced services it is desirable for the access terminal while in communication with or tuned to one radio network to receive messages and pages from other radio network.

Thus techniques to forward messages from one radio network to another radio network and to transmit these messages to an access terminal is highly desirable.

The present invention provides novel and improved techniques to forward unsolicited CDMA messages from a CDMA radio network e.g. an IS 2000 CDMA radio network to an HDR radio network. The unsolicited CDMA messages are messages originated from the CDMA radio network and sent to an access terminal without the mobile station initiating the transaction. These unsolicited messages are not in response to an inquiry from the access terminal and may include for example general paging messages GPM paging request messages and other messages from the CDMA radio network. The forwarding of unsolicited CDMA messages allows the CDMA radio network to communicate e.g. page an access terminal that is in communication with or is tuned to the HDR radio network. This allows the access terminal to receive services from the CDMA radio network even though it is not presently tuned to that radio network.

An embodiment of the invention provides a method for receiving at an access terminal messages that have been forwarded from a second e.g. IS 2000 radio network to a first e.g. HDR radio network. In accordance with the method a session is first established between the access terminal and the first radio network. During session establishment or thereafter the access terminal indicate to the first radio network an interest in receiving unsolicited messages from the second radio network and may further indicates an interest to be paged for a particular set of service options. The access terminal typically also registers with the second radio network even when it is tuned to the first radio network. Thereafter the access terminal can receive encapsulated messages from the first radio network. Each encapsulated message includes an unsolicited message from the second radio network that has been forwarded to the first radio network.

The access terminal can send a first e.g. EncapsulateCDMA message to the first radio network to request the encapsulating and forwarding of the unsolicited messages. To implement a keep alive mechanism the first message can be sent periodically within a first time interval e.g. 10 minutes or less . The encapsulating and forwarding of the unsolicited messages can cease if the first message is not received within a second time interval e.g. twice as long as the first time interval . The access terminal can also send a second e.g. StopEncapsulateCDMA message to the first radio network to request termination of the encapsulating and forwarding of the unsolicited messages.

The unsolicited messages can be sent from a mobile station controller MSC to the first and second radio networks. Alternatively the unsolicited messages can be sent from the MSC to the second radio network which then forwards the messages to the first radio network. The encapsulated messages can be sent to the access terminal on a forward traffic channel a designated control channel cycle or via other channels.

In response to receiving an encapsulated message from the first radio network the access terminal can send a page response message to the second radio network. The access terminal can also establish a connection with the second radio network to receive a voice call and or a data call.

The encapsulated message can include for example an access terminal identifier ATI Record field indicative of an address of the access terminal a Message ID field that indicates that the message is an encapsulated message and a message field that consists of the encapsulated message itself. Other message formats can also be used.

Another embodiment of the invention provides a method for forwarding messages from a second e.g. IS 2000 radio network e.g. an IS 2000 CDMA base station controller or CDMA BSC via a first e.g. HDR radio network to an access terminal. In accordance with the method a session is established between the access terminal and the first radio network. During session establishment or thereafter an indication is received from the access terminal of an interest in receiving unsolicited messages from the second radio network. Thereafter unsolicited messages from the second radio network are received and encapsulated. The encapsulated messages are then sent to the access terminal.

A first e.g. EncapsulateCDMA message can be received from the access terminal to request the encapsulating and forwarding of unsolicited messages. Again to implement a keep alive mechanism the first message can be received periodically from the access terminal and the encapsulating and forwarding of the unsolicited messages can cease if the first message is not received within a particular time interval. A second e.g. StopEncapsulateCDMA message can be received from the access terminal to request termination of the encapsulating and forwarding of unsolicited messages. Various features described above can also be implemented.

The invention further provides access terminals and access points used in the HDR radio network capable of implementing the methods described above. Other aspects and embodiments of the invention are described in further detail below.

The dual deployment and use of the HDR and CDMA radio networks can be achieved as described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 575 073 entitled HIGH DATA RATE WIRELESS PACKET DATA COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM filed May 19 2000 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 574 211 issued on Jun. 3 2005 assign to the assignee of the present invention and incorporated herein.

HDR radio network includes a number of access points that interface with a number of HDR base station controllers HDR BSC only one of each is shown in for simplicity . Each HDR BSC further couples to a packet data serving node PDSN and to a mobile switching center MSC . PDSN supports packet data transmission and can couple to an IP network that further interconnects with other networks and servers used to support packet data transmission. MSC directs the operation of the HDR and CDMA radio networks.

CDMA radio network includes a number of base station transceivers BTS that interface with a number of CDMA base station controllers CDMA BSC again only one of each is shown in for simplicity . Each CDMA BSC further couples to PDSN and MSC and can further couple to HDR BSC as indicated by the dashed line. MSC further couples to a public switched telephone network PSTN that supports communication with conventional wireline telephones. The operation of the HDR and CDMA radio networks is known in the art and not described in detail herein.

Access points in the HDR radio network can be packaged in separate units that can be co located with BTS . This deployment offers flexibility in allowing service providers to deploy HDR equipment from manufacturers that may not be the same as the phone network equipment providers. Alternatively access points can be integrated within BTS . Various deployments of the HDR and CDMA radio networks are possible and are within the scope of the invention.

For enhanced compatibility and flexibility the functionality of HDR radio network can be designed to map to the functionality of CDMA radio network . This allows HDR radio network to be integrated with CDMA radio network and to connect to the same PDSN . The RF characteristics of the HDR radio network can be designed to be similar to those of the CDMA radio network. This allows the HDR and CDMA radio networks to share cell sites towers antennas and other system elements. A dual mode access terminal can be used to receive services e.g. voice data and others from either the CDMA radio network or the HDR radio network or both.

Although HDR radio network can conform to the same model as CDMA radio network there are no dependencies between these radio networks. HDR radio network can thus be deployed independently from in conjunction with or integrated with CDMA radio network . Various deployments of the HDR radio network using various architectures are thus possible some of which are described in the aforementioned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 575 073 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 894 994 issued on May 17 2005.

Within communications system a number of access terminals only one is shown in for simplicity communicate with access points of the HDR radio network and BTS of the CDMA radio network. Each access terminal communicates with one or more access points and or one or more BTS over a wireless link for a communication depending on whether the access terminal is in soft hand off and depending on whether the access terminal has registered with one or both radio networks. A dual mode access terminal can be used to receive services from either the CDMA radio network or the HDR radio network or both and possibly concurrently .

Access terminal can be implemented in various physical embodiments such as for example a modem a phone a module or some other units. Access terminal may include a data interface that allows the access terminal to interface with other devices e.g. a computer an appliance personal digital assistances PDAs set top boxes printers and so on via a wireless or wireline link and using various interconnection layers. In the specific example shown in access terminal is in communication with the HDR radio network as shown by the solid bolted line and has registered with but is not tuned to the CDMA radio network as shown by the unshaded bolted line .

As shown in each radio network interfaces to the service networks via one or more network interfaces defined in the aforementioned Inter operability Specification. For packet data services the interfaces are the PCF to PDSN traffic interface A and the PCF to PDSN signaling interface A . For IS 41 and PSTN services the interfaces are the BSC to MSC signaling interface A and the BSC to MSC PCM traffic interface A . For example HDR radio network can interface with each of PDSN and MSC via the A A and A interfaces. Similarly CDMA radio network can interface with each of PDSN and MSC via the A A A and A interfaces. In particular the interconnection between each of the HDR and CDMA BSCs and the PDSN can be achieved via an R P interface which is part of the A interface used to interconnect the radio and service networks.

As part of the session configuration a dual mode access terminal typically sends it IMSI International Mobile Station Identification to the HDR radio network. The access terminal is also assigned a UATI Unicast Access Terminal Identifier that allows the HDR radio network to send messages specifically to this access terminal.

Session configuration are described in further detail in a document entitled HDR Air Interface HAI Specification hereinafter referred to as the HAI Specification and in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 499 196 entitled METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR PROVIDING CONFIGURABLE LAYERS AND PROTOCOLS IN A COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM filed Feb. 7 2000 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 539 030 issued on Mar. 25 2003 and assigned to the assignee of the present invention. Both of these documents are incorporated herein by reference. The HAI Specification document has been provided to the standard body 3GPP2 TSG C and is the basis for development of a final standard.

In accordance with the invention during the HDR session configuration the access terminal further indicates to the HDR radio network that it is interested in receiving unsolicited CDMA messages while it has a session with the HDR radio network. The unsolicited CDMA messages are messages originated from the CDMA radio network and sent to the access terminal without the mobile station initiating the transaction. General page messages GPM Data Burst Messages carrying a Short Message Service data SMS are examples of unsolicited messages in IS 2000. The access terminal can further indicate the particular IS 2000 service options for which it would like related messages to be delivered to the access terminal through the HDR radio network. For example the access terminal can indicate that it would like to receive general page messages GPM with a service option indicating voice service but not pages for short message service SMS . Based on these indications the HDR radio network can subsequently provide to the access terminal the designated messages from the CDMA radio network.

If the access terminal is within the registration boundary of the CDMA radio network it can also register with the CDMA radio network by sending a registration message with authorization. In accordance with the IS 2000 standard the access terminal has to prove to the CDMA BSC that it is who it claims to be. Therefore the access terminal generates a number AUTHR that only the true access terminal can generate because only the true access terminal has a secret key . This authorization is described in the aforementioned IS 2000 standard. The registration message informs the CDMA radio network of the existence of the access terminal. After registration the CDMA BSC can identify and track the access terminal. The registration of the access terminal with the CDMA radio network can be performed in accordance with the particular CDMA standard being implemented e.g. the IS 2000 standard . A multi mode access terminal can register with the CDMA radio network even if it is tuned to the HDR radio network.

Authentication is done as part of the registration and via the authentication fields inside the registration messages. Authentication is performed only when it s needed such as when there is a chance that a rouge access terminal could impersonate the true access terminal. For example without authentication a rouge access terminal can claim that it is access terminal X and have pages destined for access terminal X to be delivered where the rouge access terminal is located. If this occurs the true access terminal won t get any of his calls. The CDMA radio network further communicates with the MSC to update the location of the access terminal and for authentication. The communication between the access terminal and CDMA radio network can be achieved via the applicable e.g. IS 2000 CDMA standard and the communication between the CDMA radio network and the MSC can be achieved as defined by the aforementioned Inter operability Specification.

Once a session has been established with the HDR radio network the access terminal can exchange data with the HDR radio network. Prior to a data exchange a connection is established with the HDR radio network if none is currently established. Via the connection establishment the access terminal is assigned one or more traffic channels to be used for the data exchange. Thereafter data can be exchanged between the access terminal and HDR radio network and between the HDR radio network and the PDSN. The established connection can be torn down as directed by either the access terminal or the HDR radio network or automatically after a particular period of inactivity. Any number of data exchanges can occur while the access terminal has an established session with the HDR radio network.

In an embodiment the access terminal periodically sends an EncapsulateCDMA message to the HDR radio network to request it to start or continue forwarding i.e. tunneling unsolicited CDMA messages. This keep alive mechanism ensures that only access terminals that have indicated an interest to have the unsolicited CDMA messages forwarded are served in such manner and that valuable air link resources are not unnecessarily wasted by transmissions to uninterested access terminals. The keep alive mechanism is described in further detail below.

Once the access terminal has been registered with the CDMA radio network the CDMA radio network knows the existence and location of the access terminal but may not be aware of its communication with the HDR radio network nor would this be necessary in accordance with the invention . From the viewpoint of the CDMA radio network messages are being processed in the normal manner. Thereafter messages from the CDMA radio network can be forwarded to the access terminal in one of various embodiments.

If the access terminal has registered with the CDMA radio network unsolicited CDMA messages e.g. paging request messages are sent by the MSC to the CDMA radio network. In accordance with one embodiment of the invention if the access terminal has indicated that it would like to receive unsolicited CDMA messages while it is tuned to the HDR radio network the MSC also sends these messages to the HDR radio network. In another embodiment the CDMA radio network forwards the unsolicited CDMA messages to the HDR radio network as shown by the dashed line in if the access terminal has indicated that it would like to receive these messages while it is tuned to the HDR radio network. The unsolicited CDMA messages are thus sent by the MSC to the specific CDMA BSC and can be sent by either the MSC or the CDMA BSC to the HDR BSC with which the access terminal has tuned.

The HDR radio network receives the unsolicited CDMA messages and identifies messages for each access terminal. If a particular access terminal previously indicated that it is interested in receiving unsolicited CDMA messages then the HDR radio network encapsulates each message received for this access terminal and sends the encapsulated message to the access terminal. The HDR radio network continues to receive filter encapsulate and send unsolicited CDMA messages to the access terminal until a StopEncapsulateCDMA message is received from the access terminal or if the access terminal has disconnected from the HDR radio network.

Upon receiving and processing the encapsulated message from the HDR radio network the access terminal can take appropriate responsive action. For example if the access terminal receives a voice page while exchanging data with the HDR radio network the access terminal can terminate the connection with the HDR radio network and establishes a voice call with the CDMA radio network. To close the connection with the HDR radio network the access terminal can send a CloseConnection message to the HDR radio network. Since the access terminal will be establishing a session with the CDMA radio network it will no longer need to have the HDR radio network encapsulate and forward unsolicited CDMA messages. Thus the access terminal can also send a StopEncapsulateCDMA message to the HDR radio network to instruct it to stop forwarding unsolicited CDMA messages. Alternatively the HDR radio network can automatically stop encapsulating and forwarding the unsolicited CDMA messages upon receiving the CloseConnection message from the access terminal.

The access terminal can establish a connection with the CDMA radio network by sending a page response message to the CDMA radio network. Upon receiving the page response message and depending on the type of communication being established a voice call or data call or both can be set up with the CDMA radio network. To set up a voice call the CDMA radio network communicates with the MSC as specified in the aforementioned Inter operability Specification and further communicates with the access terminal as specified in the applicable CDMA standard e.g. the IS 2000 standard . And to set up a data call the CDMA radio network communicates with the access terminal as specified in the applicable CDMA standard and further communicates with the PDSN as specified in the Inter operability Specification. Once a voice and or data call has been set up the access terminal exchanges voice and or data traffic with the CDMA radio network. The data call with the CDMA radio network is used to continue the data exchanges between the access terminal and the PDSN which was previously achieved via the HDR radio network.

Upon completion of the voice and or data call with the CDMA radio network the access terminal can terminate the connection with the CDMA radio network. Thereafter the access terminal can send an EncapsulateCDMA message to the HDR radio network to resume receiving unsolicited CDMA messages. The access terminal can also establish another connection with the HDR radio network to exchange data or can alternatively set up another voice and or data call with the CDMA radio network.

The forwarding of unsolicited CDMA messages allows the CDMA radio network to communicate e.g. page an access terminal that is in communication with or tuned to the HDR radio network. This allows the access terminal to continue to receive services from the CDMA radio network even though it is not tuned to that radio network.

Table 1 shows a specific embodiment of a message format for the encapsulated messages. In this embodiment the encapsulated message includes three fields 1 an ATI Access Terminal Identifier Record field 2 a Message Identifier ID field and 3 a CDMA message field. The ATI Record field includes a record specifying the recipient access terminal s address and is described in further detail in the aforementioned HAI Specification. The ATI Record field identifies the access terminal that the encapsulated message is destined for. The Message ID field indicates whether the message is an encapsulated message. And the CDMA message field includes the encapsulated message itself e.g. the paging records of the recipient access terminal for which the encapsulated message is directed. Various other message formats can also be used and are within the scope of the invention.

The access terminal can receive the encapsulated messages via various mechanisms. In one mechanism if the access terminal is in a connected state with the HDR radio network it receives the encapsulated messages on the forward traffic channel.

Alternatively if the access terminal does not have an open connection with the HDR radio network other mechanisms can be used. For example if the access terminal remains tuned to the HDR radio network the HDR radio network can forward the unsolicited CDMA messages to the access terminal at its designated HDR control channel cycle. Otherwise if the access terminal has tuned to the CDMA radio network the access terminal can send a StopEncapsulateCDMA message to the HDR radio network which then stops encapsulating and forwarding the unsolicited CDMA messages to the access terminal.

Other mechanisms to forward unsolicited CDMA messages can also be used and are within the scope of the invention. For example these messages can be forwarded via a signaling channel a control channel a paging channel or others.

In an embodiment when the access terminal leaves the HDR radio network e.g. in order to respond to a voice page it sends a StopEncapsulateCDMA message to the HDR radio network as shown in . Upon receiving the StopEncapsulateCDMA message the HDR radio network stops encapsulating CDMA messages for the access terminal.

When the access terminal tunes back to the HDR radio network e.g. after the voice call with the CDMA radio network has been terminated it sends an EncapsulateCDMA message to the HDR radio network. Upon receiving the EncapsulateCDMA message the HDR radio network starts or resumes encapsulating and forwarding CDMA messages for the access terminal as the messages are received by the HDR radio network.

As noted above in an embodiment a keep alive mechanism is used to ensure that the air link resources are efficiently used. In one implementation of the keep alive mechanism the access terminal sends an EncapsulateCDMA message within each T time interval which is measured from the time the most recent prior EncapsulateCDMA message was transmitted. The HDR radio network can stop encapsulating messages if it does not receive an EncapsulateCDMA message within T time interval. T and T can each be selected based on various parameters such as the signaling delays the processing delays and so on. As a specific example T can be selected to be approximately 10 minutes and T can be selected to be approximately twice T. Other values can also be used for T and T and this is within the scope of the invention.

The HDR radio network can be designed to have similar footprint as that of the CDMA radio network. Specifically the registration boundaries of the HDR radio network can be approximately aligned with the registration boundaries of the CDMA radio network. This can be achieved for example by co locating the BTS and access points at the same cell sites and properly controlling their transmit power as described in the aforementioned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 575 073 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 894 994 issued on May 17 2005. If the registration boundaries are approximately aligned the access terminal can register with both HDR and CDMA radio networks upon entering the boundaries.

In an overlay system i.e. one that includes both HDR and CDMA radio networks the operator can set the HDR registration boundaries so that a CDMA registration boundary is always coincide with some HDR registration. The opposite can be implemented to be true. That is the operator can configure registration boundaries in HDR such that there are multiple HDR boundaries within one CDMA registration boundary. In this case the access terminal can end up sending some unnecessary registrations to the CDMA radio network when it crosses an HDR registration boundary. Note that the rule is to register with the CDMA radio network whenever the access terminal crosses an HDR registration boundary.

The encapsulated message the traffic data from a buffer and control data from a processor are then provided to an encoder that codes the data with one or more coding schemes. The coding schemes may include for example cyclic redundancy check CRC coding Turbo coding convolutional coding serial concatenated coding Reed Solomon block coding no coding and so on which are typically used for CDMA based systems. The coded data is provided to a modulator that further processes the coded data. For CDMA based systems modulator may perform Walsh covering pseudo noise PN spreading scrambling and so on. The processed data is then converted into one or more analog signals. A transmitter receives and modulates the analog signals with a particular modulation format e.g. quadrature phase shift keying QPSK offset QPSK or some other format filters and amplifies the signal and transmits the signal over the air via a duplexer D and an antenna .

At access terminal the transmitted signal is received by an antenna routed through a duplexer D and provided to a receiver . Receiver conditions demodulates and digitizes the received signal and provides samples to a demodulator . The signal conditioning may include filtering amplification frequency conversion and so on and the demodulation is complementary to that performed at access point .

Demodulator then processes the samples in a manner that is complementary to that performed at access point e.g. despreading descrambling and decovering to provide symbols. A decoder receives and decodes the symbols with one or more decoding schemes that are complementary to the coding scheme s used at access point . The decoded data is then provided to a controller .

Transmission of traffic data and messages e.g. EncapsulateCDMA messages StopEncapsulateCDMA messages and so on from access terminal to access point occurs via a complementary signal path. The traffic data from a buffer not shown in and messages are coded by an encoder modulated by a modulator conditioned by a transmitter routed through duplexer and transmitted via antenna . At access point the transmitted signal is received by antenna routed through duplexer conditioned by an RF receiver processed by a demodulator decoded by a decoder and provided to processor .

As used herein a forward transmission refers to a transmission from access point to access terminal and a reverse transmission refers to a transmission from access terminal to access point . The processing and decoding formats on the reverse path can be and is typically different from those of the forward path.

In encoder modulator and transmitter form a transmitter unit for access point and receiver demodulator and decoder form a receiver unit for access point . Similarly encoder modulator and transmitter form a transmitter unit for access terminal and receiver demodulator and decoder form a receiver unit for access terminal .

The elements of the access terminals and access points can be implemented in various manners. For example these elements can be implemented using one or more application specific integrated circuits ASICs digital signal processors DSPs microcontrollers microprocessors other electronic circuits designed to perform the functions described herein or a combination thereof. Also some of the functions described herein can be implemented with a general purpose processor or a specially designed processor operated to execute instruction codes that achieve the functions described herein. Thus the elements of the access terminals and access points described herein can be implemented using hardware software or a combination thereof.

The foregoing description of the preferred embodiments is provided to enable any person skilled in the art to make or use the present invention. Various modifications to these embodiments will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art and the generic principles defined herein may be applied to other embodiments without the use of the inventive faculty. Thus the present invention is not intended to be limited to the embodiments shown herein but is to be accorded the widest scope consistent with the principles and novel features disclosed herein.

