---

title: Apparatus for providing velocity differential between parachute and payload to reduce shock load
abstract: An apparatus for dissipating shock load in a parachute delivery system has at least one strip of material having a first end, a second end opposite the first end, and a predetermined length. The apparatus also has a piercing member having a first portion for piercing through the strip of material and a second portion that defines an opening. The strip of material passes through the opening in the piercing member. The first end of the strip of material is configured to be attached to parachute suspension lines. In a preferred embodiment, the strip of material is a strip of woven webbing. When a predetermined tensile force acts upon the strip of material and the piercing member such that the first end of the strip of woven webbing is pulled in one direction and the piercing member is pulled in an opposite direction, tension is produced which causes the piercing member to stretch and break the lateral fibers of the strip of woven webbing. In one embodiment, the apparatus includes a lanyard that has a first end attached to the piercing member and a second end adapted for attachment to a payload.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07448577&OS=07448577&RS=07448577
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07448577
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050823
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by the U.S. Government for Governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon.

The present invention generally relates to an apparatus for dissipating the shock and related forces that occur during parachute opening.

When a parachute completely opens during descent shock loads are produced due to the weight of the payload attached to the suspension lines of the parachute. If large enough such shock loads can rip or tear the parachute or parts thereof causing a catastrophic failure of the parachute system. Furthermore if the payload consists of a person that person could suffer severe injuries as a result of relatively large shock loads.

What is needed is an apparatus for use with a parachute that can safely dissipate the energy of a shock load that occurs when the parachute opens.

In one aspect the present invention is directed to an apparatus for providing a velocity differential between a parachute and a payload to reduce shock load. In one embodiment apparatus comprises at least one strip of material having a first end a second end opposite the first end and a predetermined length. The apparatus further comprises a piercing member having a first portion for piercing the strip of material and a second portion that defines an opening. The strip of material passes through the opening in the piercing member. The apparatus further comprises a device adapted for attaching the first end of the strip of material to the parachute suspension lines. When a predetermined tensile force acts upon the strip of material and the piercing member such that the first end of the strip of material is pulled in one direction and the piercing member is pulled in an opposite direction tension is produced which causes the piercing member to longitudinally tear through at least a portion of the predetermined length of the strip of material.

In a related aspect the present invention is directed to an apparatus for providing a velocity differential between a parachute and a payload to reduce shock load. In one embodiment apparatus comprises at least one strip of material having a first end a second end opposite the first end and a predetermined length. The apparatus further comprises a piercing member having a first portion that is pierced through the strip of material and a second portion that defines an opening. The strip of material passes through the opening in the piercing member. The apparatus further comprises a device adapted for attaching the first end of the strip of material to the parachute suspension lines. When a predetermined tensile force acts upon the strip of material and the piercing member such that the first end of the strip of material is pulled in one direction and the piercing member is pulled in an opposite direction tension is produced which causes the piercing member to longitudinally tear through at least a portion of the predetermined length of the strip of material.

In another aspect the present invention is directed to a parachute delivery system comprising a parachute having a canopy suspension lines that extend from the canopy and at least one strip of woven webbing. The strip of woven webbing has a first end a second end opposite the first end a predetermined length a plurality of lateral fibers throughout substantially the entire length of the strip of woven webbing and a plurality of longitudinal fibers extending for substantially the entire predetermined length of the strip of woven webbing. The parachute delivery system further comprises a device for attaching the first end of the strip of woven webbing to the parachute suspension lines. The parachute delivery system further comprises a piercing member which has a first portion that is pierced through the strip of woven webbing and a second portion that defines an opening. The strip of woven webbing passes through the opening in the piercing member. The parachute delivery system includes a lanyard having a first end attached to the piercing member and a second end adapted for attachment to a payload. When a predetermined tensile force acts upon the strip of woven webbing and the piercing member such that the first end of the strip of woven webbing is pulled in one direction and the piercing member is pulled in an opposite direction tension is produced which causes the piercing member to stretch and break the lateral fibers of the strip of woven webbing.

Other objects features and advantages of the present invention will be apparent from the ensuing description.

Referring to there is shown parachute delivery system which utilizes apparatus of the present invention. Parachute delivery system includes canopy and suspension lines . The function of parachute delivery system is to safely deliver payload or cargo . Apparatus generally comprises strip of material piercing member and ring or loop . In one embodiment piercing member comprises a rip hook. Strip of material has an upper portion A and lower portion B. Strip of material and suspension lines are attached to ring or loop . In one embodiment ring is fabricated from metal. In another embodiment ring or loop is fabricated from the same material used to fabricate suspension lines . Other suitable devices can be used to attach strip of material to suspension lines.

Referring to piercing member has top portion and bottom portion . Bottom portion defines through hole through which strip of material passes. In a preferred embodiment top portion is pierced into a starter hole not shown in strip of material during the assembly of apparatus . Piercing the strip of material with top portion increases the size of the starter hole so as to form relatively larger opening .

Referring to apparatus includes lanyard that has one end attached to piercing member . Piercing member includes through hole through which lanyard passes. Lanyard has an opposite end that is attached to ring or loop . Tie lines are attached to and between ring or loop and payload . In an alternate embodiment other suitable devices can be used to implement the function of lanyard .

Referring to strip of material is preferably fabricated from fibers or fill yarns of woven webbing. For purposes of example the ensuing description is in terms of strip of material being configured as a strip of woven webbing. Specifically the strip of woven webbing has latitudinal or lateral fibers and longitudinal fibers . For purposes of simplicity fibers and are partially shown in . When parachute delivery system and payload are released or dropped from an aircraft parachute delivery system accelerates due to gravity. Upon initial disreefing the inflation of the parachute canopy and the accelerating payload cooperate to produce a tensile force on apparatus . Specifically the gravitational force produced by payload causes a downward force and the disreefing of the canopy causes an opposite upward force. Thus device is pulled upward in one direction and piercing member is pulled downward in an opposite direction. This tensile force causes top portion of piercing member to begin ripping or breaking the lateral fill yarns or fibers of strip of woven webbing causing slit . This ripping or breaking process continues as piercing member moves downward along the length of strip of woven webbing . As a result of the aforesaid ripping or breaking process opening in strip of woven webbing see merges into slit see . The passage of strip of woven webbing through opening in bottom portion of piercing member controls and insures continuous breaking or ripping of the lateral fill yarns in strip of woven webbing . As piercing member moves downward upon the strip of woven webbing the energy of falling payload is dissipated through the heat and drag produced by piercing member . As a result falling payload decelerates without a single shock or repeated shocks to payload .

The actual length of the strip of woven webbing depends on the deceleration force produced by its fill yarns and or the strength of the individual fill yarns. In order to reduce the length of the strip of woven webbing and yet produce a relatively larger deceleration force woven webbing is fabricated from relatively higher strength woven webbing.

In an alternate embodiment strip of material comprises a woven tape. Other suitable materials can be used to realize strip of material .

In an alternate embodiment parachute delivery system further includes stop line which controls the distance piercing member moves along strip of woven webbing . Stop line is attached to and between rings and . The length of stop line is shorter than the length of the strip of woven webbing so as to prevent piercing member from completely tearing or ripping its way through the entire length of strip of woven webbing . Thus when all shock load energy is dissipated payload is actually carried by stop line and the remaining portion of the strip of woven webbing that was not ripped by piercing member .

Although the foregoing description is in terms of apparatus being configured so that top portion of piercing member is pre pierced through strip of material it is to be understood that apparatus can be configured so that top portion is not pre pierced through strip of material . In such a configuration the user of the parachute system will pierce strip of material with top portion during the process of packing the parachute system.

Referring to there is shown parachute system that uses apparatus in accordance with another embodiment of the present invention. Parachute delivery system comprises canopy and suspension lines . Apparatus generally comprises strips of material and that are attached together in an overlapping relationship. Strips of material and are attached to suspension lines via ring or loop . In a preferred embodiment strips of material and are fabricated from woven webbing as described in the foregoing description. In one embodiment strips of material and are stitched together. However other suitable techniques may be used to attach strips of woven webbing material and together. Apparatus further comprises piercing member . Piercing member has generally the same structure as piercing member see A and B and generally functions in the same manner as piercing member . Piercing member has an opening not shown that is similar to opening in piercing member see through which both strips of woven webbing and pass. Piercing member is pierced through both strips of woven webbing and . Apparatus also includes lanyard that has one end attached to piercing member and an opposite end attached to load . Specifically one end of lanyard passes through through hole in piercing member . The other end of lanyard is attached to ring or loop . Tie lines are attached to and between ring or loop and payload . Since two strips of material and are used the length of the strips of material and do not have to be long as the length of strip of material shown in . Deceleration begins when piercing member and lanyard are placed in tension by parachute canopy and accelerating load . Specifically piercing member begins ripping or breaking the horizontal or lateral fill yarns of strips of woven webbing and . This ripping or breaking process continues as piercing member moves downward along the length of strips of woven webbing material and . As piercing member moves downward the energy of falling load is dissipated through the heat and drag produced by piercing member as it tears its way through strips of woven webbing and . As a result falling load decelerates without a single shock or repeated shocks to load . The rate of dissipation of the energy depends upon the particular structure and strength of each strip of woven webbing and .

Referring to there is shown a further embodiment of the present invention. Parachute delivery system uses apparatus in accordance with a further embodiment of the present invention. Parachute delivery system includes canopy and suspension lines . In accordance with this embodiment apparatus functions to force payload to maintain specific velocity decay. Apparatus generally comprises strips of material and that are attached together and arranged in a layered relationship. Strips of material and are attached together. In one embodiment stitching is used to attach strips of material and together. However other suitable techniques can be used to attach strips of material and together. Strips of material and have progressively longer lengths. For example the length of strip of material is less than the length of strip of material and the length of the strip of material is less than the strip of material . The upper ends of strips of material and are attached to parachute suspension lines via ring or loop . In a preferred embodiment each strip of material and are fabricated from woven webbing as described in the foregoing description. Apparatus further comprises piercing member . Piercing member has the same structure as piercing member see A and B and generally functions in the same manner as piercing member . Piercing member has an opening not shown that is similar to opening in piercing member see through which all strips of woven webbing and pass. Piercing member is pierced through all three strips of woven webbing material and . Apparatus also includes lanyard . Lanyard has one end attached to piercing member at through hole . Lanyard has an opposite end attached to payload via ring or loop . Tie lines are attached to and between ring or loop and payload . Deceleration begins when piercing member and lanyard are placed in tension by accelerating payload . Specifically piercing member begins ripping or breaking the horizontal or lateral fill yarns of strips of woven webbing and . This ripping or breaking process continues as piercing member moves downward along the length of strips of woven webbing and . As piercing member moves downward the energy of falling payload is dissipated through the heat and drag produced by piercing member . As a result falling payload decelerates without a single shock or repeated shocks thereto. The rate of dissipation of the aforesaid energy depends upon the particular structure and strength of the strips of woven webbing and .

In an alternate embodiment connecting devices such as rings or loops and are not used. Instead the end or ends of the strips of woven webbing are knotted to the parachute suspension lines.

A plurality of apparatuses or may be used if a parachute delivery system is to deliver a very heavy load. For example a pair of apparatuses may be used in parallel in order to provide a velocity differential between the parachute and a heavy payload in order to substantially dissipate or minimize the effects of shock load.

Thus the apparatus of the present invention safely provides a velocity differential between a parachute and a payload so as to substantially dissipate or minimize the effects of shock load.

Although the present invention has been described as being configured for use in a parachute delivery system it is to be understood that the apparatus of the present invention can be used in other systems or situations wherein a payload is dropped or released from an elevation and shock load dissipation is needed.

The principles preferred embodiments and modes of operation of the present invention have been described in the foregoing specification. The invention which is intended to be protected herein should not however be construed as limited to the particular forms disclosed as these are to be regarded as illustrative rather than restrictive. Variations and changes may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit of the invention. Accordingly the foregoing detailed description should be considered as exemplary in nature and not limiting the scope and spirit of the invention as set forth in the attached claims.

