---

title: Solar cell circuit and method for manufacturing solar cells
abstract: The invention is a novel manufacturing method for making multi-junction solar cell circuits that addresses current problems associated with such circuits by allowing the formation of integral diodes in the cells and allows for a large number of circuits to readily be placed on a single silicon wafer substrate. The standard Ge wafer used as the base for multi-junction solar cells is replaced with a thinner layer of Ge or a II-V semiconductor material on a silicon/silicon dioxide substrate. This allows high-voltage cells with multiple multi-junction circuits to be manufactured on a single wafer, resulting in less array assembly mass and simplified power management.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07732706&OS=07732706&RS=07732706
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
number: 07732706
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050916
---
This application claims the priority date associated with provisional application 60 610 837 filed on Sep. 17 2004 entitled III V Semiconductor on Silicon Wafer Solar Cell Circuit.

The invention described hereunder was made in the performance of work under a NASA contract and is subject to the provisions of Public Law 96 517 35 U.S.C. 202 in which the Contractor has elected not to retain title.

This invention relates in general to an improved method of manufacturing solar cells that results in an improved solar cells and solar cell arrays more specifically to manufacturing multiple junction solar cell circuits on a single wafer and most specifically to manufacturing multiple solar cells in series on a single wafer.

Current multi junction solar cell circuits for space missions employ Ge GeAs and or InP wafer substrates sectioned from single crystal ingots. An alternative method of manufacture of such substrates is to grow the Ge GeAs or InP directly on silicon wafers through a lattice mismatch process by growing gradient that slowly matches the silicon lattice to the Ge GeAs or InP lattice. In order to promote such growth relatively high temperatures of between about 425 C. and 900 C. are required depending upon the chemical compound being grown.

State of the art solar cells are triple junction solar cells comprising three full junction layers manufactured on single crystal Ge wafers that require by pass diodes between each triple junction cell when assembled in series to prevent damage in case of shadowing. After the triple junction solar cells are formed an out of plane stress relief loop is arranged between each of the contacts conductors interconnection on the cells.

In using this technique for manufacture non isolated multi junction solar cells are manufactured on each Ge wafer. The solar cells are subsequently diced into single isolated cells. This is necessary due to the fact that the cells are connected in parallel on the wafer. End user of this technology generally require high voltage arrays resulting in the cells being connected in series with by pass diodes. These interconnects for arranging the cell circuits in series to form a cell array require a stress relief loop as well as the diodes placement on or near the cells make arranging multiple cell circuits on a single Ge wafer problematic.

While multi junction solar cells manufactured using the above described technique have a relatively high efficiency related to commercial single junction solar cells several problems related for use in space missions exist.

First when arranging the cells into a cell array a large surface area is required due to the economics cost of handling parts on a production line. Second due to the potentially large differential in voltage across an array between cells there is a tendency for arcing to occur when the arrays are exposed to a space environment. Third each wafer having only one solar cell circuit can only produce voltages of about 2 volts.

Therefore it is desired to provide a solar cell circuit using a manufacturing technique that will allow for multiple multi junction circuits to be placed on one lightweight silicon wafer producing a high voltage and obviating the potential for arcing across a solar cell circuit array.

The invention proposed herein comprises a unique manufacturing method that produces multi junction solar cell circuits that provide significant increases in potential voltages per each wafer and allows integral by pass diodes to be formed directly into the substrate on which the solar cells are made.

Accordingly it is an object of this invention to provide an improved method for manufacturing multi junction solar cell circuits.

It is a further object of this invention to provide a method for manufacturing solar cell circuits that allows multiple multi junction cells to be formed on a single wafer substrate.

It is yet a further object of this invention to provide a method for manufacturing solar cell circuits that allows the formation of by pass diodes directly into the wafer substrate of the solar cell circuits.

This invention meets these and other objectives related to improved solar cell circuits by providing a manufacturing method wherein a silicon based wafer substrate is provided. An insulation layer is formed on the silicon based wafer. A planar by pass diode is formed integral with the silicon based substrate and insulation layer. A single crystal layer of a compound selected from germanium based compounds III V or II IV semiconductor compounds is bonded to the insulation layer using plasma assisted electrostatic bonding. A wafer cleaving technique is then used to remove a portion of the single crystal layer in order to obtain a particular preferred thickness for the single crystal layer. In one embodiment of the invention the excess from the single crystal layer that was cleaved may be used as bonding material in another silicon wafer for the next solar cell circuit. Multi junction layers are formed on the insulation layer to fabricate a multi junction solar cell circuit.

In the most preferred embodiment of the invention a plurality of multi junction solar cell circuits manufactured via the process described above are formed in series on a single silicon wafer substrate. Such a design allows for high voltage capability for each solar cell wafer as well as minimizing the weight of solar cell arrays.

The invention as embodied herein comprises a novel manufacturing method for making multi junction solar cell circuits that addresses current problems associated with such circuits by allowing the formation of integral diodes in the cells and allows for a large number of circuits to readily be placed on a single silicon wafer substrate. The standard Ge wafer used as the base for multi junction solar cells is replaced with a thinner layer of Ge III V or II IV semiconductor material on a silicon silicon dioxide substrate which has about 40 less density than the standard Ge wafer. This allows high voltage cell circuits with multiple multi junction cells to be manufactured on a single wafer resulting in less array assembly mass and simplified power management.

A blocking diode is formed on an edge of the silicon based wafer . A plurality of by pass diodes are also formed in the silicon based wafer . These diodes may be formed by such processes as epitaxial growth or the diffusion of P or N dopents into the silicon based substrate . The number of diodes formed on the silicon based wafer depend upon the number of solar cell circuits desired on a silicon based wafer . The diodes are integral to the silicon based wafer and have diode contacts that extend above the wafer so that contacts described below may be electrically connected to the diodes .

An insulating layer preferably of silicon oxide is formed on the silicon based wafer by processes known in the art such as oxide growth epitaxial growth or deposition. The insulating layer thickness should be such that the diode contacts still extend above the insulating layer . A preferred thickness for the insulating layer is about 1000 angstroms. The insulating layer allows for the diodes to be formed integral with the silicon based wafer and still be operable with other solar cell layers formed above the insulating layer .

A thin transfer layer comprising a highly positive doped germanium based compound preferably simple Ge or semiconductor III V compound such as GaAs is formed on the insulating layer . Plasma assisted electrostatic bonding is used to adhere the transfer layer without adhesive to the insulating layer . This process is described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 908 832 which is incorporated by reference herein. In general the process works as follows. The layers to be bonded are placed in a plasma chamber mechanically supported and held in a predetermined environment depending upon the types of materials being bonded. One of the faces of the layers is exposed to a plasma. The layer that was exposed to plasma is then released from being held so that it directly bonds with the other layer. This process allows for bonding of the materials without the need for high temperature anneals or the use of organic or inorganic bonding agents which would damage the integral diodes formed in the silicon based wafer . The result is a thick single crystal layer of Ge or a III V semiconductor material see .

In order to obtain a thin transfer layer that is the appropriate thickness approximately 3000 angstroms is preferred the thick transfer layer is wafer cleaved. One wafer cleaving process than may be employed in the present invention is described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 632 724 which is incorporated herein by reference. In general the process works as follows. Prior to electrostatic bonding energetic atoms are introduced through the layer to a selected depth for cleaving and an energy source is directed to the region of the layer to be cleaved. The energy source initiates a control cleaving of the layer at the selected depth. In a preferred embodiment of the invention the excess portion of the thick transfer layer cleaved to create the thin transfer layer may be bonded to another insulating layer placed in series on a similar silicon based wafer described in more detail below in order to minimize process waste.

After the silicon layer insulting layer transfer layer is formed as described above layers forming a multi junction solar cells are formed using processes known in the art such as MO CVD. In a preferred embodiment of the invention a base layer of positively doped Ge is placed on the transfer layer of highly positive doped Ge and a negatively doped emitter layer of Ge is placed upon the base layer . A tunnel junction is placed upon the emitter layer in order to complete the first junction of the solar cell circuit .

The second junction of the circuit preferably comprises a base layer of positively doped GaAs an emitter layer of negatively doped GaAs and a tunnel junction layer . The third junction comprises a base layer of positively doped GaInP an emitter layer of negatively doped GaInP and a window layer of negatively doped AlInGaP. These materials are preferred for the junction layers because of lattice matching between Ge and GaAs and between GaAs and GaInP.

A anti reflective coating is placed upon the window layer in order to provide enhanced spectral response and a cap layer is placed between the contacts and the window layer . The cap layer is preferably constructed of n GaAs. A number of etch back process are preformed to remove all the formed layers down to the transfer layer SiO2 layer and diode . This process defines the boundary of the cell and exposes the contact area. A positive contact is placed adjacent to the diode contact . An isolation layer is then formed on the edge from the cap layer to the transfer layer on one edge. A negative contact is placed on an edge over the isolation layer of the solar cell circuit that extends to the location of the by pass diode . The contacts are electrically connected with the diode in order to prevent damage related to shadowing. The contacts are constructed of a material that may be selected by one skilled in the art. One material example is chromium palladium silver.

Referring to in a preferred embodiment of the invention a plurality of cell circuits are arranged monolithically in series on a single silicon based wafer in order to construct a high voltage solar cell . As described above the diodes are arranged across the silicon based wafer and a plurality of solar cell circuits are manufactured between the diodes so that the by pass diode contacts abut an edge of the insulating layers and the bottom transfer layers . Solar cell circuits are then manufactured as described above between each pair of diodes .

A Monolithic Interconnected Module MIM structure is formed using semiconductor etch back and contact formation processes that has been employed to construct thermophotovoltaic TPV MIM structures in order to connect the plurality of solar cell circuits on a single wafer . A MIM consists of multiple series of interconnected cells on a common semi insulating substrate that results in a higher voltage and lower current device and normally incorporates a back surface reflector for optical recuperation for TPVs. There are generally two types of MIM designs currently employed. The first utilizes a highly doped thick lateral conduction layer LCL to conduct the entire length of a cell. The second uses a thinner lower doped LCL because the current must flow only a short distance to the nearest grid finger. The second type of MIM design would be employed in the present invention. This arrangement provides for both positive and negative contacts to be formed on the top of the cell . An example of MIM fabrication can be found in U.S. Pat. No. 6 162 987 which is incorporated by reference herein.

Employing a standard size silicon based wafer about 4.0 inch diameter and employing the present invention manufacturing method approximately 29 or 30 solar cell circuits may be placed on a single wafer . If one selects to add circuits on a wafer the positive contact for the cell will be positioned with the positive contact in the upper left hand corner and diagonal and the negative contact in the upper right hand corner and diagonal when viewing the cell from above as depicted in . If 29 circuits are selected the positive contacts are positioned in the upper right and left hand corners of the cell and the negative contacts are positioned in the lower right and left hand corners.

This cell design provides for a high voltage cell providing 29 or 30 times the voltage compared to a standard multi junction solar cell. This is due to the fact that each solar cell circuit normally provides about 2 volts. In a standard cell only one complete circuit is manufactured per wafer. Therefore a standard cell can only provide about 2 volts of current. However since the present manufacturing method allows one to place up to 30 circuits on a single wafer about 60 volts of current can be obtained. This process is not limited to wafer size larger standard silicon wafers can be employed to create more circuits per wafer and higher voltage circuits.

Referring to a solar cell array panel layout is depicted using solar cells . Cell panels are placed with the positive contacts arrayed to a conjoining cell s negative contacts . Between the positive and negative contacts of each cell as noted above about 60 volts of current may be provided. Across each cell in the other direction only about 2 volts of potential exist. Therefore the maximum potential voltage from any edge of one cell to another in the array is about 5 volts. This potential voltage is too low to cause arcing as described above. The design further allows for a coverglass to be placed over each cell in order to provide protection for the cells

Referring to a flow diagram depicting the major steps of the manufacturing method used to practice the present invention is provided. A standard sized silicon based wafer is provided . Next a plurality of diodes are formed integral in the silicon based wafer . In this step diode connectors extend to the surface of the silicon based wafer. Third a silicon oxide insulation layer is formed on the silicon based wafer . The preferred insulation layer thickness is about 1000 angstroms so that the diode connectors can be exposed by silicon oxide etch back. Fourth a thick single crystal layer of either a germanium based compound III V or a II IV semiconductor compound prepared with energetic atoms is bonded to the insulation layer . Plasma assisted electrostatic bonding is used to bond the single crystal layer to the insulating layer. Next a wafer cleaving process employing the energetic atoms within the single crystal layer is used to cleave a portion of the single crystal layer to provide a selected thickness for the single crystal layer of about 3000 angstroms . Preferably the excess single crystal layer from the cleaving process is used to form the next in a series of single crystal layers between the plurality of diodes . After the cleaving step multi junction layers for a solar cell circuit are formed using processes known in the art . The wafer is back etched to expose the plurality of multi junction solar cell layers on the silicon based wafer. Contacts are formed between the transfer layer and diode . An isolating layer is then formed on the edge of the layers. Finally a monolithic interconnected structure is formed to electrically interconnect the negative contacts that are formed on each of the multi junction solar cell layers circuits to each circuits diode .

What is described are specific examples of many possible variations on the same invention and are not intended in a limiting sense. The claimed invention can be practiced using other variations not specifically described above.

