---

title: Smoking article
abstract: A smoking article, such as a cigarette, includes a lighting end and a mouth end. The lighting end is a longitudinally extending segment comprising smokable material that is intended to be lit and burned, and the resulting smoke generated by the burning of that smokable material is intended to be drawn into the mouth of the smoker through the mouth end of smoking article. A mouth end piece is located at the mouth end of the smoking article, and the mouth end piece allows the smoking article to be placed in the mouth of the smoker to be drawn upon. The smoking article further incorporates an aerosol-generation system that is located between the lighting end segment and the mouth end piece. The aerosol-generation system includes (i) a heat generation segment located adjacent to the lighting end segment, and (ii) an aerosol-generation region located between the heat generation segment and the mouth end piece. The aerosol-generation region incorporates an aerosol-forming material (e.g., glycerin and flavors). The lighting end segment is in a heat exchange relationship with the heat generation segment such that burning smokable material within the lighting end segment can ignite a combustible fuel element of the heat generation segment. The heat generation segment is in a heat exchange relationship with the aerosol-generation region such that heat generated by the burning fuel element acts to volatilize aerosol-forming material for aerosol formation.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07647932&OS=07647932&RS=07647932
owner: R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
number: 07647932
owner_city: Winston-Salem
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050801
---
Popular smoking articles such as cigarettes have a substantially cylindrical rod shaped structure and include a charge roll or column of smokable material such as shredded tobacco e.g. in cut filler form surrounded by a paper wrapper thereby forming a so called smokable rod or tobacco rod. Normally a cigarette has a cylindrical filter element aligned in an end to end relationship with the tobacco rod. Preferably a filter element comprises plasticized cellulose acetate tow circumscribed by a paper material known as plug wrap. Certain filter elements can incorporate polyhydric alcohols. See for example UK Pat. Spec. 755 475. Certain cigarettes incorporate a filter element having multiple segments and one of those segments can comprise activated charcoal particles. See for example U.S. Pat. No. 5 360 023 to Blakley et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 6 537 186 to Veluz. Preferably the filter element is attached to one end of the tobacco rod using a circumscribing wrapping material known as tipping paper. It also has become desirable to perforate the tipping material and plug wrap in order to provide dilution of drawn mainstream smoke with ambient air. Descriptions of cigarettes and the various components thereof are set forth in Davis et al. Eds. 1999 . A cigarette is employed by a smoker by lighting one end thereof and burning the tobacco rod. The smoker then receives mainstream smoke into his her mouth by drawing on the opposite end e.g. the filter end of the cigarette.

Through the years there have been proposed various methods for altering the composition of mainstream tobacco smoke. In PCT Application Pub. No. WO 02 37990 to Bereman it has been suggested that metallic particles and or carbonaceous particles can be incorporated into the smokable material of a cigarette in an attempt to reduce the amounts of certain compounds in the smoke produced by that cigarette. In U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2005 0066986 to Nestor et al. it has been suggested that a tobacco rod can incorporate tobacco filler combined with an aerosol forming material such as glycerin. U.S. Pat. No. 6 874 508 to Shafer et al. proposes a cigarette having a paper wrapped tobacco rod having a tip portion that is treated with an additive such as potassium bicarbonate sodium chloride or potassium phosphate.

Various tobacco substitute materials have been proposed and substantial listings of various types of those materials can be found in U.S. Pat. No. 4 079 742 to Rainer et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 4 771 795 to White et al. Certain cigarette type products that employ non tobacco materials e.g. dried vegetable leaves such lettuce leaves as filler that is burned to produce smoke that resembles tobacco smoke have been marketed under the trade names Cubebs Triumph Jazz and Bravo. See for example the types of materials described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 700 727 to Torigian. Furthermore tobacco substitute materials having the trade names Cytrel and NSM were introduced in Europe during the 1970s. Representative types of proposed synthetic tobacco substitute materials smokable materials incorporating tobacco and other components and cigarettes incorporating those materials are described in British Pat. No. 1 431 045 and U.S. Pat. No. 3 738 374 to Bennett U.S. Pat. No. 3 844 294 to Webster U.S. Pat. No. 3 878 850 to Gibson et al. U.S. Pat. No. 3 931 824 to Miano et al. U.S. Pat. No. 3 943 941 to Boyd et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 044 777 to Boyd et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 233 993 to Miano et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 286 604 to Ehretsmann et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 326 544 to Hardwick et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 920 990 to Lawrence et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 046 514 to Bolt U.S. Pat. No. 5 074 321 to Gentry et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 092 353 to Montoya et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 778 899 to Saito et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 397 852 to McAdam and U.S. Pat. No. 6 408 856 to McAdam. Furthermore various types of highly processed smokable materials incorporating tobacco and other ingredients are set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 4 823 817 to Luke U.S. Pat. No. 4 874 000 to Tamol et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 977 908 to Luke U.S. Pat. No. 5 072 744 to Luke et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 829 453 to White et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 6 182 670 to White et al.

Certain types of coaxial or concentric type smoking articles have been proposed. There have been proposed cigarette type smoking articles have included tobacco smokable materials surrounding longitudinally extending cores of other materials. UK Pat. Application 2 070 409 proposes a smoking article having a rod of smoking material having at least one filament extending over at least a major portion of the length of the rod. U.S. Pat. No. 3 614 956 to Thornton proposes a smoking article having an annular outer portion made of tobacco smoking material and a central cylindrical core of absorbent material. U.S. Pat. No. 4 219 031 to Rainer et al. proposes a smoking article having a central core of carbonized fibers circumscribed by tobacco. U.S. Pat. No. 6 823 873 to Nichols et al. proposes a cigarette including an ignition element surrounded by tobacco which is in turn surrounded by a composite outer wrapper. One type of cigarette type smoking article has included a rod of tobacco smokable material surrounded a longitudinally extending annulus of some other material. For example U.S. Pat. No. 5 105 838 to White et al. proposes a rod of smokable material normally circumscribed by a layer of wrapping material which is in turn circumscribed by an insulating material e.g. glass filaments or fibers . PCT Application Pub. No. WO 98 16125 to Snaidr et al. proposes a smoking device constructed from a very thin cigarette designed to fit into a tubular ceramic cartridge.

Numerous references have proposed various smoking articles of a type that generate flavored vapor visible aerosol or a mixture of flavored vapor and visible aerosol. Some of those proposed types of smoking articles include tubular sections or longitudinally extending air passageways. See for example those types of smoking articles described in U.S. Pat. No. 3 258 015 to Ellis et al. U.S. Pat. No. 3 356 094 to Ellis et al. U.S. Pat. No. 3 516 417 to Moses U.S. Pat. No. 4 347 855 to Lanzellotti et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 340 072 to Bolt et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 391 285 to Burnett et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 917 121 to Riehl et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 924 886 to Litzinger and U.S. Pat. No. 5 060 676 to Hearn et al. Many of those types of smoking articles have employed a combustible fuel source that is burned to provide an aerosol and or to heat an aerosol forming material. See for example the background art cited in U.S. Pat. No. 4 714 082 to Banerjee et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 4 771 795 to White et al. which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties. See also for example those types of smoking articles described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 756 318 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 714 082 to Banerjee et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 771 795 to White et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 793 365 to Sensabaugh et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 917 128 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 961 438 to Korte U.S. Pat. No. 4 966 171 to Serrano et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 969 476 to Bale et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 991 606 to Serrano et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 020 548 to Farrier et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 033 483 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 040 551 to Schlatter et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 050 621 to Creighton et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 065 776 to Lawson U.S. Pat. No. 5 076 296 to Nystrom et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 076 297 to Farrier et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 099 861 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 105 835 to Drewett et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 105 837 to Barnes et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 115 820 to Hauser et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 148 821 to Best et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 159 940 to Hayward et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 178 167 to Riggs et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 183 062 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 211 684 to Shannon et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 240 014 to Deevi et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 240 016 to Nichols et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 345 955 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 551 451 to Riggs et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 595 577 to Bensalem et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 819 751 to Barnes et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 089 857 to Matsuura et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 095 152 to Beven et al U.S. Pat. No. 6 578 584 Beven and U.S. Pat. No. 6 730 832 to Dominguez. Furthermore certain types of cigarettes that employ carbonaceous fuel elements have been commercially marketed under the brand names Premier and Eclipse by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. See for example those types of cigarettes described in R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company Monograph 1988 and 12 5 p. 1 58 2000 .

Yet other types of smoking articles such as those types of smoking articles that generate flavored vapors by subjecting tobacco or processed tobaccos to heat produced from chemical or electrical heat sources are described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 848 374 to Chard et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 947 874 to Brooks et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 146 934 to Deevi et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 224 498 to Deevi U.S. Pat. No. 5 285 798 to Banerjee et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 357 984 to Farrier et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 593 792 to Farrier et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 369 723 to Counts U.S. Pat. No. 5 865 185 to Collins et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 878 752 to Adams et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 880 439 to Deevi et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 915 387 to Baggett et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 934 289 to Watkins et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 6 164 287 to White and U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2005 0016549 to Banerjee et al. One type of smoking article that has employed electrical energy to produce heat has been commercially marketed by Philip Morris Inc. under the brand name Accord. 

Smoking articles that employ tobacco substitute materials and smoking articles that employ sources of heat other than tobacco cut filler to produce tobacco flavored vapors or tobacco flavored visible aerosols have not received widespread commercial success. It would be highly desirable to provide a smoking article such as a cigarette that includes the ability to provide to a smoker many of the benefits and advantages of conventional cigarette smoking without delivering considerable quantities of incomplete combustion and pyrolysis products.

The present invention relates to a smoking article and in particular a rod shaped smoking article e.g. a cigarette a cigarillo or a cigar . The smoking article includes a lighting end i.e. an upstream end and a mouth end i.e. a downstream end . The smoking article includes an aerosol generation system that includes i a heat generation segment and ii an aerosol generation region located downstream from the heat generation segment. The heat generation segment incorporates a short heat source e.g. a combustible carbonaceous fuel element . The aerosol generation region incorporates an aerosol forming material e.g. glycerin and flavors . A mouth end piece is located at the mouth end of the smoking article and the mouth end piece allows the smoking article to be placed in the mouth of the smoker to be drawn upon. Preferably the mouth end piece has the form of a filter element.

Upstream from the heat generation segment e.g. at the lighting end of a preferred smoking article is a longitudinally extending segment comprising smokable material that is intended to be lit and burned. The aerosol that is generated by the burning of that smokable material is intended to be drawn into the mouth of the smoker through the mouth end of that smoking article. An aerosol generation system is located between the lighting end segment and the mouth end piece. The heat generation segment of the aerosol generation system is located downstream from and adjacent to the lighting end segment. The lighting end segment preferably is in a heat exchange relationship with the heat generation segment such that burning smokable material within the lighting end segment or smokable segment can ignite the combustible fuel element of the heat generation segment. The aerosol generation region preferably is in a heat exchange relationship with the upstream components and particularly with the heat generation segment. As such heat generated by the burning fuel element acts to volatilize aerosol forming material for aerosol formation.

In use the lighting end of the smoking article is lit and the smokable material of the smokable segment undergoes thermal decomposition and hence yields aerosol. For example some portion or all of the smokable material within the lighting end segment can undergo burning and hence yield aerosol that can be considered to be somewhat characteristic of the smoke of a traditional type of smoking article that is intended to burn tobacco cut filler. As such when the mouth end of the smoking article is drawn upon by the smoker the smoker can draw thermal decomposition products of the smokable material i.e. aerosol components resulting from the action of heat upon the smokable material into his mouth. For example the smokable lighting end segment preferably incorporates tobacco cut filler and when lit that tobacco cut filler burns to yield components of tobacco smoke. During the smoking experience the smokable lighting end segment burns towards the heat source of the aerosol generating system. Although it is preferred that the heat source and smokable lighting end are physically separate the heat source and the smokable lighting end segment are in a heat exchange relationship with one another. As a result it is highly preferred that at some point during the period when the smokable lighting end segment is burning the burning smokable material thereof causes ignition of the heat source of the heat generation segment. Specifically it is highly preferable that the size and shape of the smokable material within the smokable lighting end segment the configuration or packing of the smokable material and the selection of composition of smokable materials are such that when the smokable material is burned the smokable segment produces a coal and or ash that is sufficient to result in ignition lighting and burning of the heat source e.g. fuel element . Furthermore although preferably physically separate the heat source and the aerosol generation region are in a heat exchange relationship with one another. As a result heat resulting from the burning heat source heats the aerosol generation region and as such acts to volatilize the aerosol forming material incorporated within the aerosol generation region. Thus as the smoker continues to draw on the mouth end of the smoking article the smoker receives an aerosol that is produced as a result of the action of heat upon the aerosol generation region. As such when the mouth end piece of the cigarette is drawn upon by the smoker the smoker can draw into his mouth smoke from burning tobacco cut filler as well as volatilized aerosol forming material and other components resulting from the burning or other action of heat upon the components of the smokable segment and the aerosol generation system. Aerosol can be produced until the smokable segment and the heat source extinguish.

A preferred smoking article of the present invention when smoked is capable of providing mainstream aerosol that may be characterized as being flavorful and satisfying. Highly preferred cigarettes provide certain of the flavors sensations and satisfaction of popular cigarettes that burn tobacco cut filler because those preferred cigarettes generate mainstream aerosol at least in part by burning charring or otherwise causing thermal degradation of tobacco cut filler.

Aspects and embodiments of the present invention relating to various smoking articles are illustrated with reference to . Like components are given like numeric designations throughout the figures.

Referring to a first embodiment of a representative smoking article in the form of a cigarette is shown. The smoking article has a rod like shape and includes a lighting end and a mouth end .

At the lighting end is positioned a longitudinally extending generally cylindrical smokable lighting end segment including smokable material . A representative smokable material preferably is a plant derived material e.g. tobacco material in cut filler form . An exemplary cylindrical smokable lighting end segment includes a charge or roll of the smokable material e.g. tobacco cut filler wrapped or disposed within and circumscribed by a paper wrapping material . As such the longitudinally extending outer surface of that cylindrical smokable lighting end segment is provided by the wrapping material . Both ends of the segment are open to expose the smokable material . It is preferable that the smokable lighting end segment be configured so that smokable material and wrapping material each extend along the entire length thereof.

Located downstream from the smokable lighting end segment is a longitudinally extending generally cylindrical heat generation segment . The heat generation segment incorporates a heat source circumscribed by insulation which is coaxially encircled by wrapping material . The heat source preferably is a combustible fuel element having a generally cylindrical shape and incorporating a combustible carbonaceous material. Carbonaceous materials generally have very high carbon contents. Exemplary preferred carbonaceous materials have carbon contents of greater than about 70 percent often greater than about 80 percent and frequently greater than about 90 percent on a dry weight basis. Representative fuel elements may contain components other than carbonaceous materials e.g. tobacco components such as powdered tobaccos or tobacco extracts flavoring agents salts such as sodium chloride potassium chloride and sodium carbonate graphite fibers iron oxide powder glass filaments powdered calcium carbonate alumina granules ammonia sources such as ammonia salts and or binding agents such as guar gum ammonium alginate and sodium alginate . Representative fuel elements can have a generally cylindrical shape having a length of about 12 mm and an overall outside diameter of about 4.2 mm. See for example the types of fuel element components formulations and designs set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 5 551 451 to Riggs et al. A representative fuel element preferably is extruded or compounded using a ground or powdered carbonaceous material and has a density that is greater than about 0.5 g cm often greater than about 0.7 g cm and frequently greater than about 1 g cm on a dry weight basis.

A layer of insulation preferably includes by glass filaments or fibers. Preferably the insulation acts as a jacket that assists in maintaining the heat source firmly in place within the smoking article . The insulation can be provided as a multi layer component including an inner layer or mat of non woven glass filaments an intermediate layer of reconstituted tobacco paper and an outer layer of non woven glass filaments . Preferably both ends of the heat generation segment are open to expose the heat source and insulation to the adjacent segments. Preferably the heat source and the insulation around it are configured so that the length of both materials is co extensive i.e. the ends of the insulating jacket are flush with the respective ends of the heat source . Optionally the insulation may extend slightly beyond e.g. from about 0.5 mm to about 2 mm beyond either or both ends of the heat source . However it is preferred that the ends of each of the insulation and the heat source be virtually flush with one another at the downstream end of the heat generation segment . It also is highly preferred that aerosol produced when the smokable lighting end segment is burned during use of the smoking article readily be able to pass through the heat generation segment during draw by the smoker on the mouth end .

The heat generation segment is positioned adjacent the downstream end of the smokable lighting end segment such that those segments are axially aligned in an end to end relationship preferably abutting one another. The close proximity of the heat generation segment and the smokable lighting end segment provides for an appropriate heat exchange relationship e.g. such that the action of burning smokable material within the smokable lighting end segment acts to ignite the heat source of the heat generation segment . The outer cross sectional shapes and dimensions of those smokable and heat generation segments when viewed transversely to the longitudinal axis of the smoking article most preferably are essentially identical to one another e.g. both comprise cylinders with essentially identical diameters .

The cross sectional shape and dimensions of the heat generation segment prior to burning can vary. Preferably the cross sectional area of the heat source makes up about 10 percent to about 35 percent often about 15 percent to about 25 percent of the total cross sectional area of that segment while the cross sectional area of the outer or circumscribing region comprising the insulation and relevant outer wrapping materials make up about 65 percent to about 90 percent often about 75 percent to about 85 percent of the total cross sectional area that segment . For example for a cylindrical cigarette having a circumference of about 24 mm to about 26 mm a representative heat source has a generally circular cross sectional shape with an outer diameter of about 2.5 mm to about 5 mm often about 3 mm to about 4.5 mm.

Located downstream from the heat generation segment is a longitudinally extending preferably cylindrical aerosol generation segment . The aerosol generation segment preferably incorporates a substrate material that in turn acts as a carrier for an aerosol forming agent or material not shown . An exemplary aerosol generation segment preferably incorporates a reconstituted tobacco material that includes for example processing aids flavoring agents and glycerin.

The foregoing components of the aerosol generation segment can be disposed within and circumscribed by a wrapping material . A preferred wrapping material facilitates transfer of heat from the upstream end of the smoking article e.g. from the heat generation segment to components of the aerosol generation segment . That is the aerosol generation segment and the heat generation segment preferably are configured in a heat exchange relationship with one another. The heat exchange relationship preferably is such that sufficient heat from the heat source is supplied to the aerosol formation region to volatilize aerosol forming material for aerosol formation. Preferably the heat exchange relationship is achieved by positioning those segments in close proximity to one another. A heat exchange relationship also can be achieved by extending a heat conductive material from the vicinity of the heat source into the region occupied by the aerosol generation segment .

For example a representative wrapping material for the substrate material includes heat conductive properties and can have the form of a metal or metal foil e.g. aluminum tube or a laminated material having on outer surface comprised of paper and an inner surface comprised of metal foil. In this representative example the metal foil will conduct heat from the heat generation segment to the aerosol generation segment where it will be able to volatilize the flavor components therein.

Preferably both ends of the aerosol generation segment are open to expose the substrate material thereof. It is highly preferred that components of the aerosol produced by burning the smokable lighting end segment during use of the smoking article readily be able to pass through the aerosol generation segment during draw on the mouth end .

Together the heat generating segment and the aerosol generating segment form an aerosol generation system . The aerosol generation segment preferably is positioned adjacent the downstream end of the heat generation segment such that those segments are axially aligned in an end to end relationship. Most preferably those segments are physically separate relative to one another. Those segments can abut one another or be positioned in a slight spaced apart relationship. The outer cross sectional shapes and dimensions of those segments when viewed transversely to the longitudinal axis of the smoking article preferably are essentially identical to one another. The physical arrangement of those components preferably is such that heat is transferred e.g. by means that includes conductive and convective heat transfer from the heat source to the adjacent substrate material throughout the time that the heat source is activated e.g. burned during use of the smoking article .

The components of the aerosol generation system are attached to one another and secured in place using an over wrap material . For example a paper wrapping material or most preferably a laminated material having on outer surface comprised of paper and an inner surface comprised of metal foil can circumscribe the outer longitudinally extending surface of the aerosol generation segment and an adjacent region of the heat generation segment . The inner surface of the over wrap material preferably is secured to the outer surface of the outer wrapping material of the heat generation segment and the outer surface of the outer wrapping material of the aerosol generation segment using a suitable adhesive.

The smokable lighting end segment preferably is attached to aerosol generating system using tipping material . For example a tipping paper can circumscribe adjacent regions of the smokable lighting end segment and the heat generation segment . The inner surface of the tipping material preferably is secured to the outer surface of the outer wrapping material of smokable lighting end segment and the outer surface of the outermost wrapping material of the aerosol generation system using a suitable adhesive. If desired the wrapping material of the smokable lighting end segment the circumscribing materials of the heat generation segment and or the tipping paper that secures those segments to one another can be treated in the manner set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 6 874 508 to Shafer et al.

The smoking article preferably includes a suitable mouthpiece such as for example a filter element positioned at the mouth end thereof. Preferably the filter element is positioned adjacent one end of the aerosol generating segment such that the filter element and aerosol generating segment are axially aligned in an end to end relationship preferably abutting one another. It is preferred that the general cross sectional shapes and dimensions of those segments when viewed transversely to the longitudinal axis of the smoking article are essentially identical to one another. The filter element incorporates filter material e.g. plasticized cellulose acetate tow that is over wrapped along the longitudinally extending surface thereof with circumscribing plug wrap material . Both ends of the filter element are open to permit the passage of aerosol therethrough.

The aerosol generating system preferably is attached to filter element using tipping material . The tipping material circumscribes both the entire length of the filter element and an adjacent region of the aerosol generation system . The inner surface of the tipping material preferably is secured to the outer surface of the plug wrap and the outer surface of the outer wrapping material of the aerosol generation system using a suitable adhesive.

The smoking article preferably includes an air dilution means such as a series of perforations each of which extend through the filter element tipping material and plug wrap material .

The overall dimensions of the cigarette prior to burning can vary. Preferred cigarettes are cylindrically shaped rods having circumferences of about 20 mm to about 27 mm and preferably about 22 mm to about 25 mm. Preferred cigarettes are cylindrically shaped rods that have overall lengths of about 70 mm to about 130 mm generally about 80 mm to about 120 mm and often have overall lengths of about 83 mm to about 100 mm. Preferred smokable lighting end segments have lengths of at least about 3 mm generally at least about 5 mm often at least about 8 mm and frequently at least about 10 mm when preferred smokable lighting end segments have lengths of not more than about 30 mm generally not more than about 25 mm often not more than about 20 mm and frequently not more than about 15 mm. Preferred filter elements have lengths of about 10 mm to about 40 mm and generally about 15 mm to about 35 mm. The aerosol generation system that is located between the smokable lighting end segment and the filter element has an overall length that can vary but preferably the length of thereof is about 20 mm to about 50 mm and generally about 25 mm to about 40 mm. The heat generation segment of the aerosol generation system preferably has a length of about 5 mm to about 30 mm generally about 10 mm to about 15 mm and the aerosol generation segment of the aerosol generation system preferably has an overall length of about 10 mm to about 45 mm generally about 20 to about 30 mm.

The amount of smokable material employed to manufacture the smokable lighting end segment can vary. Preferably a representative smokable lighting end segment manufactured predominantly from tobacco cut filler includes at least about 20 mg generally at least about 50 mg often at least about 75 mg and frequently at least 100 mg of tobacco material on a dry weight basis. Preferably a representative smokable lighting end segment manufactured predominantly from tobacco cut filler includes up to about 400 mg generally up to about 350 mg often up to about 300 mg and frequently up to about 250 mg of tobacco material on a dry weight basis. Certain smokable lighting end segments manufactured predominantly from tobacco cut filler may include less than about 85 mg often less than about 60 mg and even less than about 30 mg of tobacco material on a dry weight basis. The packing density of the smokable material within the smokable lighting end segment most preferably is less than the density of the fuel element. When the smokable material has the form of cut filler the packing density of the smokable material within the smokable lighting end segment is less than about 400 mg cm and generally less than about 350 mg cm while the packing density of the tobacco material within the smokable lighting end segment can exceed about 100 mg cm often exceeds about 150 mg cm and frequently exceeds about 150 mg cm. Most preferably the smokable lighting end segment is composed entirely of smokable material and does not include a carbonaceous fuel element component.

The combined amount of aerosol forming agent and substrate material employed in the aerosol generation segment can vary. The material normally is employed so as to fill the appropriate section of the aerosol generation segment e.g. the region within the wrapping material thereof at a packing density of less than about 400 mg cm and generally less than about 350 mg cm while the packing density of the aerosol generation segment generally exceeds about 100 mg cm and often exceeds about 150 mg cm.

During use the smoker lights the lighting end of the smoking article using for example a match or cigarette lighter in a manner similar to the way that conventional smoking articles are lit. As such the smokable material of the smokable lighting end segment begins to burn. The mouth end of the smoking article is placed in the lips of the smoker. Thermal decomposition products e.g. components of tobacco smoke generated by the burning smokable material are drawn through the smoking article through the filter element and into the mouth of the smoker. That is when smoked the smoking article yields visible mainstream aerosol that resembles the mainstream tobacco smoke of traditional cigarettes that burn tobacco cut filler. Depending upon factors such as the type and configuration of the smokable material the smokable lighting end segment of the smoking article can burn down in a manner similar to a traditional type of cigarette that burns tobacco cut filler and the smokable lighting end segment can produce an ash that preferably is similar in certain regards to other traditional types of cigarettes that burn tobacco cut filler. Burning of the smokable lighting end segment causes the heat source of the heat generation segment which preferably is positioned downstream from the smokable lighting end segment to be heated.

For a smoking article having a relatively short smokable lighting end segment the action of lighting the smokable lighting end segment also may have some effect upon the lighting of the heat source . Thus the heat source is ignited or otherwise activated e.g. begins to burn and as a consequence of the heat exchange relationship between the heat generation segment and the aerosol generation segment the aerosol forming material within the aerosol generation segment is heated. Volatilized aerosol forming material is entrained in the air that is drawn through that region the aerosol generation system of the smoking article . The aerosol so formed may be drawn through the filter element and into the mouth of the smoker. During certain periods of use of a smoking article it is preferable that aerosol formed within the aerosol generation segment is drawn through the filter element and into the mouth of the smoker along with the aerosol i.e. smoke formed as a result of the thermal degradation of the smokable material within the lighting segment . Thus the mainstream aerosol produced by the smoking article includes tobacco smoke produced by the thermal decomposition of the tobacco cut filler and volatilized aerosol forming material. Preferably for early puffs i.e. during and shortly after lighting most of the mainstream aerosol results from thermal decomposition of the smokable lighting end segment and hence contains thermal decomposition products of the smokable material . Preferably for later puffs i.e. after the smokable lighting end segment has been consumed and the heat source of the aerosol generation system has been ignited most of the mainstream aerosol that is provided is produced by the aerosol generation system . The smoker can smoke a smoking article for a desired number of puffs. However when the smokable material has been consumed and the heat source extinguishes the use of the smoking article is ceased i.e. the smoking experience is finished .

For a preferred smoking article the smokable material and outer wrapping material of the smokable lighting end segment burn down essentially as is the case for a traditional tobacco burning cigarette. Ash and charred materials that result as the resulting hot coal also known as a fire cone passes downstream from the lighting end can be flicked or otherwise removed from the cigarette essentially in the manner that ash generated from burned tobacco cut filler is removed from a traditional type of tobacco burning cigarette. The heat source within the aerosol generating system is burned to supply heat to volatilize aerosol forming material located within the aerosol generation segment . It is highly preferred that the components of the aerosol generation segment not experience thermal decomposition e.g. charring or burning to any significant degree.

Referring to a second embodiment of a representative smoking article in the form of a cigarette is shown. The cigarette has rod like shape and includes a lighting end and a mouth end . The cigarette includes a smokable lighting end segment located at the lighting end a filter segment located at the mouth end and a centrally located aerosol generation segment . The aerosol generation segment includes a heat generation segment that is located adjacent to the smokable lighting end segment and an aerosol formation segment that is located adjacent to the filter element . A representative heat generation segment preferably includes a generally cylindrical carbonaceous heat source circumscribed by insulation . The composition and dimensions of the various segments of the smoking article and its preferred method of use are generally similar to those set forth previously with reference to .

The smokable lighting end segment includes an outer wrapping material that circumscribes the outer longitudinally extending portion of that segment. The heat generation segment includes a heat source longitudinally circumscribed by insulation and a wrapping material that circumscribes the insulation . The aerosol generation segment includes a substrate material that in turn acts as a substrate or carrier for an aerosol forming material not shown and a wrapping material that circumscribes the substrate material . The filter element may have the shape of a tube comprised of steam bonded cellulose acetate filter material and include a central longitudinally extending air passageway . The filter element also can include an optional though preferable plug wrap material that circumscribes the outer longitudinally extending portion of that segment .

The generally cylindrical segments that make up the cigarette preferably are aligned in an end to end relationship abutting one another. The smokable lighting end segment is attached and secured to the heat generation segment using a wrapping material that circumscribes at least a portion of the length of smokable lighting end segment e.g. that portion of the smokable lighting end segment immediately adjacent the heat generation segment and preferably circumscribes the entire length of the heat generation segment . The aerosol generation segment is attached and secured to the heat generation segment by a wrapping material that circumscribes at least a portion of the length of the heat generation segment e.g. that portion of the heat generation segment immediately adjacent the aerosol generation segment and preferably circumscribes the entire length of the aerosol generation segment . The aerosol generation segment is attached and secured to the filter element using a tipping material that circumscribes at least a portion of the length of the aerosol generation segment e.g. that portion of the aerosol generation segment immediately adjacent the filter segment and preferably circumscribes the entire length of the filter segment . Optionally the tipping material and the plug wrap may be perforated with a series of holes in order to provide some degree of air dilution to the smoking article .

Referring to a third embodiment of a representative smoking article in the form of a cigarette is shown. The cigarette has rod like shape and includes a lighting end and a mouth end . The cigarette includes a smokable lighting end segment located at the lighting end a filter element e.g. a cylinder of cellulose acetate tow located at the mouth end and a centrally located aerosol generation segment . The aerosol generation segment includes a heat generation segment that is located adjacent to the smokable lighting end segment and an aerosol formation segment that is located adjacent to the filter element . The composition and dimensions of the various segments of the smoking article and its preferred method of use are generally similar to those set forth previously with reference to .

The aerosol generation segment includes at least two longitudinally aligned aerosol releasing portions . The first aerosol releasing portion positioned adjacent the heat generation segment includes substrate material that in turn acts as a substrate or carrier for a flavoring agent or material not shown and provides a source of sensory characteristics to the mainstream aerosol produced by the cigarette. The substrate material of the first aerosol releasing portion can also act as a carrier for an aerosol forming material not shown . The first aerosol releasing portion also includes a wrapping material that circumscribes the substrate material of the portion . The second aerosol releasing portion positioned adjacent the filter segment includes substrate material that acts as a substrate or carrier for an aerosol forming material not shown and a wrapping material that circumscribes the substrate material of the portion . For the embodiment shown the two aerosol releasing portions of the aerosol generation segment are shown as being circumscribed along their outer surfaces with a single layer of wrapping material .

If desired the positioning of the first aerosol releasing portion and the second aerosol releasing portion within the aerosol generation segment can be reversed. For example tobacco containing segments can be of the types that have been incorporated within those cigarettes commercially marketed under the trade name Eclipse by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.

Preferred wrapping materials of the aerosol releasing portions facilitate transfer of heat from the upstream end of the cigarette . That is the aerosol generation segment and the heat generation segment are configured in a heat exchange relationship with one another. Representative wrapping materials include heat conductive properties and may have the form of a metal or metal foil e.g. aluminum tube or a laminated material having on outer surface comprised of paper and an inner surface comprising metal foil.

The substrate material and any substance carried thereby that are incorporated into the first aerosol releasing portion of the aerosol generation segment can vary. In one embodiment the first aerosol releasing portion incorporates a blend of flavorful and aromatic tobaccos in cut filler form. Those tobaccos in turn can be treated with aerosol forming material and or at least one flavoring agent. In another embodiment the first aerosol releasing portion incorporates a processed tobacco e.g. a reconstituted tobacco manufactured using cast sheet or papermaking types of processes in cut filler form. That tobacco in turn can be treated with aerosol forming material and or at least one flavoring agent. In another embodiment the inner metal surface of the wrapping material of the first aerosol releasing portion can act as a carrier for aerosol forming material and or at least one flavoring agent. For example aerosol forming material and or at least one flavoring agent can be incorporated within a film formed on the inner metallic surface of a laminate of paper and aluminum foil using a polymeric film forming agent such as ammonium alginate sodium alginate guar gum ethyl cellulose starch or the like. In another embodiment aerosol forming material and or at least one flavoring agent can be carried by a plurality of metal pieces that can be dispersed throughout tobacco filler within the first aerosol releasing portion. For example aerosol forming material can be carried on the surface of about 10 to about 20 strips of heat conductive material e.g. thin aluminum foil each strip being about 1 mm to about 2 mm wide and about 10 mm to about 20 mm long. In yet another embodiment the components of the first aerosol releasing portion can include aerosol forming material and or at least one flavoring agent carried by a gathered or shredded paper type material such as a paper incorporating particles of absorbent carbon alumina or the like.

The aerosol generation system has an overall length that can vary but preferably the length of thereof is about 30 mm to about 50 mm. The heat generation segment of the aerosol generation system preferably has a length of about 10 mm to about 30 mm and the aerosol generation segment of the aerosol generation system preferably has an overall length of about 20 mm to about 40 mm. Preferably the length of the first aerosol releasing portion of the aerosol generation system is about 10 mm to about 30 mm and the length of the second aerosol releasing portion of the aerosol generation system is about 10 mm to about 30 mm.

Referring to a fourth embodiment of a representative smoking article in the form of a cigarette is shown. The cigarette has rod like shape and includes a lighting end and a mouth end . The cigarette includes a smokable lighting end segment located at the lighting end a filter element located at the mouth end and a centrally located aerosol generation segment . The aerosol generation segment includes a heat generation segment that is located adjacent to the smokable lighting end segment and an aerosol formation segment that is located adjacent to the filter element. The composition and dimensions of the various segments of the smoking article and its preferred method of use are generally similar to those set forth previously with reference to .

The smokable lighting end segment includes an inner longitudinally extending region of smokable material an insulative jacket that longitudinally circumscribes the smokable material an optional longitudinally extending wrapper for the smokable material e.g. in order to maintain physical separation of the smokable material from the insulation and a wrapping material that circumscribes the smokable lighting end segment . A representative smokable lighting end segment preferably has a length of about 10 mm to about 30 mm often about 15 mm to about 25 mm.

The cross sectional dimensions of the smokable lighting end segment can vary. Preferably the cross sectional area comprising smokable material makes up about 10 percent to about 40 percent often about 15 percent to about 25 percent of the total cross sectional area of that segment while the cross sectional area of the outer or circumscribing insulative jacket makes up about 60 percent to about 90 percent often about 75 percent to about 85 percent of the total cross sectional area that segment. For example for a cylindrical cigarette having a circumference of about 24 mm to about 26 mm a representative core of smokable filler comprises a generally circular cross sectional shape and an outer diameter of about 2.5 mm to about 5 mm often about 3 mm to about 4.5 mm.

Referring to there is shown a fifth embodiment of a representative cigarette that is similar in many respects to the smoking article that has been described previously with reference to . However although physically separate e.g. in an abutting end to end relationship the smokable material of the smokable lighting end segment and the heat source of the heat generation segment each are positioned within a single circumscribing insulative jacket . The insulative jacket surrounds both the smokable material and the heat source to form a combined length of the segments . The smokable material can be circumscribed by an optional wrapper and as such the smokable material and the heat source each can be aligned to have an overall configuration that preferably is generally cylindrical in nature. The representative insulative jacket preferably includes an inner layer of non woven glass filament mat and intermediate layer of reconstituted tobacco paper and an outer layer of non woven glass filament mat . An outer wrapping material circumscribes the outer longitudinally extending periphery of the insulating jacket .

The composition of the smokable material within the smokable lighting end segment can vary. The smokable material most preferably has is comprised essentially of tobacco cut filler. The smokable material alternatively can have the form of a compressed cylinder of tobacco material e.g. shredded pieces of tobacco lamina and or stem that have been compressed into a desired shape or as a generally cylindrical extrudate incorporating tobacco material. The smokable lighting end segment can have a length that can vary and representative smokable lighting end segments have lengths of at least about 3 mm often at least about 4 mm and frequently at least about 5 mm. Preferably the smokable lighting end segment has a length that does not exceed about 25 mm and often does not exceed about 20 mm and frequently does not exceed about 15 mm. For a cigarette having relatively short smokable lighting end segment e.g. having a smokable lighting end segment of less than about 12 mm the action of lighting the smokable lighting end segment also can have some effect upon lighting of the heat source .

Wrapping material which can be a laminate of paper and metal foil circumscribes the length of the aerosol generation segment and a portion of the wrapping material of the front two segment components in the region adjacent the aerosol generation segment . As such the lighting end and heat generation segments are secured to the remainder of the cigarette .

Referring to there is shown a sixth embodiment of a representative cigarette that is similar in many respects to the smoking article that has been described previously with reference to . However the lighting end includes a smokable lighting end segment positioned adjacent the heat generation segment and an extreme lighting end segment positioned upstream from the smokable lighting end segment . The smokable lighting end segment includes smokable material that is circumscribed by a wrapping material and the extreme lighting end segment is a smokable or non smokable material circumscribed by a wrapping material . An over layer wrapping material acts to maintain the two segments in position.

The smokable lighting end segment preferably incorporates smokable material having the form of tobacco cut filler. The smokable lighting end segment can be relatively short. For example a representative smokable lighting end segment can have a length of less than about 15 mm often less than about 10 mm and frequently less than about 8 mm and a length of at least about 3 mm and frequently at least about 5 mm. The extreme lighting end segment also can be relatively short. For example a representative lighting end segment can have a length of not more than about 10 mm and often less than about 8 mm and a length of at least about 3 mm and frequently at least about 5 mm. The extreme lighting end segment can act as a type of retaining means in order to assist in preventing tobacco cut filler within the smokable lighting end segment from falling from the cigarette during normal handling and use.

The extreme lighting end segment can incorporate a smokable material . In one embodiment the smokable material can be a reconstituted tobacco sheet that is gathered using techniques such as those set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 4 807 809 to Pryor et al. or shredded and gathered using techniques such as those set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 5 025 814 to Raker. For example a cylindrical extreme lighting end segment having a length of about 5 mm to about 10 mm can be provided by gathering a web of cast sheet type reconstituted tobacco having a width of about 50 mm which reconstituted tobacco is produced primarily using a Turkish Ismir A type of tobacco.

The extreme lighting end segment can incorporate a non smokable material . The material can be a highly porous or air permeable disc comprising a material such as alumina. The material also can include non fusible glass filaments. The extreme lighting end also can comprise a mixture of non smokable material and smokable materials such as a mixture of granulated or powdered tobacco lamina and or stems mixed with a non woven glass filament material or the type of glass filament and reconstituted tobacco configuration set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 5 065 776 to Lawson et al. Most preferably extreme lighting end segments comprising non smokable materials are short and highly porous or air permeable in order that the smokable material located downstream from that segment can be readily lit using a match or a cigarette lighter.

For the foregoing embodiments the smokable lighting end segment the heat generation segment the aerosol generation segment the mouth end piece and various components of the foregoing can be manufactured using conventional types of cigarette and cigarette component manufacturing techniques and equipment or appropriately modified cigarette and cigarette component manufacturing equipment. That is the various component parts and pieces can be processed and assembled into cigarettes using the conventional types of technologies known to those skilled in the art of the design and manufacture of cigarettes and cigarette components and in the art of cigarette component assembly. See for example the types of component configurations component materials assembly methodologies and assembly technologies set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 5 052 413 to Baker et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 088 507 to Baker et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 105 838 to White et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 469 871 to Barnes et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 5 551 451 to Riggs et al. and U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2005 0066986 to Nestor et al. which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties.

A manner or method for assembling a cigarette representative of one aspect of the present invention such as a cigarette of the type described with reference to can be manufactured using the following types of techniques. A tobacco rod including tobacco cut filler circumscribed by paper wrapper can be manufactured using conventional cigarette making machinery. For example a continuous tobacco rod can be subdivided into a plurality of tobacco rods each having a length of 120 mm and each such rod can be used as a six up tobacco rod for the manufacture of the lighting end segments of six cigarettes. As such the six up rod can be subdivided transversely to its longitudinal axis into six segments each having a length of 20 mm using conventional types of tobacco rod cutting techniques. A continuous rod of extruded carbonaceous fuel element surrounded by a glass filament insulation jacket and circumscribed by an outer wrapping material. Such continuous rod also can be subdivided into short segments. For example the continuous rod can be subdivided into a plurality of cylindrically shaped heat source segments each having a length of 24 mm and each such segment can be used as a two up segment for the manufacture of the heat generation segments of two cigarettes. A smokable lighting end segment can be positioned at each end of a two up heat generation segment. A circumscribing wrapper for the heat generation segment and at least a portion of the length of the smokable lighting end segment acts to provide a two up combined segment. That two up combined segment can be cut in half i.e. transversely to the longitudinal axis of the combined segment through the two up heat source segment to provide two combined segment pieces. A rod including processed tobacco filler incorporating glycerin circumscribed by wrapping material can be manufactured using conventional types of cigarette making machinery. The wrapping material preferably is a laminated material having on outer surface comprised of paper and an inner surface comprised of metal foil. For example a continuous tobacco rod can be subdivided into a plurality of tobacco rods each having a length of 102 mm and each such rod can be used as a six up tobacco rod for the manufacture of the aerosol generation segments of six cigarettes. As such the six up rod can be subdivided into three two up cylindrically shaped segments each having a length of 34 mm using conventional types of tobacco rod cutting techniques. A previously provided combined segment can be positioned at each end of a two up aerosol generation segment. A circumscribing wrapper for the aerosol generation segment and at least a portion of the length of the combined segment acts to provide a two up cigarette rod. A preferred wrapper is a laminated material having on outer surface comprised of paper and an inner surface comprised of metal foil. That two up cigarette rod can be cut in half i.e. transversely to the longitudinal axis of the combined segment through the two up aerosol generation segment to provide two cigarette rods each including three combined segment pieces. A two up filter element segment can be manufactured using conventional types of filter making techniques. A previously provided cigarette rod can be positioned at each end of a two up filter element segment. A circumscribing tipping material for the filter element segment and an adjacent region of the cigarette rod acts to provide a two up filtered cigarette. That two up cigarette can be cut in half i.e. transversely to the longitudinal axis of the combined segment through the two up filter element to provide two filtered cigarettes.

The manufacture of multi segment components can be carried out using combination equipment of the type available under the brand name Mulfi from Hauni Werke Korber Co. KG of Hamburg Germany. Combination of various segments or cigarette components also can be carried out using conventional type or suitably modified devices such as tipping devices available as Lab MAX MAX MAX S or MAX 80 from Hauni Werke Korber Co. KG. See for example the types of devices and combination techniques set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 3 308 600 to Erdmann et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 280 187 to Reuland et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 281 670 to Heitmann et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 6 229 115 to Vos et al.

Referring to there is shown an end view of a first embodiment of a heat source illustrated as a fuel element that can be employed within the heat generation segment of a smoking article of the present invention. The fuel element has a generally circular cross sectional shape. The fuel element can include several peripheral grooves extending along its length. The fuel element also includes at least one passageway extending through its central region. For the embodiment shown a representative fuel element can have an outermost diameter of about 4.2 mm include five equally spaced peripheral slots or grooves each having a depth of about 2 mm and a maximum width of about 2 mm and a central circular passageway having a diameter of about 0.027 mm and extending through the center of the fuel element. In various embodiments the grooves may intersect or may remain parallel and may form a set of straight lines along the surface of the fuel element or may curve and even intersect each other along its surface.

Referring to there is shown an end view of a second embodiment of a representative fuel element that can be employed within the heat generation segment of a smoking article of the present invention. The fuel element includes five peripheral grooves extending along its. The fuel element does not include any passageway extending through its central region. For the embodiment shown a representative fuel element can have an outermost diameter of about 3.8 mm and include five equally spaced peripheral slots or grooves each having a depth of about 1.52 mm and a maximum width of about 0.56 mm.

Referring to there is shown an end view of a third embodiment of a representative fuel element that can be employed within the heat generation segment of a smoking article of the present invention. The fuel element can include several peripheral grooves extending along its length. The fuel element does not include a centrally located longitudinally extending passageway. For the embodiment shown a representative fuel element can have an outermost diameter of about 3.8 mm and include six equally spaced peripheral slots or grooves each having a depth of about 2 mm and a maximum width of about 2 mm.

Referring to there is shown an end view of a fourth embodiment of a representative fuel element that can be employed within the heat generation segment of a smoking article of the present invention. The fuel element can include several peripheral grooves extending along its length. The fuel element does not include any passageway extending through its central region. For the embodiment shown a representative fuel element can have an outermost diameter of about 3.8 mm and include sixteen equally spaced peripheral slots or grooves each having a depth of about 1 mm and a maximum width of about 1 mm. The slots or grooves may provide a type of variegated appearance to the peripheral surface of the fuel element.

Smokable materials and other associated materials useful for carrying out certain aspects of the present invention can vary. Smokable materials are materials that can be incorporated into the smokable lighting end segment or rod and provide mass and bulk to some region within that smokable lighting end segment. Smokable materials undergo some type of destruction during conditions of normal use of the smoking article into which they are incorporated. Destruction of the smokable material due at least in part to thermal decomposition of at least some component of that smokable material results in the formation of an aerosol having the form normally characterized as smoke. For example smokable materials incorporating tobacco materials are intended to burn or otherwise undergo thermal decomposition to yield tobacco smoke. The selection of tobacco types and tobacco blends can determine the chemical composition of and the sensory and organoleptic characteristics of that aerosol produced when that tobacco material or blend of tobacco materials is burned.

It is most highly preferred that smokable materials of the smokable lighting end segment incorporate tobacco of some form. Preferred smokable materials are composed predominantly of tobacco of some form based on the dry weights of those materials. That is the majority of the dry weight of those materials and the majority of the weight of a mixture incorporating those materials including a blend of materials or materials having additives applied thereto or otherwise incorporated therein are provided by tobacco of some form. For example those materials can be processed tobaccos that incorporate minor amounts non tobacco filler materials e.g. calcium carbonate particles carbonaceous materials grains or wood pulp and or binding agents e.g. guar gum sodium alginate or ammonium alginate and or a blend of those materials can incorporate tobacco substitutes or extenders. Those materials and blends incorporating those materials frequently include greater than about 70 percent tobacco often are greater than about 80 percent tobacco and generally are greater than about 90 percent tobacco on a dry weight basis based on the combined weights of the tobacco non tobacco filler material and non tobacco substitute or extender. Those materials also can be primarily made all of tobacco material and not incorporate any non tobacco fillers substitutes or extenders.

The smokable material can be treated with tobacco additives of the type that are traditionally used for the manufacture of cigarettes such as casing and or top dressing components. See for example U.S. Pat. No. 3 419 015 to Wochnowski U.S. Pat. No. 4 054 145 to Berndt et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 887 619 to Burcham Jr. et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 022 416 to Watson U.S. Pat. No. 5 103 842 to Strang et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 5 711 320 to Martin. Preferred casing materials include water sugars and syrups e.g. sucrose glucose and high fructose corn syrup humectants e.g. glycerin or propylene glycol and flavoring agents e.g. cocoa and licorice . Those added components also include top dressing materials e.g. flavoring materials such as menthol . See for example U.S. Pat. No. 4 449 541 to Mays et al. Additives also can be added to the smokable materials using the types of equipment described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 995 405 to Lettau or that are available as Menthol Application System MAS from Kohl Maschinenbau GmbH. The selection of particular casing and top dressing components is dependent upon factors such as the sensory characteristics that are desired and the selection and use of those components will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art of cigarette design and manufacture. See Gutcho Noyes Data Corp. 1972 and Leffingwell et al. 1972 . The smokable material also may be treated for example with ammonia or ammonium hydroxide or otherwise treated to incorporate ammonia e.g. by addition of ammonia salts such as for example diammonium phosphate . Preferably the amount of ammonia optionally incorporated into the smokable material is less than about 5 percent and generally about 1 to about 3 percent based on the dry weight of the smokable material.

Smokable materials preferably are used in forms and in manners that are traditional for the manufacture of smoking articles such as cigarettes. Those materials can incorporate shredded pieces of tobacco e.g. as lamina and or stem and or those materials can be tobacco materials that are in processed forms. For example those materials normally are used in cut filler form e.g. shreds or strands of tobacco filler cut into widths of about 1 10 inch to about 1 60 inch preferably about 1 20 inch to about 1 35 inch and in lengths of about inch to about 3 inches usually about inch to about 1 inch . Alternatively though less preferred those materials such as processed tobacco materials can be employed as longitudinally extending strands or as sheets formed into the desired configuration or as compressed or extruded pieces formed into a desired shape.

Tobacco materials can include or can be derived from various types of tobaccos such as flue cured tobacco burley tobacco Oriental tobacco or Maryland tobacco dark tobacco dark fired tobacco and tobaccos as well as other rare or specialty tobaccos or blends thereof. Descriptions of various types of tobaccos growing practices harvesting practices and curing practices are set for in Davis et al. Eds. 1999 . See also U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2004 0084056 to Lawson et al. Most preferably the tobacco materials are those that have been appropriately cured and aged.

Preferably tobacco materials are used in a so called blended form. For example certain popular tobacco blends commonly referred to as American blends comprise mixtures of flue cured tobacco burley tobacco and Oriental tobacco. Such blends in many cases contain tobacco materials that have processed forms such as processed tobacco stems e.g. cut rolled stems cut rolled expanded stems or cut puffed stems volume expanded tobacco e.g. puffed tobacco such as dry ice expanded tobacco DIET preferably in cut filler form . Tobacco materials also can have the form of reconstituted tobaccos e.g. reconstituted tobaccos manufactured using paper making type or cast sheet type processes . Tobacco reconstitution processes traditionally convert portions of tobacco that normally might be wasted into commercially useful forms. For example tobacco stems recyclable pieces of tobacco and tobacco dust can be used to manufacture processed reconstituted tobaccos of fairly uniform consistency. The precise amount of each type of tobacco within a tobacco blend used for the manufacture of a particular cigarette brand can vary is a manner of design choice depending upon factors such as the sensory characteristics desired. See for example Voges Ed. p. 44 45 1984 Browne 3Ed. p. 43 1990 and Davis et al. Eds. p. 346 1999 . Various representative tobacco types processed types of tobaccos types of tobacco blends cigarette components and ingredients and tobacco rod configurations also are set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 4 836 224 to Lawson et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 924 883 to Perfetti et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 924 888 to Perfetti et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 056 537 to Brown et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 159 942 to Brinkley et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 220 930 to Gentry U.S. Pat. No. 5 360 023 to Blakley et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 715 844 to Young et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 6 730 832 to Dominguez et al. U.S. Patent Application Pub. Nos. 2002 0000235 to Shafer et al. 2003 0075193 to Li et al. and 2003 0131859 to Li et al. PCT Application Pub. No. WO 02 37990 to Bereman U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2004 0084056 to Lawson et al. U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2004 0255965 to Perfetti et al. U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2005 0066986 to Nestor et al. and Bombick et al. 39 p. 11 17 1997 which are incorporated herein by reference.

The fuel element of the heat generation segment can vary. Exemplary suitable fuel elements and representative components designs and configurations thereof and manners and methods for producing those fuel elements and the components thereof are set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 4 714 082 to Banerjee et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 756 318 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 881 556 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 989 619 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 020 548 to Farrier et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 027 837 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 067 499 to Banerjee et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 076 297 to Farrier et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 099 861 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 105 831 to Banerjee et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 129 409 to White et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 148 821 to Best et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 156 170 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 178 167 to Riggs et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 211 684 to Shannon et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 247 947 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 345 955 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 469 871 to Barnes et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 551 451 to Riggs U.S. Pat. No. 5 560 376 to Meiring et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 706 834 to Meiring et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 5 727 571 to Meiring et al. and U.S. patent application Pub. No. Ser. No. 10 868 126 filed Jun. 15 2004 to Banerjee et al. which are incorporated herein by reference. Exemplary carbonaceous fuel elements are of the type that have been incorporated within those cigarettes commercially marketed under the trade names Premier and Eclipse by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. Most preferably each heat source segment incorporates a one piece fuel element and only one fuel element is incorporated into each heat source segment. Certain preferred fuel elements are absent of longitudinally extending air passageways. Certain fuel elements can have a generally tubular shape having a relatively large diameter central passageway and no peripherally extending grooves. Certain fuel elements have longitudinally extending peripheral grooves and the grooves can have cross section shapes of semi circular triangular or rectangular or such that the overall cross sectional shape of the fuel element can be characterized as generally snow flake in nature. Certain other fuel elements may have a surface that includes no grooves while optionally including a central passageway. Yet other fuel elements may have a surface that includes no grooves and are substantially solid e.g. not having any central passageway .

Preferred fuel elements incorporate carbonaceous material. For example the amount of carbonaceous material incorporated into a fuel element preferably provides at least about 50 percent often at least about 60 percent and frequently at least about 70 percent of the weight of a fuel element on a dry weight basis. Preferred representative fuel elements incorporate up to about 15 weight percent frequently up to about 10 weight percent binding agent up to about 15 weight percent frequently up to about 10 weight percent of additive ingredients such as tobacco powder salts and the like up to about 20 weight percent frequently up to about 15 weight percent of ingredients such as graphite or alumina and at least about 50 weight percent frequently at least about 65 weight percent of a high carbon content carbonaceous material. Certain representative fuel elements incorporate about 10 to about 20 weight parts of ingredients such as graphite or alumina and about 60 to about 75 weight parts of carbonaceous material.

The fuel element can be formed into the desired shape by techniques such as compression pressing or extrusion. For example a moist dough like paste can be extruded using single screw or twin screw extruder such as an extruder having a stainless steel barrel and screw an inner sleeve constructed from a highly wear resistant and corrosion resistant ceramic material and a ceramic die. Exemplary types of extrusion devices include those types available as ICMA San Giorgio Model No. 70 16D or as Welding Engineers Model No. 70 16LD. For an extruded fuel element containing a relatively high level of carbonaceous material the density of the fuel element can be decreased slightly by increasing the moisture level within the extruded mixture decreasing the die pressure within the extruder or incorporating relatively low density materials within the extruded mixture.

The fuel element most preferably is circumscribed or otherwise jacketed by insulation or other suitable material. The insulation most preferably configured and employed so as to support maintain and retain the fuel element in place within the smoking article. The insulation most preferably is adapted such that drawn air and aerosol can pass readily therethrough. Exemplary insulation materials components of insulation assemblies configurations of representative insulation assemblies within heat generation segments wrapping materials for insulation assemblies and manners and methods for producing those components and assemblies are set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 4 807 809 to Pryor et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 893 637 to Hancock et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 938 238 to Barnes et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 027 836 to Shannon et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 065 776 to Lawson et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 105 838 to White et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 119 837 to Banerjee et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 247 947 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 303 720 to Banerjee et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 345 955 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 396 911 to Casey III et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 546 965 to White U.S. Pat. No. 5 727 571 to Meiring et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 902 431 to Wilkinson et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 5 944 025 to Cook et al. which are incorporated herein by reference. See also R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company Monograph 1988 . Exemplary insulation assemblies have been incorporated within the types of cigarettes commercially marketed under the trade names Premier and Eclipse by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. A preferred insulation assembly is manufactured using at least one layer of non woven glass filament mat. For example a web of at least one layer of non woven glass filament mat can be wrapped around a continuously extruded fuel element the face of the mat can be moistened with water e.g. by spraying in order to facilitate binding of the fuel element to the mat the resulting assembly can be circumscribed with a continuous paper web e.g. using two continuous center line strips adhesive and a seam line adhesive each of which optionally can contain flavoring agents or burn modifiers and the resulting continuous rod can be cut into segments of the desired length. If desired flavoring agents burn modifiers and the like can be incorporated within the water that is applied to the glass filament mat.

Insulation assemblies can incorporate materials such as calcium sulfate fibers thermal resistant ceramic filaments high temperature resistant carbon filaments e.g. graphite type materials and the like which can be incorporated into non woven mats. Representative insulation assemblies also can incorporate tobacco such as particles or pieces of tobacco dispersed within a glass filament mat or configured as at least one layer of reconstituted tobacco sheet with at least one layer of glass filament mat. Alternatively though less preferred paper type materials e.g. paper type materials treated with appropriate salts such as potassium chloride in amounts sufficient to provide certain degrees of heat resistant characters thereto can be gathered or crimped and gathered around the fuel element in order to adequately hold the fuel element securely in place within the cigarette. Alternatively though less preferred tobacco cut filler e.g. a shredded lamina pieces of tobacco stems shredded reconstituted tobacco paper type sheet shredded reconstituted tobacco cast sheet or blends of the foregoing which can be treated with appropriate salts such as is set forth in U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2005 0066986 to Nestor et al. can surround the peripheral region of the fuel element in order to adequately hold the fuel element securely in place within the cigarette. Representative types of tobacco materials can be manufactured from mixtures of tobacco types or from one predominant type of tobacco e.g. a cast sheet type or paper type reconstituted tobacco composed primarily of burley tobacco or a cast sheet type or paper type reconstituted tobacco composed primarily of Oriental tobacco . Flavoring agents e.g. volatile flavoring agents can be incorporated within the insulation assembly and as such i flavor can be entrained within drawn aerosol that is produced by burning of the smokable material as that aerosol passes through the insulation assembly and ii the flavor of aerosol produced by burning the fuel element of the heat generation segment can be enhanced.

The aerosol forming material can vary and mixtures of various aerosol forming materials can be used. Representative types of aerosol forming materials are set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 4 793 365 to Sensabaugh Jr. et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 5 101 839 to Jakob et al. PCT Application Pub. No. WO 98 57556 to Biggs et al. and R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company Monograph 1988 which are incorporated herein by reference. A preferred aerosol forming material produces a visible aerosol upon the application of sufficient heat thereto and a highly preferred aerosol forming material produces an aerosol that can be considered to be smoke like. A preferred aerosol forming material is chemically simple relative to the chemical nature of the smoke produced by burning tobacco. A highly preferred aerosol forming material is a polyol such as glycerin.

A variety of materials can be used to provide the material for that portion of the aerosol generating region that acts as a substrate for the aerosol forming material. Exemplary substrate materials and exemplary formulations incorporating aerosol forming materials are set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 4 793 365 to Sensabaugh et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 893 639 to White U.S. Pat. No. 5 099 861 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 101 839 to Jakob et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 105 836 to Gentry et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 159 942 to Brinkley et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 203 355 to Clearman et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 271 419 to Arzonico et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 327 917 to Lekwauwa et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 396 911 to Casey III et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 533 530 to Young et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 588 446 to Clearman U.S. Pat. No. 5 598 868 to Jakob et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 5 715 844 to Young et al. and U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2005 0066986 to Nestor et al. which are incorporated herein by reference. See also R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company Monograph 1988 . Exemplary substrate materials have been incorporated within the types of cigarettes commercially marketed under the trade names Premier and Eclipse by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.

The substrate material can incorporate tobacco of some form normally is composed predominantly of tobacco and can be provided by virtually all tobacco material. The form of the substrate material can vary but most preferably that material is employed in an essentially traditional filler form e.g. as cut filler . The substrate material can be otherwise formed into desired configurations. The substrate material can be used in the form of a gathered web or sheet using the types of techniques generally set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 4 807 809 to Pryor et al. The substrate material can be used into the form of a web or sheet that is shredded into a plurality of longitudinally extending strands using the types of techniques generally set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 5 025 814 to Raker. The substrate material can have the form of a loosely rolled sheet such that a spiral type of air passageway extends longitudinally through the aerosol generation segment. Representative types of tobacco containing substrate materials can be manufactured from mixtures of tobacco types or from one predominant type of tobacco e.g. a cast sheet type or paper type reconstituted tobacco composed primarily of burley tobacco or a cast sheet type or paper type reconstituted tobacco composed primarily of Oriental tobacco .

The substrate material also can be treated with tobacco additives of the type that are traditionally used for the manufacture of cigarettes such as casing and or top dressing components. The substrate material optionally can be ammoniated e.g. by treatment with anhydrous ammonia aqueous ammonium hydroxide or ammonium salts such as diammonium phosphate . Alternatively those materials can be absent or virtually absent of any type of added ammonia e.g. whether by treatment with anhydrous ammonia aqueous ammonium hydroxide or ammonium salts such as diammonium phosphate . Those materials also can be treated with other additives such as potassium carbonate or sodium bicarbonate. Other materials such as catalytic agents nanoparticle compositions and the like also can be incorporated within any of the smokable materials of the smokable rod. See for example the types of components set forth in US Pat. Publication 2004 0173229 to Crooks et al. Preferably the material is not treated with more that about 10 percent of any of those types of additive agents other than aerosol forming materials based on the dry weight of tobacco material within that substrate material.

The manner by which the aerosol forming material is contacted with the substrate material e.g. the tobacco material can vary. The aerosol forming material can be applied to a formed tobacco material or can be incorporated into processed tobacco materials during manufacture of those materials. The aerosol forming material can be dissolved or dispersed in an aqueous liquid or other suitable solvent or liquid carrier and sprayed onto that substrate material. See for example U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2005 0066986 to Nestor et al. The amount of aerosol forming material employed relative to the dry weight of substrate material can vary. Materials including exceedingly high levels of aerosol forming material preferably can be difficult to process into cigarette rods using conventional types of automated cigarette manufacturing equipment.

Cast sheet types of materials preferably can incorporate relatively high levels aerosol forming material. Reconstituted tobaccos manufactured using paper making types of processes preferably can incorporate moderate levels of aerosol forming material. Tobacco strip and tobacco cut fuller can incorporate lower amounts of aerosol forming material. For processed materials such as cast sheet materials and paper type reconstituted tobaccos tobacco pulp materials that are extracted with aqueous liquids can be used as components thereof. The removal of some fraction or essentially all of the water soluble components of tobacco can assist in providing a processed material that is capable of acting as an effective substrate for higher levels of aerosol forming material. In addition dusting processed materials with dry tobacco powders can assist in providing processed materials having relatively high levels of glycerin while not demonstrating overly tacky or sticky characteristics.

Cast sheet materials and particularly cast sheet materials incorporating certain amounts of tobacco pulp materials that have been extracted with water often can comprise up to about 65 percent often up to about 60 percent and frequently up to about 55 percent aerosol forming material based on the dry weight of the tobacco and aerosol forming material in the material so produced. Paper type reconstituted tobacco materials and particularly those materials incorporating certain amounts of tobacco pulp materials that have been extracted with water and not reapplying some or all of the water soluble extract components back to that pulp often can comprise up to about 55 percent often up to about 50 percent and frequently up to about 45 percent aerosol forming material based on the dry weight of the tobacco and aerosol forming material in the material so produced. A material produced by spraying tobacco strip or cut filler with aerosol forming material often does not comprise more than about 20 percent and frequently does not comprise more than about 15 percent aerosol forming material based on the dry weight of the tobacco and aerosol forming material of the material so produced. Materials having relatively high loading levels of aerosol forming material can be dried e.g. by being subjected to a flow of hot air to a moisture content of about 4 percent to about 5 percent by weight the dried material then can be processed to form the components of the designed configuration and then those components can be re equilibrated to a moisture content of about 12 to about 13 weight percent.

Other types of materials incorporating relatively high levels of aerosol forming material can be incorporated in the aerosol generation segment . Formed encapsulated or microencapsulated materials can be employed. Such types of materials preferably include primarily of aerosol forming material and those materials can incorporate some amount and form of tobacco. An example of such a type of material is a film produced by casting and drying an aqueous solution of about 65 to about 70 weight parts glycerin and about 25 to about 30 weight parts binder e.g. citrus pectin ammonium alginate sodium alginate or guar gum and about 5 weight parts flavoring agent e.g. vanillin coffee tea cocoa and or fruit flavor concentrates and then surface coating that film with about 2 to about 10 weight parts of a finely divided powder that is provided by milling tobacco lamina.

The amount of aerosol forming material that is used within the aerosol generation segment is such that the cigarette exhibits acceptable sensory and organoleptic properties and desirable performance characteristics. For example it is highly preferable that sufficient aerosol forming material such as glycerin be employed in order to provide for the generation of a visible mainstream aerosol high in many regards resembles the appearance of tobacco smoke. It is desirable for those components not to introduce significant degrees of unacceptable off taste filmy mouth feel or an overall sensory experience that is significantly different from that of a traditional type of cigarette that generates mainstream smoke by burning tobacco cut filler. The selection of the components the amounts of those components used and the types of tobacco material used can be altered in order to control the overall chemical composition of the mainstream aerosol produced by the cigarette.

Other types of flavoring agents or materials that alter the sensory or organoleptic character or nature of the mainstream aerosol of the cigarette can be employed. Such flavoring agents can be provided from sources other than tobacco can be natural or artificial in nature and can be employed as concentrates or flavor packages. Of particular interest are flavoring agents that are applied to or incorporated within the substrate material of the aerosol generation segment. Exemplary flavoring agents include vanillin ethyl vanillin cream tea coffee fruit e.g. apple cherry strawberry peach and citrus flavors including lime and lemon maple menthol mint peppermint spearmint wintergreen nutmeg clove lavender cardamom ginger honey anise sage cinnamon sandalwood jasmine cascarilla cocoa licorice and flavorings and flavor packages of the type and character traditionally used for the flavoring of cigarette and pipe tobaccos. Syrups such as high fructose corn syrup also can be employed. Flavoring agents also can include acidic or basic characteristics e.g. organic acids such as levulinic acid . Preferably such flavoring agents constitute less than about 10 percent and often less than about 5 percent of the total weight of aerosol generation segment on a dry weight basis.

The wrapping materials can vary. Exemplary types of wrapping materials for the heat generation segment are set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 4 938 238 to Barnes et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 5 105 837 to Barnes et al. Wrapping materials such as those set forth in U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2005 0005947 to Hampl Jr. et al. and PCT Application Pub. No. WO 2005 039326 to Rasouli et al. can be employed as inner wrapping materials of a so called double wrap configuration of a heat generation segment. An exemplary type of heat conductive wrapping material for the aerosol generation segment is set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 5 551 451 to Riggs et al. Other suitable wrapping materials are set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 5 065 776 to Lawson et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 6 367 481 to Nichols et al. Exemplary wrapping materials such as laminates of paper and metal foil and papers used as the outer circumscribing wrapper of the heat generation segment have been incorporated within the types of cigarettes commercially marketed under the trade names Premier and Eclipse by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. If desired outer wrapping materials of the aerosol generation segment e.g. those wrapping materials circumscribing the aerosol generation as well as adjacent regions optionally can be treated with heat sensitive materials e.g. heat sensitive inks that provide color change when the cigarette is being used in order that the smoker can visually identify the regions of the cigarette that are experiencing increased temperature relative to ambient temperature.

A preferred wrapping material for a component such as the smokable lighting end segment is a paper material such as the type of paper material preferably used in cigarette manufacture. The selection of a particular wrapping material will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art of cigarette design and manufacture. Smokable lighting end segments can include one layer of wrapping material or those segments can have more than one layer of circumscribing wrapping material such as is the case for the so called double wrap smokable rods. The wrapping material can be made of materials or be suitably treated in order that the wrapping material does not experience a visible spotting and staining as a result of contact with various components contained within the cigarette. Exemplary types of wrapping materials wrapping material components and treated wrapping materials are described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 105 838 to White et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 271 419 to Arzonico et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 220 930 to Gentry and U.S. Pat. No. 6 874 508 to Shafer et al. PCT Application Pub. No. WO 01 08514 to Fournier et al. PCT Application Pub. No. WO 03 043450 to Hajaligol et al. U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2003 0114298 to Woodhead et al. and U.S. Patent Application Pub. No.s 2004 0134631 to Crooks et al. 2005 0005947 to Hampl Jr. et al. 2005 0016556 to Ashcraft et al. and 2005 0076929 to Fitzgerald et al. and PCT Application Pub. No. WO 2005 039326 to Rasouli et al. which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties. Representative wrapping materials are commercially available as R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company Grades 119 170 419 453 454 456 465 466 490 525 535 557 652 664 672 676 and 680 from Schweitzer Mauduit International. Colored wrapping materials e.g. brown colored papers can be employed. Reconstituted tobacco materials also can be used particularly as inner wrapping materials e.g. in regions that are over wrapped with at least one further layer of wrapping material and representative reconstituted tobacco materials useful as wrapping materials for smokable rods are set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 5 074 321 to Gentry et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 159 944 to Arzonico et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 261 425 to Raker U.S. Pat. No. 5 462 073 to Bowen and U.S. Pat. No. 5 699 812 to Bowen which are incorporated herein by reference. The inner wrapping material also can be a cast sheet type of reconstituted tobacco material including such a material incorporating a relatively high level of aerosol forming material.

The mouth end piece can vary. Preferred mouth end pieces have the form of filter elements. The filter elements can be of a one segment or multi segment design. Representative filter element components designs and assemblies are described in Browne 3Ed. 1990 Davis et al. Eds. 1999 U.S. Pat. No. 4 508 525 to Berger U.S. Pat. No. 4 807 809 to Pryor et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 903 714 to Barnes et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 920 990 to Lawrence et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 012 829 to Thesing et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 025 814 to Raker U.S. Pat. No. 5 074 320 to Jones Jr. et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 076 295 to Saintsing et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 101 839 to Jakob et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 105 834 to Saintsing et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 105 838 to White et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 271 419 to Arzonico et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 137 034 to Perfetti et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 360 023 to Blakley et al U.S. Pat. No. 5 396 909 to Gentry et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 595 218 to Koller et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 718 250 to Banerjee et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 537 186 to Veluz U.S. Pat. No. 6 530 377 to Lesser et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 615 842 to Cerami et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 631 722 to MacAdam et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 6 792 953 to Lesser et al. U.S. Patent Application Pub. No.s 2002 0014453 to Lilly Jr. et al. 2002 0020420 to Xue et al. 2002 0166563 to Jupe et al. 2003 0154993 to Paine et al. 2003 0168070 to Xue et al. 2004 0261807 to Dube et al. 2005 0066983 to Clark et al. 2005 0133051 to Luan et al. and 2005 0133052 to Fournier et al. U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 901 662 filed Jul. 29 2004 to Gonterman et al. and PCT Application Pub. No. WO 02 37990 to Bereman. Representative filter materials can be manufactured from tow materials e.g. cellulose acetate or polypropylene tow or gathered web materials e.g. gathered webs of paper reconstituted tobacco cellulose acetate polypropylene or polyester . Certain filter elements can have relatively high removal efficiencies for selected gas phase components of the mainstream aerosol. Certain filter elements can have relatively low filtration efficiencies for the volatilized aerosol forming material. Exemplary mouth end piece assemblies have been incorporated within the types of cigarettes commercially marketed under the trade names Premier and Eclipse by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.

The plug wrap and tipping material used to construct the mouth end piece and attach the mouth end piece to the remainder of the smoking article can vary. Exemplary plug wrap papers are available from Schweitzer Mauduit International as Porowrap Plug Wrap 17 M1 33 M1 45 M1 65 M9 95 M9 150 M4 260 M4 and 260 M4T and from Olsany Facility OP Paprina of the Czech Republic Trierenberg Holding as Ref. No. 646. Suitable plug wrap and tipping materials have been incorporated within the types of cigarettes commercially marketed under the trade names Premier and Eclipse by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.

For cigarettes of the present invention that are air diluted or ventilated the amount or degree of air dilution or ventilation can vary. Frequently the amount of air dilution for an air diluted cigarette is greater than about 10 percent generally is greater than about 20 percent often is greater than about 30 percent and sometimes is greater than about 40 percent. Preferably the upper level for air dilution for an air diluted cigarette is less than about 80 percent and often is less than about 70 percent. As used herein the term air dilution is the ratio expressed as a percentage of the volume of air drawn through the air dilution means to the total volume and air and aerosol drawn through the cigarette and exiting the mouth end portion of the cigarette. Higher air dilution levels can act to reduce the transfer efficiency of aerosol forming material into mainstream aerosol.

Preferred cigarettes of the present invention exhibit desirable resistance to draw. For example an exemplary cigarette exhibits a pressure drop of between about 50 and about 200 mm water pressure drop at 17.5 cc sec. air flow. Preferred cigarettes exhibit pressure drop values of between about 60 mm and about 180 more preferably between about 70 mm to about 150 mm water pressure drop at 17.5 cc sec. air flow. Preferably pressure drop values of cigarettes are measured using a Filtrona Cigarette Test Station CTS Series available form Filtrona Instruments and Automation Ltd.

Cigarettes of the present invention when smoked yield an acceptable number of puffs. Such cigarettes normally provide more than about 6 puffs and generally more than about 8 puffs per cigarette when machine smoked under FTC smoking conditions. Such cigarettes normally provide less than about 15 puffs and generally less than about 12 puffs per cigarette when smoked under FTC smoking conditions. FTC smoking conditions consist of 35 ml puffs of 2 second duration separated by 58 seconds of smolder. The number of puffs attributed principally to the burning of the smokable lighting end segment of smokable material preferably ranges from about 1 to about 5 per cigarette generally about 2 to about 4 per cigarette when the cigarette is smoked under FTC smoking conditions. The number of puffs attributed principally to the operation of the aerosol generation system generally ranges from about 5 to about 12 per cigarette when the cigarette is smoked under FTC smoking conditions.

Cigarettes of the present invention when smoked yield mainstream aerosol. The amount of mainstream aerosol that is yielded per cigarette can vary. When smoked under FTC smoking conditions an exemplary cigarette yields an amount of FTC tar that normally is at least about 1 mg often is at least about 3 mg and frequently is at least about 5 mg. When smoked under FTC smoking conditions an exemplary cigarette yields an amount of FTC tar that normally does not exceed about 20 mg often does not exceed about 15 mg and frequently does not exceed about 12 mg.

A preferred cigarette exhibits a ratio of yield of FTC tar to FTC nicotine of less than about 30 and often less than about 25. A preferred cigarette exhibits a ratio of yield of FTC tar to FTC nicotine of more than about 5. A preferred cigarette e.g. a cigarette including a carbonaceous fuel element absent of a centrally or internally located longitudinally extending air passageway exhibits a ratio of yield of FTC carbon monoxide to FTC tar of less than about 1 often less than about 0.8 and frequently less than about 0.6. Techniques for determining FTC tar and FTC nicotine are set forth in Pillsbury et al. 52 458 462 1969 . Techniques for determining FTC carbon monoxide are set forth in Horton et al. 57 1 7 1974 .

Aerosols that are produced by cigarettes of the present invention are those that comprise air containing components such as vapors gases suspended particulates and the like. Aerosol components can be generated from burning tobacco of some form and optionally other components that are burned to generate heat by thermally decomposing tobacco caused by heating tobacco smoldering tobacco and charring tobacco and by vaporizing aerosol forming agent. As such the aerosol can contain volatilized components combustion products e.g. carbon dioxide and water incomplete combustion products and products of pyrolysis. Aerosol components may also be generated by the action of heat from burning tobacco of some form and optionally other components that are burned to generate heat upon substances that are located in a heat exchange relationship with tobacco material that is burned and other components that are burned. Aerosol components may also be generated by the aerosol generation system as a result of the action of heat of the heat generation segment upon an aerosol generation segment . Most preferably components of the aerosol generation segment have an overall composition and are positioned within the smoking article such that those components have a tendency not to undergo a significant degree of thermal decomposition e.g. as a result of combustion smoldering or pyrolysis during conditions of normal use.

The amount of aerosol forming material within the mainstream smoke of a cigarette of the present invention can vary. For preferred cigarette mainstream smoke condensate that is collected during smoking the amount of aerosol forming material within that condensate usually makes up at least about 30 percent generally at least about 40 percent frequently at least about 50 percent often at least about 60 percent and sometimes at least about 70 percent of the total dry weight thereof. For condensate that is collected the amount of aerosol forming material within that condensate preferably makes up less than about 90 percent and generally less than about 85 percent frequently less than about 75 percent of the total dry weight thereof. See for example Laurene et al. 9 1 4 1965 . The overall mainstream aerosol produced by a cigarette of the present invention comprises reduced amounts of certain incomplete products of combustion and pyrolysis products derived from the burning of substances such as tobacco cut filler and other thermal degradation products of tobacco as compared to the mainstream smoke produced entirely by burning conventional blends of tobacco cut filler in traditional types of commercially popular tobacco burning cigarettes.

A highly preferred cigarette of the present invention is capable of providing mainstream aerosol including at least to some extent the desirable sensory characteristics traditionally associated with tobacco smoke incorporating those incomplete combustion products pyrolysis products and other thermal degradation products associated with the burning of tobacco. A preferred cigarette produces mainstream aerosol that can be characterized as highly flavorful and as having a relatively great degree of strength. The selection of certain cultivars e.g. by employing burley tobacco and or certain amounts of Prelip Bafra Samsun and Agonya types of Oriental tobaccos and incorporating those tobaccos in relevant regions of the cigarettes e.g. into the aerosol generation segment of those cigarettes can be used as a means to provide flavorful mainstream aerosol. For example a substrate material of the aerosol generation segment can be manufactured from about 50 weight parts of a cast sheet type of reconstituted tobacco manufactured from a blend of flavorful tobaccos and added flavors and about 50 weight parts of a cast sheet type of reconstituted tobacco manufactured from about 90 weight parts burley tobacco and about 10 weight parts Prelip type Oriental tobacco. Burley tobacco can be incorporated within the cigarette particularly within the smokable material at the lighting end of the cigarette. The insulation assembly can incorporate a sandwiched sheet or gathered web of a cast sheet type of reconstituted tobacco material incorporating about 35 weight parts burley tobacco about 23.5 parts flue cured tobacco about 15 weight parts alginate binder about 13 weight parts glycerin about 12 weight parts wood pulp and about 1.5 weight parts potassium hydroxide. Suitably selected of upper stalk leaves from flue cured burley and Oriental tobaccos also can be incorporated into cigarettes in relevant regions in order to provide flavorful mainstream aerosol. Thus a smoker can be provided with mainstream aerosol including a desirably high degree of tobacco flavor organoleptic sensations and satisfaction while ingesting a significantly reduced overall amount of smoke generated by the burning of tobacco. Flavorings and flavor packages can provide flavor strength and body to an aerosol that might be otherwise perceived as having overall sensory attributes that can be characterized as being overly bland weak mild or unsatisfying or as otherwise having negative sensory attributes.

The following prophetic examples are provided in order to further illustrate various aspects of the invention but should not be construed as limiting the scope thereof. Unless otherwise noted all parts and percentages are by weight.

A cigarette of the general type described previously with reference to is provided. The cigarette has an overall length of about 84 mm. The cigarette includes a smokable lighting end segment having a length of about 21 mm at one end and a mouth end piece having a length of about 34 mm at the other end. The cigarette also includes a heat generation segment having a length of about 12 mm adjacent the smokable lighting end segment and an aerosol generation segment having a length of about 17 mm positioned adjacent the filter element. When viewed end on the cigarette has a generally circular cross sectional shape. The circumference of the cigarette is about 24.6 mm.

The smokable lighting end segment has a generally cylindrical shape and is produced by wrapping the smokable material in a wrapping material. The wrapping material circumscribes the smokable material such that the wrapping material and smokable material each extend along the total length of the segment. The wrapping material provides the outer longitudinal surface for the segment and due to the resulting tubular shape of the wrapping material each end of the segment is open to expose the smokable material thereof. The wrapping material is a combustible paper wrapper comprising wood pulp and calcium carbonate. The paper wrapping material has a dry basis weight of about 45 g m a porosity of about 21 CORESTA units and is available as Reference No. 445 from RFS Ecusta Inc.

The smokable material of the smokable lighting end segment is a blend of various types of tobaccos and processed tobaccos and is the type of blend known as an American blend. The blend is that type of cased and top dressed tobacco cut filler blend used by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for the manufacture of cigarettes that are commercially available under the brand name Camel Turkish Gold. Each of the cut filler materials are shredded materials that are cut into pieces at about 28 cuts per inch. Except for the casing and top dressing components that have been applied thereto the blend is a smokable material that consists primarily of tobacco and no tobacco substitutes non tobacco fillers or non tobacco extenders are used in the blend or within processed tobaccos of the blend. The moisture content of the tobacco cut filler blend of the inner rod is about 12 percent to about 13 percent. The cased and top dressed smokable material within the smokable lighting end segment weighs about 350 mg.

The aerosol generation segment has a generally cylindrical shape. A wrapping material circumscribes a processed tobacco material having glycerin incorporated therein. The wrapping material and processed tobacco material each extend along the total length of the segment. The wrapping material provides the outer longitudinal surface for the segment and due to the resulting tubular shape of the wrapping material each end of the segment is open to expose the processed tobacco material thereof. The wrapping material is a laminate of paper and metal foil. A representative paper of the laminate is available as Reference No. 445 from RFS Ecusta Inc. and aluminum foil having a thickness about 0.0005 mm is adhered to one side thereof. The aluminum foil side of the laminate provides the inner surface of the wrapping material i.e. the surface that contacts the processed tobacco material . The aerosol generation segment is the type of segment that is positioned adjacent the heat source within the cigarette marketed under the brand name Eclipse. The processed tobacco material within the segment weighs about 275 mg.

The processed tobacco material is provided by forming an aqueous slurry of about 6 parts ammonium alginate about 58 parts glycerin about 29 parts of a paper type reconstituted tobacco manufactured from water extracted burley tobacco and hence including essentially no water soluble extract portion about 4 parts diammonium phosphate and about 3 parts of finely milled particles of burley tobacco lamina. The slurry is mixed and is cast as a sheet and heat is applied to dry the cast slurry to a moisture content of about 12 to about 13 percent. During casting of the slurry a top load of finely divided particles of burley tobacco lamina is applied to the sheet such that the final sheet incorporates about 90 parts of the slurry components and about 10 parts of the milled burley tobacco lamina on a dry weight basis. The resulting processed tobacco material includes about 51 percent glycerin on a dry weight basis.

The heat generation segment has a generally cylindrical shape. Combustible wrapping material circumscribes an insulating jacket that circumscribes a carbonaceous heat source. The heat generation segment is that type of segment used by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for the manufacture of cigarettes that are commercially available under the brand name Eclipse. The wrapping material provides the outer longitudinal surface of the segment and end of the segment is open to expose the intermediate insulation region and the inner fuel element. A representative wrapping material is a paper material available as Reference No. 445 from RFS Ecusta Inc. The insulating jacket incorporates two layers of non woven glass filament mat each layer positioned on each side of a central layer of a reconstituted tobacco paper containing about 75 parts tobacco parts and about 25 parts wood pulp that is available as GSR265M2 from Schweitzer Mauduit International. Each glass filament mat exhibits a caliper of about 0.75 mm to about 0.9 mm and a basis weight of about 134 g mto about 1.54 g m. The carbonaceous fuel element has an outer diameter of about 4.2 mm.

The carbonaceous fuel element is provided by providing a mixture of about 77.5 parts milled carbon powder about 6.5 parts graphite about 5 parts milled low tobacco specific nitrosamine content tobacco burley lamina about 10 parts guar gum about 1 part sodium carbonate and sufficient water to provide an overall mixture having a moisture content of about 12 percent. The carbon is a type that is obtained from Calgon Carbon Inc. and can be characterized as a type BKO coconut base calcined at about 950 C. that has a moisture content of about 2 percent an ash content of about 2.5 percent and a surface area of less than 220 g m. The graphite is a type of graphite available as Grade 5539A or 5539AF from Superior Graphite Company. The resulting mixture which resembles a powder is fed into a twin screw type extruder along with sufficient water to provide an overall mixture having a moisture content of about 34.5 percent. The extruder is equipped with a water jacket in order that the extruder can be maintained at about 27 C. The resulting mixture is extruded at so as to produce a continuous extrudate having a cross sectional shape set forth in . The fuel element includes five longitudinally extending peripheral slots each having a width of about 0.56 mm and a depth of about 0.75 mm. The central passageway that extends through the fuel element has a diameter of about 0.7 mm.

The continuous extrudate is conveyed on an air foil conveyor. The extrudate is circumscribed by a 19 mm wide web of non woven glass filament mat a 15 mm wide web of tobacco paper a 19 mm wide web of non woven glass filament mat and on outer layer of wrapping paper. The construction of the continuous heat source assembly is performed using a PROTOS type of garniture on a KDF 2 type of rod making apparatus. Each of the PROTOS and KDF 2 types of cigarette component making equipment are available through Hauni Werke Korber Co. KG. The continuous rod is sub divided into rods each having lengths of about 72 mm. Air is blown over the assemblies and the rods are further sub divided into fuel element segments each of about 12 mm in length. Each fuel element assembly is attached to an aerosol generation segment assembly and the resulting assemblies are slowly dried. The assemblies are heated to about 47 C. and then to about 57 C. The assemblies preferably are not heated above about 65 C. After about 4 hours the fuel element exhibits a moisture content of about 5 percent to about 8 percent preferably about 6 percent to about 7 percent and the substrate material of the aerosol generation assembly exhibits a moisture content of about 10 percent to about 16 percent preferably about 12 percent to about 14 percent. The assemblies are stored under conditions of 24.5 C. and about 60 percent relative humidity.

The four segments are aligned in an abutting end to end relationship. A circumscribing layer of tipping paper and adhesive is used to connect the smokable lighting end segment to the heat generation segment. The tipping material is a tipping paper available as FEP 2836 from RFS Ecusta Inc. That is a strip of tipping paper of about 27 mm width overlies the back 3 mm to 4 mm of the smokable lighting end segment and the front 3 mm to 4 mm of the heat generation segment. A circumscribing layer of wrapping material is used to connect the heat generation segment to the aerosol generation segment. That is a strip of the aluminum foil laminated paper overlies the back 4 mm of the heat generation segment and the full length of the aerosol generation segment. The filter element and the aerosol generation segment are secured together using the tipping paper. The tipping material circumscribes the length of the filter element and about 3 mm to about 4 mm of the length of the adjacent region of the heat generation segment.

A ring of laser perforations is provided around the periphery of the cigarette about 13 mm from the mouth end thereof. The perforations penetrate through the tipping paper and underlying wrapping material and are provided using a Laboratory Laser Perforator from Hauni Werke Korber Co. KG. Each perforated cigarette is about 24 percent air diluted.

The side seam adhesive that is used for constructing the various segments and for assembling the various segments together can be that type of cigarette seam adhesive employed by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and designated as CS 1242. See for example U.S. Patent Application Pub. No. 2004 0099279 to Chapman et al.

The tipping adhesive used for assembling the various segments together can be the type of water based vinylacetate ethylene based tipping adhesive employed by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and designated as MT 8027.

A cigarette of the general type described previously with reference to is provided in the general manner set forth in Example 1. However the mouth end segment has a length of about 10 mm. The aerosol generation segment has a length of about of about 40 mm and the processed tobacco material within the aerosol generation segment weighs about 525 mg.

The mouth end segment has a generally cylindrical shape. A paper wrapping material circumscribes a steam bonded cellulose acetate tube manufactured by Filtrona plc. The central passageway of the tubular filter element is generally circular and is about 4 mm in diameter. The mouth end segment generally is a filter element of the type incorporated within the cigarette marketed under the brand name Eclipse. 

A cigarette of the general type described previously with reference to is provided in the general manner set forth in Example 2. However the fuel element of the heat generation segment is replaced with a fuel element that is provided as follows 

The carbonaceous fuel element is essentially of the type set forth in Example 1 and is provided using techniques and materials essentially of the type set forth in Example 1 however the fuel element is absent of a central passageway and has a cross sectional shape generally of the type set forth in .

A cigarette of the general type described previously with reference to is provided in the general manner set forth in Example 3. However the paper wrapper of the heat generation segment is replaced with a calcium carbonate and wood pulp cigarette paper wrapping material having a porosity of about 60 CORESTA units and a basis weight of about 29 g mthat is of a type available as P4495 173 6 Grade 615 from Schweitzer Mauduit International.

A cigarette of the general type described previously with reference to is provided. The aerosol generation system and the mouth end piece are provided in the general manner set forth in Example 1. However the smokable lighting end segment is provided by removing the fuel element from a heat source segment of the type used for the manufacture of the aerosol generation system and replacing the fuel element with a 12 mm segment of tobacco cut filler wrapped circumscribed with a paper wrapper. The paper wrapped tobacco cut filler segment is cut from the tobacco rod of a cigarette having a circumference of about 17 mm that is available under the brand name Capri by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. As such the cigarette includes a 12 mm long segment of an insulated rod of tobacco cut filler and an abutting 12 mm long heat generation segment.

A cigarette of the general type manufactured for commercial sale under the brand name Eclipse by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is provided. However rather than providing a ring of air dilution perforations about 13 mm from the mouth end of the cigarette a ring of air dilution perforations is located about 44 mm from the mouth end of the cigarette. In addition a cylindrical smokable lighting end segment generally of the type described in Example 1 but having a length of about 16 mm is positioned and secured upstream of the heat source segment generally in the manner set forth in Example 1 so as to abut the front face of the heat source segment and provide a lighting end to the resulting segment. The resulting cigarette has an overall length of about 99 mm.

A cigarette of the general type manufactured for commercial sale under the brand name Premier by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is provided. However a cylindrical smokable lighting end segment generally of the type described in Example 6 is positioned and secured upstream of the heat source segment generally in the manner set forth in Example 1 so as to abut the front face of the heat source segment and provide a lighting end to the resulting cigarette.

A cigarette of the general type described previously with reference to is provided in the general manner set forth in Example 1. However the fuel element of the heat generation segment is replaced with a fuel element that is provided as follows 

The carbonaceous fuel element is essentially of the type set forth in Example 2 and is provided using techniques and materials essentially of the type set forth in Example 1 however the fuel element does not include any central passageway and has the appearance when viewed along its longitudinal axis essentially as is set forth in . In addition the fuel element is provided by providing a mixture of about 73.5 parts milled carbon powder about 10.5 parts graphite about 5 parts milled low tobacco specific nitrosamine content tobacco burley lamina about 10 parts guar gum and about 1 part sodium carbonate.

A cigarette of the general type described previously with reference to is provided in the general manner set forth in Example 2. However the cigarette has an overall length of about 90 mm. The smokable lighting end segment has a length of about 30 mm the heat source segment has a length of about 10 mm the aerosol generation segment has a length of about 20 mm and the filter element has a length of about 30 mm.

A cigarette of the general type described previously with reference to is provided in the general manner set forth in Example 2. However half of the processed tobacco material within the aerosol generation segment is replaced with a flavored tobacco material that is prepared as follows 

The processed tobacco material is provided by forming an aqueous slurry of about 6 parts ammonium alginate about 54 parts glycerin about 29 parts of a paper type reconstituted tobacco manufactured from water extracted burley tobacco and hence including essentially no water soluble extract portion about 4 parts diammonium phosphate about 3 parts of finely milled particles of burley tobacco lamina and about 4 parts of a concentrated flavor package. The slurry is mixed and is cast as a sheet and heat is applied to dry the cast slurry to a moisture content of about 12 to about 13 percent. During casting of the slurry a top load of finely divided particles of burley tobacco lamina is applied to the sheet such that the final sheet incorporates about 90 parts of the slurry components and about 10 parts of the milled burley tobacco lamina on a dry weight basis.

A cigarette of the general type described previously with reference to is provided in the general manner set forth in Example 2. However the fuel element of the heat generation segment is replaced with a fuel element that is provided as follows 

The carbonaceous fuel element is essentially of the type set forth in Example 1 and is provided using techniques and materials essentially of the type set forth in Example 1 however the fuel element does not include any central passageway and has the appearance when viewed along its longitudinal axis essentially as is set forth in . In addition the fuel element is provided by providing a mixture of about 69.5 parts milled carbon powder about 14.5 parts graphite about 5 parts milled low tobacco specific nitrosamine content tobacco burley lamina about 10 parts guar gum and about 1 part sodium carbonate.

A cigarette of the general type described previously with reference to is provided in the general manner set forth in Example 2. However the fuel element of the heat generation segment is replaced with a fuel element that is provided as follows 

The carbonaceous fuel element is essentially of the type set forth in Example 1 and is provided using techniques and materials essentially of the type set forth in Example 1 however the fuel element does not include any central passageway and has the appearance when viewed along its longitudinal axis essentially as is set forth in . In addition the fuel element is provided by providing a mixture of about 65.5 parts milled carbon powder about 18.5 parts graphite about 5 parts milled low tobacco specific nitrosamine content tobacco burley lamina about 10 parts guar gum and about 1 part sodium carbonate. The density of such a fuel element so provided preferably is slightly less than that exhibited by the fuel element provided using the techniques and materials set forth in Example 1.

A cigarette of the general type manufactured for commercial sale under the brand name Eclipse by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is provided. However the 12 mm carbonaceous fuel element is carefully removed from the cigarette and cut to a length of about 8 mm. The 8 mm segment is reinserted into the cigarette so as to abut the aerosol generation segment . Into the resulting cylindrical cavity within the insulating member is inserted about 30 mg of tobacco cut filler of the type described in Example 1 such that the downstream end of the tobacco cut filler and the upstream end of the fuel element contact one another. As such the smokable lighting end segment of the cigarette includes a 12 mm length of insulating member having a 4 mm length of tobacco cut filler at one end and an 8 mm extruded carbonaceous segment at the other.

A cigarette of the general type described with reference to Example 13 is provided. However the 8 mm carbonaceous fuel element is replaced with fuel element having a length of 8 mm but which is provided in the manner set forth in Example 12.

A cigarette of the general type described with reference to Example 12 is provided. However rather than employing a smokable lighting end segment having a length of about 21 mm a similar smokable lighting end segment having a length of about 15 mm is employed.

A cigarette of the general type described with reference to Example 12 is provided. However rather than employing a smokable lighting end segment having a length of about 21 mm a similar smokable lighting end segment having a length of about 10 mm is employed.

A cigarette of the general type described with reference to Example 1 is provided. However rather than employing a smokable lighting end segment having a length of about 21 mm a similar smokable lighting end segment having a length of about 8 mm is employed.

It is intended that the foregoing detailed description be regarded as illustrative rather than limiting and that it be understood that it is the following claims including all equivalents that are intended to define the spirit and scope of this invention.

