---

title: Coatings and methods for corrosion detection and/or reduction
abstract: Coatings and methods are provided. An embodiment of the coating includes microcapsules that contain at least one of a corrosion inhibitor, a film-forming compound, and an indicator. The microcapsules are dispersed in a coating vehicle. A shell of each microcapsule breaks down in the presence of an alkaline condition, resulting from corrosion.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07790225&OS=07790225&RS=07790225
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
number: 07790225
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050919
---
The invention described herein was made in the performance of work under a NASA contract and by an employee of the United States Government and is subject to the provisions of Public Law 96 517 35 U.S.C. 202 and may be manufactured and used by or for the Government for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore. In accordance with 35 U.S.C. 202 the contractor elected not to retain title. 

The present invention relates generally to corrosion and in particular the present invention relates to coatings and methods for corrosion detection and or reduction.

Metals and metal alloys are present in some shape or form in nearly every facet of our lives. Many metals and metal alloys are subject to corrosion that causes these metals and metal alloys to lose their structural integrity.

The above mentioned problems with metals and metal alloys and other problems are addressed by the present invention and will be understood by reading and studying the following specification.

For one embodiment the invention provides a corrosion detection method including applying a coating on a metal surface the coating having microcapsules dispersed in a coating vehicle the microcapsules containing an indicator releasing the indicator in the presence of corrosion and indicating the presence of the corrosion using the indicator where releasing the indicator is caused by an alkaline condition resulting from the corrosion that breaks down shells of microcapsules exposed to the alkaline condition.

In the following detailed description of the invention reference is made to the accompanying drawings that form a part hereof and in which is shown by way of illustration specific embodiments in which the invention may be practiced. In the drawings like numerals describe substantially similar components throughout the several views. These embodiments are described in sufficient detail to enable those skilled in the art to practice the invention. Other embodiments may be utilized and structural logical and chemical changes may be made without departing from the scope of the present invention. The following detailed description is therefore not to be taken in a limiting sense and the scope of the present invention is defined only by the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

Shell is broken down or disintegrates in the presence of a base or an alkaline e.g. having a pH above about 8 for releasing encapsulant . Microcapsules having shells that break down under basic or alkaline conditions are known in the art. For example a microcapsule may be formed by forming an oil e.g. toluene vegetable oil in water emulsion. A surfactant such as xanthan gum Attagel 40 available from Engelhard Corporation Iselin N.J. USA Petro BAF available from Akzo Nobel Chemicals Inc. Chicago Ill. USA and or Reax 83 available from MeadWestvaco Corporation Stamford Conn. USA is added to the emulsion to evenly distribute the oil in the water. A pre polymer such as an amino resin pre polymer a cross linking agent having one or more ester or thioester groups that are broken down under basic conditions and encapsulant are added to the oil phase. A catalyst such as an inorganic acid is added to the water phase. The oil in water emulsion is heated causing a polymerization reaction to occur at the water oil interface which forms shell around encapsulant . It is the interaction of alkaline conditions with functional groups of the cross linking agent that causes shell to break down under alkaline conditions. Alternatively encapsulant can be released mechanically such as by scratching or compressing a surface to which coating is applied.

A basic or alkaline condition often forms in the presence of corrosion in a metal or a metal alloy e.g. a basic condition often forms next to corrosion induced pits crevices etc. For example as is known in the art when a drop of salt water is applied to steel an anodic reaction occurs to produce a rust spot and a cathodic reaction e.g. involving water and oxygen occurs to produce a basic condition. Therefore when coating is applied to a metal surface and if there is corrosion shells of the microcapsules exposed to the base condition will break down under the basic condition resulting from the corrosion thereby releasing encapsulant . Hereinafter corrosion will refer to any chemical or electrochemical process involving the deterioration or degradation of metals including pitting crevice corrosion or the like.

For one embodiment coating is temporarily applied to a metal containing surface e.g. by spraying brushing or rolling to determine whether corrosion has occurred. For this embodiment coating vehicle is an aqueous gel and encapsulant includes a suitable indicator such as the pH indicator or the florescent indicator as described above. In the presence of corrosion the shells of the microcapsules break down releasing the indicator. The pH indicator will change color or the florescent indicator will fluoresce to indicate the presence of corrosion. Coating vehicle is not limited to an aqueous gel but can be a clear paint or varnish opaque paint or varnish etc. that is substantially permanently applied to the metal containing surface by spraying brushing or rolling. For another embodiment coating is applied substantially permanently to a bare metal surface as a primer coat that is clear coated. Another example of a temporary coating is a water suspension of microcapsules . Examples of a metal containing surface include a bare metal surface a metal surface coated with e.g. paint varnish epoxy etc. a metal coated with a previous application of coating or the like. Other examples of a metal containing surface include metal or metal alloy e.g. a ferrous metal or alloy.

For some embodiments e.g. where coating is substantially permanently applied encapsulant may include the indicator or the corrosion inhibitor or both. If corrosion occurs encapsulant due to shells breaking down in the presence of the basic condition resulting from the corrosion is released and the corrosion inhibitor acts to prevent further corrosion while the indicator indicates the corrosion location. For another embodiment a trauma such as a scratch an impact etc. to coating may act to expose metal. The trauma can also break shells so as to release corrosion inhibitor that acts to reduce the likelihood of the exposed metal of corroding.

For another embodiment e.g. where coating is substantially permanently applied encapsulant may include the film forming compound the film forming compound and corrosion inhibitor the film forming compound corrosion inhibitor and indicator or the film forming compound and the indicator. For one embodiment if coating is exposed to trauma that causes shells to break the film forming compound forms over at least a portion of the trauma and acts to reduce the likelihood of any exposed metal of corroding. For some embodiments the corrosion inhibitor acts further reduce the likelihood of corrosion of any exposed metal.

Note that if corrosion occurs at locations away from the trauma location e.g. due to small breaks in the coating such as chips or adjacent the trauma location corrosion inhibitor and film forming compound will be released due to shells breaking down in the presence of the basic condition resulting from the corrosion. In other embodiments the indicator will indicate the presence of the corrosion.

For one embodiment a portion of microcapsules in coating contains corrosion inhibitor and another portion of microcapsules in coating contains indicator. For another embodiment a portion of microcapsules in coating contains corrosion inhibitor another portion of microcapsules in coating contains indicator and yet another portion of microcapsules in coating contains film forming compound. For another embodiment a portion of microcapsules in coating contains film forming compound and another portion of microcapsules in coating contains indicator. For some embodiments microcapsules having different contents are randomly distributed within coating vehicle so that microcapsules having the different functions of indicating inhibiting and or film forming may be adjacent each other as well as microcapsules having like functions being adjacent each other.

Although specific embodiments have been illustrated and described herein it will be appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art that any arrangement that is calculated to achieve the same purpose may be substituted for the specific embodiments shown. Many adaptations of the invention will be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art. Accordingly this application is intended to cover any adaptations or variations of the invention. It is manifestly intended that this invention be limited only by the following claims and equivalents thereof.

