---

title: System, method, and program for alternating sheets of media
abstract: Systems, methods, and programs for adjusting marking data for use with alternately stacked multi-thickness media. The systems, methods, and programs input marking data and determine an orientation of sheets of the multi-thickness media that is alternated within a stack. The systems, methods, and programs adjust, for each sheet whose orientation is not consistent with the marking data, the marking data for that sheet such that the marking data for that sheet is consistent with the orientation of that sheet.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07411602&OS=07411602&RS=07411602
owner: Xerox Corporation
number: 07411602
owner_city: Norwalk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050831
---
Many conventional marking devices are configured to obtain optimized results with standard sizes of sheets of media such as for example letter sized media 8.5 by 11 A4 media executive sized media A5 media legal sized media envelopes and the like. Specifically for example the media storage media transport and marking functions of these conventional marking devices are designed around these common media sizes such that these sizes of media can be most efficiently used within the devices. Accordingly special steps and or user assisted functions may be required for uniquely sized media.

Such marking devices typically include one or more input modules each of which may include one or more feeders into which blank media is loaded for imaging. Conventional feeders are usually adjustable for media size and generally feed from the top of the stack of media. The feeder generally includes an elevator on which the stack of media is loaded and which rises as media is fed off the top of the stack reducing the stack height. Thereby the stack is kept level with the feeding mechanism.

The primary function of the feeder is to advance media to the imaging process one sheet at a time at very precise intervals as dictated by the marking device process.

Conventional marking devices typically include one or more output modules performing various post imaging operations. Typically the last output module in the imaging and finishing process is a stacker where consecutive pages or sets of pages are automatically stacked one on top of the previous as part of the real time imaging and finishing process.

Some types of combined media for use in these conventional marking devices incorporate a smaller uniquely sized sheet of media fixed to at least a portion of a larger standard sized sheet of media. These types of media enable marking on the smaller uniquely sized sheet of media while utilizing the efficiently stored and transported standard sized sheet of media as a vehicle through the marking device. As a result fewer special steps and or user assisted functions are required for marking on the smaller uniquely sized sheet of media.

Conventional marking devices that are optimized for standard sized media are designed to begin marking on a leading portion of the sheet of media as it is transported through the device. As a result the smaller uniquely sized sheet of media is frequently fixed to the leading edge of the larger standard sized sheet of media. This allows for marking to begin on the leading portion of the combined media.

The above described conventional combined media as result of having a smaller sheet of media fixed to a leading portion in the vicinity of the leading edge of the combined media of the larger sheet of media has a thicker leading portion than trailing portion in the vicinity of the trailing edge of the combined media . Thus the leading portion has a thickness equivalent to the thickness of both the small sheet and the large sheet while the trailing portion has a thickness equal to only the large sheet.

As used herein the term leading edge is intended to describe the edge of a sheet of media that leads the sheet of media as it is transported through a marking device. Similarly the term trailing edge is intended to describe the edge of a sheet of media that is opposite the leading edge and trails the sheet of media as it is transported through the marking device. As used herein the terms feeder or media feed mechanism are intended to describe devices that feed unmarked media into a marking device. The terms stacker or media stacking mechanism are intended to describe devices that stack marked media after being marked by the marking device. It should be appreciated that the feeder and or stacker may be included in the marking device or may be separate devices attached to the marking device.

One example of the above described combined multi thickness media is Xerox Corporation s DocuCard media. For ease of explanation the following exemplary systems method and programs will be disclosed using DocuCard type media as an example of combined multi thickness media however it should be appreciated that the principles disclosed herein may be applied to any type of media with each sheet having at least two different thicknesses.

Conventional media feeding mechanisms are designed such that feeding reliability is generally maximized when the top of the media stack is level front to back and side to side.

Conventionally however the above described combined multi thickness media is packaged and loaded into the feeder of marking devices with each sheet having the same orientation. Because each sheet has a same orientation the marking device may process each sheet in the same manner thus simplifying the marking process. Due to the orientation of the sheets the thicker portion of each sheet of the combined media is oriented above the thicker portion of the sheets below it and the thinner portion of each sheet of the combined media is oriented above the thinner portion of the sheets below it.

As a result and as described in further detail below when the combined multi thickness media is stacked and loaded into a marking device there exists a substantial difference in thickness between a leading edge portion of a stack corresponding to the thick portion of the media and a trailing edge of the stack corresponding to the thin portion of the media.

This difference in thickness in the stack of media may cause problems when feeding and transporting the media through the marking device. Because of an increasing angle of incidence of the lead edge of the sheets to the feed mechanism tall stacks of the combined multi thickness media may not feet at all misfeed or may feed two or more sheets of media simultaneously resulting in a jam.

Currently in order to avoid jams or misfeeds in conventional general purpose marking devices users must limit the number of sheets of multi thickness media that are loaded into a media tray in order to reduce the overall thickness difference between a leading edge portion of the stack and the trailing edge portion of the stack.

Similarly the performance of conventional media stackers is substantially degraded when the marked media being stacked is not uniformly flat. As media is stacked sheet by sheet in the stacker of the marking device the top of the stack becomes increasingly unlevel until the slope is great enough that the down slope gravitational pull on the sheet exceeds the friction between sheets and the sheets start to slip off of the stack.

Currently the stacker must be unloaded more frequently at lower than maximum possible stack height in order to avoid sheets from falling off the stack.

Some marking systems such as those utilizing Xerox Corporation s Tiltatron feeding device have attempted to reduce the frequency of jams caused by combined multi thickness media by incorporating specialized media feed mechanisms designed specifically for multi thickness media. However these specialized media feed mechanisms are available for only specific marking devices and require substantial expense and hardware modification for installation.

In view of at least the forgoing it is beneficial to provide systems methods and programs that allow for a large number of sheets of combined multi thickness media to be loaded in the feeder of a general purpose marking device and stacked in the stacker of a general purpose marking device without substantial expense and hardware modification.

Accordingly various exemplary implementations of the principles described herein provide a method of adjusting marking data for use with alternately stacked multi thickness media. The method may include inputting marking data. The method may include determining an orientation of each sheet of multi thickness media that is alternated within a stack. The method may include adjusting for each sheet of multi thickness media whose orientation is not consistent with the marking data the marking data for that sheet of multi thickness media such that the marking data for that sheet of multi thickness media is consistent with the orientation of that sheet of multi thickness media.

Various exemplary implementations of the principles described herein provide a storage medium storing a set of program instructions executable on a data processing device and usable to adjust marking data for use with alternately stacked multi thickness media. The instructions may include instructions for inputting marking data. The instructions may include instructions for determining an orientation of each sheet of multi thickness media that is alternated within a stack. The instructions may include instructions for adjusting for each sheet of multi thickness media whose orientation is not consistent with the marking data the marking data for that sheet of multi thickness media such that the marking data for that sheet of multi thickness media is consistent with the orientation of that sheet of multi thickness media.

Various exemplary implementations of the principles described herein provide a system for adjusting marking data for use with alternately stacked multi thickness media. The system may include a controller that may input marking data. The controller may determine an orientation of each sheet multi thickness media that is alternated within a stack. The controller may adjust for each sheet of multi thickness media whose determined orientation is not consistent with the marking data the marking data for that sheet of multi thickness media such that the marking data for that sheet of multi thickness media is consistent with the determined orientation of that sheet of multi thickness media

The difference in thickness between a portion of the stack corresponding to the small media and a portion corresponding only to the large media can cause a number of problems when attempting to load a plurality of sheets into a marking device. For example by virtue of the slope created by the difference in thickness sheets on the top of the stack have a tendency to slide off the top of the stack. Additionally by virtue of the slope created by the difference in thickness sheets on the thicker end of the stack have a tendency to separate or fan out as a result of the slope and the stiffness of the media.

The slope and separation of the sheets when stacked in this conventional manner makes it difficult for a conventional media transport system to effectively contact and transport a single sheet of the combined multi thickness media through the marking device.

For example as shown in when sheets of constant thickness media are loaded in a feeder the stack has a substantially constant thickness as well. Thus when the sheet picker of the feed head pulls a sheet from the stack a direction of transport of that sheet is properly aligned with the feed chute .

However as shown in when sheets of multi thickness media including for example large media portion and small media portion are loaded in a feeder stack in a conventional manner the difference in thickness between a portion of the stack corresponding to the small media and a portion of the stack corresponding to only the large media causes the stack to slope away from the sheet picker and feed head . As a result the leading edges of the sheets are picked by the sheet picker at an angle of incidence substantially corresponding to the slope of the stack. As the height of the stack increases the angle of incidence increases and thus the greater the separation or fanning of the sheets at their leading edge.

Accordingly tall stacks whose sheets are picked at a large angle may not feet at all misfeed if the angle of incidence of the top sheet causes the direction of transport of the sheet to miss or otherwise jam in the feed chute . Additionally when the sheet picker applies a rotational force to the top sheet and the top sheet is at an angle rather than horizontal the friction between sheets may cause multiple sheets to be picked simultaneously resulting in a jam.

In order to reduce the likelihood that a jam or misfeed may result due to the stacking of the combined multi thickness media many users of marking devices have reduced the number of combined multi thickness media that are stacked in the marking device at any one time. This requires a user to more closely monitor the number of combined multi thickness media in the device and more frequently replenish the combined multi thickness media or to unload the stacker.

Accordingly it is beneficial to provide systems methods and programs that allow for a large number of sheets of combined multi thickness media to be stacked in the feeder of a general purpose marking device and for these sheets to be reliably stacked in the stacker after being marked. shows an example of a method of stacking combined multi thickness media that substantially reduces the unevenness of the stack. As shown in a first amount of combined multi thickness media may be stacked in a same orientation with the thicker portion of each sheet stacked on a thicker portion of each sheet below it. Then a second amount for example having a substantially similar number of sheets as the first portion may be stacked on the first amount in an orientation such that a thicker portion of the second amount of combined multi thickness media may be stacked on the thinner portion of the first amount. Additional amounts of combined multi thickness media may be stacked in the same alternating fashion.

As a result of the configuration shown in some of the sheets combined multi thickness media will have the small media in the vicinity of the leading edge of the large media and some of the sheets of combined multi thickness media will have the small media in a vicinity of the trailing edge of the sheet of media. When taken together as shown in a stack including a large number of sheets may have a substantially similar thickness in the vicinity of the small media since the small media is located in both the leading edge and trailing edge portions of the stack.

By stacking the sheets of combined multi thickness media in such a manner the angle of incidence of sheets when picked by the picker is substantially horizontal. As shown in when sheets of combined multi thickness media are picked from an alternated stack the sheet picker of the feed head pulls a sheet from the stack in a direction of transport that is properly aligned with the feed chute . Thereby reducing the likelihood of a misfeed and or jam.

As discussed above combined multi thickness media is conventionally stacked in a same orientation e.g. as shown in in order to simplify the marking process. When conventionally stacked combined multi thickness media is transported through the marking device the small media is always in the same location relative to the marking device. As a result the image device does not need to adjust the position of the marked image with respect to the sheet of combined multi thickness media.

According to the stacking method shown in the location of the small media relative to the stack is not the same. Similarly the location of the small media within the marking device will vary depending upon the orientation of the sheet to be marked.

The number of sheets that will be alternated may be determined in any number of ways. For example media may be packaged at the manufacturer with a predetermined number of alternating sheets. Accordingly the number might be associated with the type of media. The number of sheets that will be alternated may be defined by a user loading the media into a marking device. Accordingly the user may load the media according to a predetermined number known by the device or the user may input the number of sheets that will be alternated into the device. The number of sheets that will be alternated may be encoded on the media either visually or otherwise since the large media will not be marked on it may include a visual indication of the number of sheets that will be alternated. A visual indicator may be read by the user and then input into the device. A visual or non visual indicator may be detected by a detector within the marking device.

For example alternation of the combined multi thickness media in the feeder and its subsequent presentation to the imaging process requires that the image be modified in order to be placed properly on the media regardless of the orientation of the media when it is fed into the imaging process i.e. whether the small media is at the lead edge of the large media or at the trail edge of the large media .

In order for the image to be properly oriented on the small media the orientation of the media must be known by the marking device and may be accomplished through the automatic sensing of the position of the small media on the large media as each sheet is transported past a sensor along or otherwise in communication with the media transport path. The sensor may determine the position of the small media on the large media using of various known or later developed technologies including for example transmissive sensing reflective sensing and or thickness sensing. However it should be appreciated that any senor or sensing technique that is capable of determining the orientation of a sheet of multi thickness media may be used.

Operation continues to step . In step the number of sheets prior to the first orientation change requiring output adjustment e.g. the position and or orientation of the marked image is adjusted based on previous operation. For example the stack of combined multi thickness media was loaded into a marking device prior to a previous marking operation. A number of sheets have been transported off of the stack and through the marking device during the previous marking operation. Thus the number of sheets on the top of the stack before the orientation of the sheets is changed may be less than the total number of sheets that are alternated within the stack. Additionally the orientation of the top sheet may be different from the orientation of the top sheet when the stack was originally loaded.

For example assume that a stack of combined multi thickness media contains sheets that alternate their orientation every five sheets. Assume that a previous marking operation transported six of the sheets off the top of the stack the first five with a first orientation and the next one with a second orientation. The stack has 4 sheets with the second orientation on top. As a result the number and or format of the new first group i.e. the four sheets on top with the second orientation must be accounted for before the number of alternated sheets returns to the original value after the top four sheets have been transported of the stack .

There are a number of ways to account for the number and or format of the first group of sheets. For example following a marking operation a marking device may store the current stack settings e.g. step . Thus according to the above example after the previous marking operation transported six of the sheets of the top of the stack at least that number would be stored for reference by the marking device. During a subsequent marking operation the device could refer to the number of sheets previously used or other data indicating the current state of the stack of combined multi thickness media and adjust the number and or output format for the first group accordingly. According to above example the stored data would be used to indicate that the first group of the stack contains four sheets with the second orientation and the marking device could adjust the marking format for the current marking operation accordingly.

Alternatively the number and or format of the first group may be visually or otherwise marked on each sheet of the combined multi thickness media. Thus according to the above example the top sheet would have a visual or non visual marking detectable by the marking device that indicates the state of the stack. For example the marking may indicate that the top sheet is the seventh sheet of the stack with a second orientation that alternates every five sheets. Based on detecting the mark the marking device could adjust the marking format for the current marking operation accordingly.

Operation continues to step . In step the top sheet of the stack is selected as the current sheet. Then in step the current sheet is transported through the marking device and marked. In step it is determined whether the marking operation is complete i.e. have the number of sheets required for the current marking operation been selected and marked. If the marking operation is complete operation jumps to step . If the marking operation is not complete operation continues to step .

In step it is determined whether the number to be alternated has been reached. For example if groups of five sheets alternate orientation within the stack and five sheets have been marked the marking format is adjusted to account for the changed orientation of the sixth sheet. Of course if a previous marking operation has been marked using the current stack the number of sheets that has been reached for the first group of sheets in step will have been adjusted in step .

If the number of sheets to be alternated has not been reached operation returns to step . If the number of sheets to be alternated has been reached operation continues to step . In step the marking format is adjusted in accordance with the changed orientation of the next sheet to be marked on. Steps will continue to be looped until in step the marking operation is complete.

In step the current stack settings are stored so that the number and or format of the first group may be adjusted in a subsequent marking operation. Of course step may not be necessary when as discussed above the number and or format of the first group is visually or otherwise marked on each sheet of the combined multi thickness media. Operation continues to step where operation ends.

It should be appreciated that any number of sheets of combined multi thickness media may make up the groups of sheets whose orientation are alternated within the stack. For example as much as substantially half of the entire stack may be alternated. Additionally each single sheet may be alternated. If a small number of sheets are alternated the stack will remain more uniform in thickness as marking operations reduce the number of sheets in the stack. If a larger number of sheets are alternated the position and or orientation of the marked image relative to the sheet of combined multi thickness media will be changed less frequently.

The input output interface may be connected to one or more data sources over one or more links . The data source s can be a locally or remotely located computer a printer a scanner a facsimile device a xerographic device a multi fictional imaging device a device that stores and or transmits electronic data such as a client or a server of a wired or wireless network such as for example an intranet an extranet a local area network a wide area network a storage area network the Internet especially the World Wide Web and the like. In general the data source can be any known or later developed source that is capable of providing image data to the input output interface .

The input output interface may be connected to one or more data sinks over one or more links . The data sink s can be a locally or remotely located inkjet printer locally or remotely located laser printer a facsimile device a xerographic device a multi fictional imaging device a device that stores and or transmits electronic data such as a client or a server of a wired or wireless network such as for example an intranet an extranet a local area network a wide area network a storage area network the Internet especially the World Wide Web and the like. In general the data sink can be any known or later developed sink that is capable of storing image data to be marked or capable of marking images based on data output by the input output interface .

Each of the various links and may be any known or later developed device or system for connecting the data source s and or the data sink s respectively to the input output interface . In particular the links and my each be implemented as one or more of for example a direct cable connection a connection over a wide area network a local area network or a storage area network a connection over an intranet a connection over an extranet a connection over the Internet a connection over any other distributed processing network or system and or an infrared radio frequency or other wireless connection.

As shown in the memory may be physically functionally and or conceptually divided into a number of different memory portions including a current stack setting portion an alternating number portion and or a marking data portion . The current stack setting portion may store the current sate of the stack of combined multi thickness media such as for example how many sheets are in the first group of media and their orientation. The alternating number portion may store the number of sheets that are alternated in the stack of combined multi thickness media. The marking data portion may store input and or adjusted marking data.

The memory may be implemented using any appropriate combination of alterable or non alterable memory volatile or non volatile memory or fixed memory. The alterable memory whether volatile or non volatile can be implemented using any one or more of static or dynamic RAM a floppy disk and disk drive a writeable or re re writeable optical disk and disk drive a hard drive flash memory or the like. Similarly the non alterable or fixed memory can be implemented using any one or more of ROM PROM EPROM EEPROM an optical ROM disk such as CD ROM or DVD ROM disk and disk drive or the like.

The format adjusting circuit routine or application may input data indicating for example the current condition of the stack of media and adjust the output format accordingly. The stack adjusting circuit routine or application may input for example data indicating a current stack setting data indicating the number of sheets that are alternated and data indicating the number of sheets of media to be used by a marking operation and adjust the current stack setting accordingly.

For example in operation data related to a marking operation may be input from the data source to the input output interface . Under control of the controller the data may be stored in the marking data portion of the memory . Alternatively the marking operation data may be input under control of the controller directly to the format adjusting circuit routine or application . Under control of the controller the format adjusting circuit routine or application may access the marking operation data the current stack setting and the alternating number and adjust the output data in accordance with the current stack setting and alternating number for example according to the above described exemplary method. Under control of the controller the adjusted marking operation data may be stored in the marking data portion . Alternatively the adjusted marking data under control of the controller may be output directly to the data sink via the input output interface .

During operation under control of the controller the stack adjusting circuit routine or application may access the marking operation data the current stack setting data and the alternating number and determine how many sheets of the combined multi thickness media within the stack will be or have been utilized for the marking operation and adjust the current stack setting accordingly. Then under control of the controller the adjusted stack setting data may be stored in the current stack setting portion for a subsequent marking operation.

Each time a new stack of media is loaded into a marking device for which the exemplary system is adjusting the marking operation data the current stack setting and or alternating number may be reset.

Alternatively the current stack setting may be included as part of the marking data for each marking operation for example when a current setting of the stack may be determined from a mark on each sheet of the combined multi thickness media in the stack. In such a case the stack adjusting circuit routine or application may be omitted from the exemplary system .

It should be appreciated that although the above described system may input marking data for an entire marking operation. The system may input marking data for each sheet of media individually adjust the format of the marking data for that sheet if necessary and adjust the current stack setting after that adjusted marking data for that sheet has been output.

While the exemplary system has been described as physically functionally and or conceptually divided into a format adjusting circuit routine or application and or a stack adjusting circuit routine or application it should be appreciated that one or more of the circuits routines or applications may be included in and or executed by the controller .

For example alternation of the combined multi thickness media in the feeder and its subsequent presentation to the imaging process requires that the image be modified in order to be placed properly on the media regardless of the orientation of the media when it is fed into the imaging process i.e. whether the small media is at the lead edge of the large media or at the trail edge of the large media .

In order for the image to be properly oriented on the small media the orientation of the media must be known by the marking device and may be accomplished through the automatic sensing of the position of the small media on the large media as each sheet is transported past a sensor along or otherwise in communication with the media transport path. The sensor may determine the position of the small media on the large media using of various known or later developed technologies including for example transmissive sensing reflective sensing and or thickness sensing. However it should be appreciated that any senor or sensing technique that is capable of determining the orientation of a sheet of multi thickness media may be used.

In transmissive sensing for example the media may be transported between a signal transmitter and signal receiver. A signal is sent by the transmitter thought the sheet to the receiver. The receiver can discriminate between the large media portion of a sheet and the small media portion of a sheet as each sheet passes between the transmitter and receiver based on the transmissibility of the signal energy passed through the media. The signal energy may include for example visible light an infrared signal an ultrasonic signal and or signals based on other energy spectra.

In reflective sensing for example the media may be transported over and or under a signal transmitter that would reflect signal energy off the surface of the media back to a signal receiver. The receiver would be able to discriminate between the large media and small media as each passed over and or under the transmitter and receiver based on the strength of the signal reflected off of the media. For example thinner and or less dense media may allow more of the signal to pass through the media resulting in a weaker reflected signal. Thicker and or denser media would allow less of the signal to pass through the media resulting in a stronger reflected signal. The signal energy may include for example visible light an infrared signal an ultrasonic signal and or signals based on other energy spectra.

In thickness sensing for example the media may be transported over and or under a thickness sensor that could discriminate between the thickness of the large media and the thickness of the small media by using for example a pair of rollers that contact both the top and bottom of the media and exert compressive force on the media. As the larger thinner media portion passes through the rollers the rollers would compress towards one another. As the smaller thicker media portion passes through the rollers the thickness of the media would force the rollers apart. By sensing the distance between the rollers the marking device could determine the thickness of the media.

Operation continues to step . In step based on detecting of the orientation the marking device may adjust the marking format for marking on the current sheet. As discussed above the imaging process requires that the image is properly oriented on the small media . Thus after the orientation of the sheet is detected the marking format may be adjusted to correspond with the detected orientation.

Operation continues to step . In step the current sheet is transported through the marking device and marked. In step it is determined whether the marking operation is complete i.e. have the number of sheets required for the current marking operation been selected and marked. If the marking operation is complete operation jumps to step . If the marking operation is not complete operation returns to step . In step operation of the exemplary method ends.

It should be appreciated that any number of sheets of combined multi thickness media may make up the groups of sheets whose orientation are alternated within the stack. For example as much as substantially half of the entire stack may be alternated. Additionally each single sheet may be alternated. If a small number of sheets are alternated the stack will remain more uniform in thickness as marking operations reduce the number of sheets in the stack. If a larger number of sheets are alternated the position and or orientation of the marked image relative to the sheet of combined multi thickness media will be changed less frequently.

The input output interface may be connected to one or more data sources over one or more links . The data source s can be a locally or remotely located computer a printer a scanner a facsimile device a xerographic device a multi fictional imaging device a device that stores and or transmits electronic data such as a client or a server of a wired or wireless network such as for example an intranet an extranet a local area network a wide area network a storage area network the Internet especially the World Wide Web and the like. In general the data source can be any known or later developed source that is capable of providing image data to the input output interface .

The input output interface may be connected to one or more data sinks over one or more links . The data sink s can be a locally or remotely located inkjet printer locally or remotely located laser printer a facsimile device a xerographic device a multi fictional imaging device a device that stores and or transmits electronic data such as a client or a server of a wired or wireless network such as for example an intranet an extranet a local area network a wide area network a storage area network the Internet especially the World Wide Web and the like. In general the data sink can be any known or later developed sink that is capable of storing image data to be marked or capable of marking images based on data output by the input output interface .

The input output interface may be connected to one or more sensors over one or more links . The sensor s may include one or more of for example a transmissive sensor a reflective sensor and or a thickness sensor. In general the sensor can be any known or later developed sensing device that is capable of sensing of the position of the small media on the large media as each sheet is transported past the sensor .

Each of the various links and may be any known or later developed device or system for connecting the data source s the data sink s and or the sensor s respectively to the input output interface . In particular the links and my each be implemented as one or more of for example a direct cable connection a connection over a wide area network a local area network or a storage area network a connection over an intranet a connection over an extranet a connection over the Internet a connection over any other distributed processing network or system and or an infrared radio frequency or other wireless connection.

As shown in the memory may be physically functionally and or conceptually divided into a number of different memory portions including for example a current sheet setting portion and or a marking data portion . The current sheet setting portion may store the orientation of the current sheet of combined multi thickness media to be marked. The marking data portion may store input and or adjusted marking data for example for the current sheet and or the current marking operation including a marking data for a plurality of sheets.

The memory may be implemented using any appropriate combination of alterable or non alterable memory volatile or non volatile memory or fixed memory. The alterable memory whether volatile or non volatile can be implemented using any one or more of static or dynamic RAM a floppy disk and disk drive a writeable or re re writeable optical disk and disk drive a hard drive flash memory or the like. Similarly the non alterable or fixed memory can be implemented using any one or more of ROM PROM EPROM EEPROM an optical ROM disk such as CD ROM or DVD ROM disk and disk drive or the like.

The format adjusting circuit routine or application may input data indicating for example an orientation of the current sheet and adjust the output format accordingly.

For example in operation data related to a marking operation may be input from the data source to the input output interface . Under control of the controller the data may be stored in the marking data portion of the memory . Alternatively the marking operation data may be input under control of the controller directly to the format adjusting circuit routine or application .

Next for example current sheet setting data representing the orientation of a sheet to be marked on may be input from the sensor to the input output interface . Under control of the controller the data may be stored in the current sheet setting portion of the memory . Alternatively the current sheet setting data may be input under control of the controller directly to the format adjusting circuit routine or application .

Under control of the controller the format adjusting circuit routine or application may access the marking operation data and the current sheet setting data and adjust the marking operation data in accordance with the current sheet setting for example according to the above described exemplary method. Under control of the controller the adjusted marking operation data may be stored in the marking data portion . Alternatively the adjusted marking data under control of the controller may be output directly to the data sink via the input output interface .

It should be appreciated that although the above described system may input marking data for an entire marking operation. The system may input marking data for each sheet of media individually.

While the exemplary system has been described as physically functionally and or conceptually divided into at least a controller and or a format adjusting circuit routine or application it should be appreciated that one or more of the circuits routines or applications may be included in and or executed by the controller . Furthermore while the exemplary system has been described as connected to but not including the data source the data sink and the sensor one or more of the data source the data sink and the sensor may be included in the system .

While various features have been described in conjunction with the examples outlined above various alternatives modifications variations and or improvements of those features and or examples may be possible. Accordingly the examples as set forth above are intended to be illustrative. Various changes may be made without departing from the broad spirit and scope of the underlying principles.

For example while the exemplary methods and systems described herein are described within the context of combined multi thickness media the methods and systems are applicable to any media that has a thickness variation between its leading edge portion and its trailing edge portion.

It will be appreciated that various of the above disclosed and other features and functions or alternatives thereof may be desirably combined into many other different systems or applications. Also various presently unforeseen or unanticipated alternatives modifications variations or improvements therein may be subsequently made by those skilled in the art which are also intended to be encompassed by the following claims.

