---

title: Seamless network interface selection, handoff and management in multi-IP network interface mobile devices
abstract: A Multi-Interface Mobility Management (MIMM) client is provided on a mobile Multi-Interface Device (MID) to support seamless network connectivity and switching of the MID. The MIMM client communicates with a MIMM Server. The MIMM Server collects information from MIMM Clients and provides information to the MIMM Clients pertaining to the network(s) to which the mobile MID has access, such as information concerning the availability of a network, the quality of network connectivity, etc. The MIMM Client is responsible for determining whether and when a handoff or roaming operation should be initiated by the mobile MID, and which network interface the mobile MID should use after the handoff/roam operation has been completed. The MIMM Client also is responsible for performing mobility-related functions that are required prior and subsequent to the handoff/roam operation. The MIMM Client uses the information received from the MIMM Server in order to make these determinations.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07835743&OS=07835743&RS=07835743
owner: Telcordia Technologies, Inc.
number: 07835743
owner_city: Piscataway
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050803
---
The present application relates generally to wireless networking and more particularly to systems and methods for supporting the use of mobile devices having multiple heterogeneous network access interfaces whereby such mobile devices may connect to different wireless networks and or make use of various network access technologies.

IP is a connectionless protocol. The connection between end points during a communication is not continuous. When a user sends or receives data or messages the data or messages are divided into components known as packets. Every packet is treated as an independent unit of data.

In order to standardize the transmission between points over the Internet or the like networks an OSI Open Systems Interconnection model was established. The OSI model separates the communications processes between two points in a network into seven stacked layers with each layer adding its own set of functions. Each device handles a message so that there is a downward flow through each layer at a sending end point and an upward flow through the layers at a receiving end point. The programming and or hardware that provides the seven layers of function is typically a combination of device operating systems application software TCP IP and or other transport and network protocols and other software and hardware.

Typically the top four layers are used when a message passes from or to a user and the bottom three layers are used when a message passes through a device e.g. an IP host device . An IP host is any device on the network that is capable of transmitting and receiving IP packets such as a server a router or a workstation. Messages destined for some other host are not passed up to the upper layers but are forwarded to the other host. In the OSI and other similar models IP is in Layer 3 the network layer. The layers of the OSI model are listed below.

Layer 7 i.e. the application layer is a layer at which e.g. communication partners are identified quality of service is identified user authentication and privacy are considered constraints on data syntax are identified etc.

Layer 6 i.e. the presentation layer is a layer that e.g. converts incoming and outgoing data from one presentation format to another etc.

Layer 5 i.e. the session layer is a layer that e.g. sets up coordinates and terminates conversations exchanges and dialogs between the applications etc.

Layer 4 i.e. the transport layer is a layer that e.g. manages end to end control and error checking etc.

Layer 2 i.e. the data link layer is a layer that e.g. provides synchronization for the physical level does bit stuffing and furnishes transmission protocol knowledge and management etc. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE sub divides the data link layer into two further sub layers the MAC Media Access Control layer that controls the data transfer to and from the physical layer and the LLC Logical Link Control layer that interfaces with the network layer and interprets commands and performs error recovery.

Layer 1 i.e. the physical layer is a layer that e.g. conveys the bit stream through the network at the physical level. The IEEE sub divides the physical layer into the PLCP Physical Layer Convergence Procedure sub layer and the PMD Physical Medium Dependent sub layer.

Typically layers higher than layer 2 such as layers including the network layer or layer 3 in the OSI model and the like are referred to as the higher layers.

Wireless networks can incorporate a variety of types of mobile devices such as cellular and wireless telephones PCs personal computers laptop computers wearable computers cordless phones pagers headsets printers PDAs etc. For example mobile devices may include digital systems to secure fast wireless transmissions of voice and or data.

Wireless LANs WLANs in which a mobile user can connect to a local area network LAN through a wireless connection may be employed for wireless communications. Wireless communications can include communications that propagate via electromagnetic waves such as light infrared radio microwave. There are a variety of different WLAN standards that currently exist such as Bluetooth IEEE 802.11 and HomeRF.

For example Bluetooth products may be used to provide links between mobile computers mobile phones portable handheld devices personal digital assistants PDAs and other mobile devices and connectivity to the Internet. Bluetooth is a computing and telecommunications industry specification that details how mobile devices can easily interconnect with each other and with non mobile devices using a short range wireless connection. Bluetooth creates a digital wireless protocol to address end user problems arising from the proliferation of various mobile devices that need to keep data synchronized and consistent from one device to another thereby allowing equipment from different vendors to work seamlessly together. Bluetooth devices may be named according to a common naming concept. For example a Bluetooth device may possess a Bluetooth Device Name BDN or a name associated with a unique Bluetooth Device Address BDA . Bluetooth devices may also participate in an Internet Protocol IP network. If a Bluetooth device functions on an IP network it may be provided with an IP address and an IP network name. Thus a Bluetooth Device configured to participate on an IP network may contain e.g. a BDN a BDA an IP address and an IP name. The term IP name refers to a name corresponding to an IP address of an interface.

Similarly IEEE 802.11 specifies technologies for wireless LANs and devices. Using 802.11 wireless networking may be accomplished with each single base station supporting several devices. In some examples devices may come pre equipped with wireless hardware or a user may install a separate piece of hardware such as a card that may include an antenna. By way of example devices used in 802.11 typically include three notable elements whether or not the device is an access point AP a mobile station STA a bridge a PCMCIA card or another device a radio transceiver an antenna and a MAC Media Access Control layer that controls packet flow between points in a network.

Wireless networks also may involve methods and protocols found in Mobile IP Internet Protocol systems in PCS systems and in other mobile network systems. With respect to Mobile IP this involves a standard communications protocol created by the Internet Engineering Task Force IETF . With Mobile IP mobile device users may move across networks while maintaining their IP Address assigned once. See Request for Comments RFC 3344. Mobile IP enhances Internet Protocol IP and adds means to forward Internet traffic to mobile devices when connecting outside their home network. Mobile IP assigns each mobile node a home address on its home network and a care of address CoA that identifies the current location of the device within a network and its subnets. When a device is moved to a different network it receives a new care of address. A mobility agent on the home network can associate each home address with its care of address. The mobile node can send the home agent a binding update each time it changes its care of address by using a protocol such as Internet Control Message Protocol ICMP .

In basic IP routing routing mechanisms typically rely on the assumptions that each network node always has a constant attachment point to the Internet and that each node s IP address identifies the network link it is attached to. In this document the terminology node includes a connection point which can include a redistribution point or an end point for data transmissions and which can recognize process and or forward communications to other nodes. For example Internet routers can look at an IP address prefix or the like identifying a device s network. Then at a network level routers can look at a set of bits identifying a particular subnet. Then at a subnet level routers can look at a set of bits identifying a particular device. With typical mobile IP communications if a user disconnects a mobile device from the Internet and tries to reconnect it at a new subnet then the device has to be reconfigured with a new IP address a proper netmask and a default router. Otherwise routing protocols would not be able to deliver the packets properly.

In the context of a mobile device with an IP based wireless network interface the mobile device needs to perform roaming or handoffs when it moves from one network to another network or from one access point of a network to another. With existing handoff methodologies handoff is typically accomplished by performing the following sequence of protocol layer specific handoffs 

As the popularity and proliferation of wireless network access grows more and more mobile devices are expected to have Multiple Interface Device MID capabilities. MIDs are mobile devices that contain two or more independent network interfaces thus allowing the MID to have connectivity with two or more separate networks and or make use of different network access technologies. The MID may have an IP address and a common IP network name associated with the IP address.

For example an MID may have different wireless local area LAN interfaces such as 802.11x i.e. IEEE 802.11a 802.11b or 802.11g BlueTooth HomeRF or Wi Fi different wide area WAN radio interfaces such as GPRS General Packet Radio Service 3G 3GPP 3GPP2 GSM Global System for Mobile Communications EDGE Enhanced Data for GSM Evolution TDMA Time Division Multiple Access or CDMA Code Division Multiple Access both LAN and WAN wireless network interfaces or both wireless and wireline network interfaces.

Each network interface may contain addresses of varying types such as an IP address a Bluetooth Device Address a Bluetooth Common Name a Bluetooth IP address a Bluetooth IP Common Name an 802.11 IP Address an 802.11 IP common Name or an IEEE MAC address.

However there exists a multitude of technical issues involved in supporting such multi interface mobile devices that cannot be readily solved using known solutions. For example 

Consequently there remains a need in the art for solutions to the above issues and problems related to support of functionality of wireless MIDs.

The preferred embodiments of the present invention fulfill the existing need as explained above by providing systems and methods for supporting IP based mobile MIDs. According to one aspect of the invention a Multi Interface Mobility Management MIMM client is provided on a mobile MID. The MIMM Client communicates with a MIMM Server. The MIMM Server is an IP based server that preferably resides in the IP core network that is used to interconnect the various radio networks and to connect the radio networks to other IP networks such as the Internet. The MIMM Server collects information from MIMM Clients and provides information to the MIMM Clients pertaining to the network s to which the mobile MID has access such as information concerning the availability of a network the quality of network connectivity etc.

The MIMM Client is responsible for determining whether and when a handoff or roaming operation should be initiated by the mobile MID and which network interface the mobile MID should use after the handoff roam operation has been completed. The MIMM Client also is responsible for performing mobility related functions that are required prior and subsequent to the handoff roam operation. The MIMM Client uses the information received from the MIMM Server in order to make these determinations.

The above and or other aspects features and or advantages of various embodiments will be further appreciated in view of the following description in conjunction with the accompanying figures. Various embodiments can include and or exclude different aspects features and or advantages where applicable. In addition various embodiments can combine one or more aspect or feature of other embodiments where applicable. The descriptions of aspects features and or advantages of particular embodiments should not be construed as limiting other embodiments or the claims.

While the present invention may be embodied in many different forms a number of illustrative embodiments are described herein with the understanding that the present disclosure is to be considered as providing examples of the principles of the invention and that such examples are not intended to limit the invention to preferred embodiments described herein and or illustrated herein.

Referring now to a MIMM Client according to an embodiment of the invention is a software component installed on a mobile MID that is responsible for determining whether and when a handoff roaming operation should occur and which interface i.e. network the MID should use after such handoff roam operation. The MIMM Client includes three main functional entities an Interface Monitor IM a Virtual Subnet Device VSD and and a Mobility Manager MM . The MIMM Client also manages mobility related functions required prior to and after performing the handoff roaming. MIMM Client can be run on the mobile terminal as an autonomous process making its own decisions and performing appropriate tasks. However where the MIMM Server is present in the network the MIMM Client may communicate with the MIMM Server and acquire information or advice to support the decision making processes. The MIMM Client performs main functions relating to interface monitoring and management mobility management and mobility related function management. For example with respect to interface management the MIMM Client monitors the Layer 3 L3 Layer 2 L2 Layer 1 L1 status of each interface and either activates or deactivates interfaces that require configuration or connection setup eq. PPP over Bluetooth or 3G when necessary.

With respect to mobility management the MIMM Client determines whether and when the terminal should handoff from one network to another executes a handoff operation such as a fast Layer 2 handoff using the Virtual Subnet Device VSD and uses a mobility handling protocol e.g. Mobile IP or Session Invitation Protocol SIP defined by the IETF to initiate the Layer 3 handoff process performs Make before break handoffs and performs Network assisted handoffs through communication with the MIMM Server.

Regarding mobility related function management the MIMM Client may initiate an interface auto configuration process may initiate Authentication Authorization AA and security association clients agents may manage IP routing and may perform miscellaneous configuration operations e.g. name server web proxy settings etc. .

The IM constantly monitors the status of the network interfaces on the mobile MID. In three network interfaces are shown for purposes of explanation namely Interfaces and each having its own MAC address. However it will be appreciated that the invention is not restricted to any particular number of network interface devices that can be incorporated into a wireless mobile device as the concepts of the invention are equally applicable to and implementable on any number of different network interface devices.

The status information may include for example whether an interface is up i.e. active or down i.e. inactive the radio quality e.g. signal strength of the interface if the interface is a wireless interface the cable connection state if the interface is a wired interface bit error rates power consumption level link rate network attachment point eq. WLAN Access Point etc. The status information collected by the IM will be reported to any functional entity that subscribes to the interface status monitor service. The reporting may be performed either upon request periodically or only when changes occur. In accordance with the invention one of the entities that subscribe to the status monitor service of the IM is the MM module .

The VSD is a shim layer between IP and physical network interfaces which performs a L2 handoff. Each VSD aggregates physical interfaces connected to a single subnet and transparently selects the best available interface for the communication over the subnet. The selection of the best available interface is performed by the MM module and it triggers the L2 handoff by the VSD. The details of the MM module are described below.

A separate VSD is instantiated per each subnet to which the mobile MID is connected and it attaches multiple physical interfaces connected to the subnet. To the IP and higher networking layers the VSD appears as a network interface and the actual physical interfaces attached to the VSD can be accessed through the VSD that attaches them. Actual physical interfaces also can be accessed directly as usual. However in such case the transparent L2 handoff capability provided by the VSD cannot be utilized. The VSD will be assigned an IP address from the subnet address pool and the attached physical interfaces shall have the same IP address as the VSD to which they are attached. Optionally each physical interface attached to a VSD may have an identical L2 MAC address referred to as a Shadow MAC Address to improve L2 handoff performance.

The MM module is responsible for determining which interface the mobile MID should use and when the mobile should switch from one interface to another. After a decision is made the MM is also responsible for signaling or spawning appropriate clients agents on the mobile MID that manage interface configurations AA functions security associations and mobility management in proper sequence.

Initially the MM module will search for active interfaces through a list of the network interfaces that are provided in the mobile MID using the status information provided by the IM module . An active interface is one that is currently in a useable state. Among these active interfaces the MM will select a candidate interface based on a number of parameters such as signal strength network type and capability i.e. whether it is WLAN Bluetooth cellular etc. user preference power level the cost of usage etc. Once the candidate interface is selected the MM will determine the functions that need to be performed before the mobile MID can use the selected interface to send and receive user data over the network. Depending on the specific network the following are examples of such functions 

When any of the above functions are required the MM will invoke the functional entity on the mobile MID that is responsible for performing these functions with the new candidate interface as a parameter. The method invoking the functional entity may differ depending on how the entity is designed and what external interface the entity provides. Normally each entity provides one or more of the following interfaces 1 direct execution through the OS Operating System specific command line interface 2 API Application Programming Interface provided by the entity s software library or signaling through the OS specific inter process signaling method. The MIMM Client provides process modules for each mobility related function that can be customized to use any of the above methods to invoke a specific functional entity.

The MM will then invoke the appropriate IP mobility management client agent such as Mobile IP agent or SIP Mobility client to handle the actual handoff of user traffic. After the handoff the candidate interface becomes the primary active interface. The primary active interface is the interface currently being used by the mobile MID for communication. When the candidate interface becomes the primary active interface MM will also manage IP routing table to insure the communication over the primary active interface.

The MM constantly acquires interface status information from the IM and based on above mentioned parameters it will probe for a potentially better interface or a better network for communication. To prevent unnecessarily frequent switching between two interfaces or between two networks the MM uses multiple levels of thresholds and averaging for performance metrics such as signal strength power level etc. In anticipation that the mobile MID may need to use a new interface the MM can proactively activate the new interface for use where such interface is not constantly available. An example is an interface to a wireless network that uses point to point connections e.g. GPRS cdma2000 or Bluetooth . This allows the MM to perform make before break handoffs which significantly reduce handoff delays.

First the MM detects either that the status of the current primary active interface is deteriorating or that the user preference has been changed to select another device as the preferred primary active interface. The MM then scans for a new candidate active interface to which to switch over. If the preferred interface is not on the list of the candidate active interfaces provided by the IM such as where user preference has selected a new interface the MM may itself bring up the selected interface.

Next if the network access using the candidate active interface requires IP mobility related functions to be performed e.g. when the new interface requires that the mobile MID use a new IP address hence the mobile MID will have to register the new IP address with the mobility servers such as a Mobile IP Home Agent or a SIP server the MM instructs each functional component responsible for carrying out the needed mobility related functions to take the appropriate actions before the actual switchover to the new network interface takes place. The MM then instructs the mobility handling function to switchover the user traffic to the selected candidate interface. Each interface will have its own metric that represents the quality of the link. Normally the quality measure of a radio link could be measured with the signal level or power level. Signal or power levels are generally represented by SNR CIR or RSSI.

The SigTh here could be 0 zero in which case the number of threshold levels implemented will be 4. In many systems including the traditional mobile cellular communication system multiple 2 or 3 signal threshold levels are adopted to prevent a so called ping pong effect near the boundary of the coverage area wherein a mobile device will be switched multiple times back and forth between the same two base stations or access point. The preferred embodiments of the present invention further enhance the multiple threshold concept to add thresholds SigTh and SigTh to support make before break handoff operation between heterogeneous network interfaces.

The signal level is measured periodically where the measurement period should be short enough to capture instantaneous changes. However actual signal level S comparison with the threshold values should be made with an average value S to prevent instability due to transient fluctuations in the radio quality. The average value could be obtained by using a moving average a smoothed average or any other method that suits the physical characteristics of the radio device. Some example equations are shown below to evaluate the average signal strength S t value where the instantaneous signal strength value is S t at a given time t. where 1 1 where 1 2 1 1 where 0 

With the above defined five levels of signal threshold when the average signal strength S measured on a certain interface is above SigTh the MM considers the interface to be available . In the available state the interface will be monitored constantly but the MM will give the lowest priority to that interface when selecting a candidate interface to hand off to. When the Sgoes above SigTh the interface is considered to be active . When the MM decides to hand off from the current interface to another interface it will normally select a candidate interface among the active interfaces using various metrics such as signal level bit rate power consumption fixed priority user preference etc. When none of the interfaces are in an active state a similar comparison will be performed among the available interfaces. However if there are interfaces that require configuration or connection setup e.g. PPP connection setup for 3G cellular devices before selecting among the available interfaces the MM will try to activate these alternative interfaces first. The candidate interface becomes the primary active interface when the hand off operation is finished and the interface is in use. When the Sof the primary active interface becomes higher than SigTh the MM considers the link quality of the interface to be stable and it will attempt to disable other alternative interfaces that can be disconnected or turned off to reduce power consumption or the cost of usage. When the Sof the primary active interface drops below SigTh the MM considers the link quality to be deteriorating and it starts to search for a new candidate interface among the active interfaces to prepare for a possibly imminent handoff. If no active interface is available the MM will try to activate the alternative interfaces. If the Sof the primary active interface drops below SigTh its status becomes inactive and the MM immediately will perform handoff to a candidate interface.

In addition to the stand alone implementation of the MIMM Client on each mobile MID a MIMM Server may be used to assist the MIMM Clients in making handoff roaming decisions. As shown in A MIMM Server is an IP based server that resides in the IP core network. Depending on how roaming handoff operations between different types of networks is supported the MIMM Server could be deployed in different network providers. For example a network provider that provides different types of radio networks e.g. hotspots and cellular networks could deploy MIMM Servers in its IP core networks to assist the handoff roaming operations between its different types of radio networks. An enterprise network could deploy a MIMM Server in its enterprise network and use it to support the mobility of the enterprise users on public networks. In this case enterprise users will subscribe to public networks cellular and hotspot networks and use these public networks only as packet transport pipes to the enterprise networks and roaming between different public networks will be anchored at the enterprise network i.e. handled by the MIMM Server. The MIMM Server includes the following main functions 

The MIMM Server also can communicate with other network entities such as a RTS Real Time Session server in addition to MME to acquire and or to provide information relevant to the network conditions which information cannot be directly known or easily obtained by the mobile MIDs. An example of the RTS Server is a SIP Server that keeps information on real time SIP based application sessions e.g. on going SIP sessions and their service descriptions which may include bandwidth requirements . Upon request by the MIMM Server the RTS Server will return the on going real time session information of the network e.g. the number of on going SIP sessions and their bandwidth requirements at the moment . Although the MIMM Server and RTS Server are illustrated in as separate entities in the network for illustrative purposes they also can reside in a single server entity depending on the system architecture.

When the MIMM Client on a mobile MID wishes to check if a candidate network is a good choice to handoff roam into e.g. using procedures described above it will send a Request Handoff message to the MIMM Server . Based on the information gathered from various entities in the network and from all the mobile MIDs the MIMM Server will determine whether allowing the requesting MIMM Client to handoff to the target candidate network will deteriorate the communication qualities of the existing real time sessions in the target network as well as the qualities of the on going sessions of the requesting mobile MID to unacceptable levels. The MIMM Server then sends a corresponding Handoff Advice as a response to the Request Handoff. The MIMM Client will use the information acquired from the MIMM Server to make its handoff roaming decisions.

The MIMM Server may communicate with the MIMM Client using any standard or non standard protocol deemed appropriate by the implementers of the MIMM Server and MIMM Client. One approach is to use the mobility management protocol used by the MIMM Client to control the handoff roaming at the IP layer or application layers. Such protocols may be Mobile IP MIP or the Session Invitation Protocol SIP specified by the Internet Engineering Task Force IETF .

Consider for example that MIP is used not only as the handoff roaming control protocol but also as the protocol for the MIMM Client and the MIMM Server to communicate. The MIMM Server could be integrated with the MIP Home Agent HA used for mobility control. The Request Handoff message from the MIMM Client to the MIMM Server will be a MIP Registration Request message with a Vendor Organizational Specific Extension defined by the MIP standards for the MIP Registration Request. The Vendor Organization Specific Extension will carry an indication to inform the MIMM Server that this MIP Registration Request message serves as a query to the MIMM Server to ask the MIMM Server for advice on whether and when the mobile MID could handoff roam into a target network. The target network could be indicated to the MIMM Server by the Care of Address carried in the MIP Registration Request. Alternatively the target network can also be identified in any other way e.g. by information carried in the Vendor Organization Specific Extension. The Vendor Organization Specific Extension will also carry all other necessary information e.g. radio network conditions that the MIMM Client wants to send to the MIMM Server. The Handoff Advice message sent back from the MIMM Server to the MIMM Client will be a MIP Registration Reply message with a Vendor Organizational Specific Extension. The Vendor Organizational Specific Extension will carry all the necessary information e.g. handoff roaming advice that the MIMM Server wants to send to the MIMM Client.

When the mobility control protocol is also used as the protocol between the MIMM Server and the MIMM Client the MIMM Server query and handoff roaming control can be merged in some scenarios. Continuing the above example where MIP is used for handoff roaming control as well as the communication between MIMM Server and MIMM Client when the MIMM Server s response to a MIMM Client s Request Handoff message i.e. a MIP Registration Request message is Go ahead and move into the target network then the MIMM Server could proceed to complete all the necessary MIP HA operations necessary for the handoff roaming and returns a Handoff Advice message i.e. a MIP Registration Reply message to the MIMM Client to inform the mobile MID that the mobile MID can proceed immediately to move into the target network and that the handoff roaming has already been completed on the network side. Any another protocol also may be used for signaling between the MIMM Server and MIMM Client.

The MIMM Server also can provide advice and or decision directives to the MIMM Clients already in the network to handoff roam to another network due to deteriorating network conditions or due to the occurrence of an unexpected event such as network congestion fault management temporary change of policy etc. Such advice may be for example Move out from current network A due to condition X and move into network B now or Move out from current network A due to condition X and move into network B now. Then try network A again after Y seconds. 

As illustrated in network management monitoring entities MME may send alert or warning messages to MIMM Server indicating that an unexpected event has occurred. The unexpected event can include but is not limited to 

Communication between the MMEs and the MIMM Server can be done using a proprietary protocol or a standard protocol such as Simple Network Management Protocol SNMP defined by IETF. MIMM Server will then communicate with a set of MIMM Clients or all the MIMM Clients in the impacted network or region advising to handoff out of the network or the region if alternative network access is available. The information in the Reactive Advice message should include the reason for the message expiration time of the advice and optionally the alternative network to handoff roam into. MIMM Clients having alternative network connectivity then will try to select an alternative network and perform handoff to the selected network. The positive integer expiration time value indicates that the MIMM Client should avoid the current network for the given amount of time. If the expiration time value is 1 the MIMM Client is advised not to return to the network during the present session. After the expiration time the MIMM Client may select the network as a handoff roaming destination candidate. The communication method between the MIMM Server and the Client could be 1 a periodic push by the MIMM Server 2 an event driven push by the MIMM Server or 3 a periodic pull by the MIMM Client.

A Mobile Host MH in an enterprise network can access the resources within the network and external to the network directly without any encapsulation or tunneling. Any Correspondent Host CH in the network can reach the MH using the MH s home IP Address IPH . When the MH moves out of the enterprise network and moves into an external network provided by an entity such as an ISP a cellular carrier or a hotspot provider using a network interface attached to the MH the MH has to perform the following procedures if the user wishes to continuously access the enterprise network without any disruption in the ongoing communication sessions and also to be reached by other entities through its home IP address wherever it goes 

2. Get authenticated authorized into the network and obtain an IP address IPL locally from the visiting network 

3. Register using IPL as the care of address COA to the external Mobile IP Home Agent x HA and obtain a dynamic home address IPX . The x HA will forward incoming packets for IPX to IPL through an encapsulation tunnel 

4. Register using IPX as the local address to the VPN Gateway VPN GW and obtain a VPN address IPV . The VPN GW will forward incoming packets for IPV to IPX through an encryption e.g. IPSEC tunnel using IPX as the tunnel end 

5. Register to internal Mobile IP Home Agent i HA using the IPV as the COA and IPH as the permanent home IP address. IPH can be assigned statically or dynamically.

The MIMM Client on the Mobile Host MH continuously scans for available networks and when it selects the best available network connectivity or interface other than the network connectivity or interface currently being used it will configure the interface e.g. ESSID and WEP key to connect to the selected network. The MIMM Client may get assistance in the decision making from the MIMM Server in the network if present. It will then launch appropriate clients to conduct the necessary procedures to get authenticated authorized into the network and obtain an IP address locally. If the network that it is connecting to is not the home network the MIMM Client will then signal the Mobile IP agent running on the MH to register to the external Home Agent x HA . After obtaining the dynamic home address IPX from x HA the MIMM Client will then launch a VPN Client to setup the VPN tunnel between the MH and the VPS Gateway VPN GW . The MIMM Client will then register to its internal Home Agent i HA using the IP address IPV obtained from the VPN GW.

As described above all of the procedures required for host mobility of a mobile MID can be automated without user intervention with the present invention.

While the present invention may be embodied in many different forms a number of illustrative embodiments are described herein with the understanding that the present disclosure is to be considered as providing examples of the principles of the invention and that such examples are not intended to limit the invention to preferred embodiments described herein and or illustrated herein.

While illustrative embodiments of the invention have been described herein the present invention is not limited to the various preferred embodiments described herein but includes any and all embodiments having equivalent elements modifications omissions combinations e.g. of aspects across various embodiments adaptations and or alterations as would be appreciated by those in the art based on the present disclosure. The limitations in the claims are to be interpreted broadly based on the language employed in the claims and not limited to examples described in the present specification or during the prosecution of the application which examples are to be construed as non exclusive. For example in the present disclosure the term preferably is non exclusive and means preferably but not limited to. In this disclosure and during the prosecution of this application means plus function or step plus function limitations will only be employed where for a specific claim limitation all of the following conditions are present in that limitation a means for or step for is expressly recited b a corresponding function is expressly recited and c structure material or acts that support that structure are not recited. In this disclosure and during the prosecution of this application the terminology present invention or invention may be used as a reference to one or more aspect within the present disclosure. The language present invention or invention should not be improperly interpreted as an identification of criticality should not be improperly interpreted as applying across all aspects or embodiments i.e. it should be understood that the present invention has a number of aspects and embodiments and should not be improperly interpreted as limiting the scope of the application or claims. In this disclosure and during the prosecution of this application the terminology embodiment can be used to describe any aspect feature process or step any combination thereof and or any portion thereof etc. In some examples various embodiments may include overlapping features. In this disclosure the following abbreviated terminology may be employed e.g. which means for example. 

