---

title: Eccentric mounting and adjustment system for belt driven devices
abstract: An eccentric adjustment and mounting system is useful for belt engaging engine components such as alternators or water pumps. The system includes a housing fixed to the engine, a socket rotatable in pawl-and-ratchet fashion within the housing, and a socket aperture eccentrically disposed relative to the socket's axis. The aperture receives the belt engaging component, whereby rotation of the socket moves the component to adjust belt tension.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07442137&OS=07442137&RS=07442137
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07442137
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050328
---
The invention described herein may be made used and licensed by or for the United States Government for governmental purposes without paying me any royalty.

The present invention relates to an eccentric mounting and adjustment EMA system for belt driving or belt driven devices that are installed and operated within the restricted confines of an engine compartment typically a motor vehicle. It satisfies two essential requirements for automotive devices driven by an endless flexible belt. These are 1 a reliable mounting to the engine block assembly and 2 a continuous provision of a proper amount of tension to the belt for either driving or driven devices. As a result there is minimal wear and tear on device bearings and the belt which reduces operational failures and assures maximum efficiency for these devices.

The term belt driven device includes those devices within motor vehicles that are serviced by endless belts such as power steering pumps air compressors water pumps generators alternators cooling fans sheaves idlers pulleys water extraction and recycle systems and other ancillary devices customarily used by motor vehicles with internal combustion engines. A drive device is one that is directly connected to an output shaft of said engine and uses a flexible endless belt to drive at least one driven device such as an alternator.

Further a mechanic must avoid accidents while working in the restricted confines of an engine compartment to avoid any mishap to himself or to sensitive engine components. Such accidents could potentially disrupt or disable hydraulic electrical and mechanical systems located therein. Also the mechanic or operator must perform all installation adjustment and removal work very quickly with minimal efforts and support in either the field or the shop. Finally uncomfortable or awkward positions while working should be avoided to avoid personal injury.

My invention allows any flexible belt of the armed forces inventory to be readily removable installable and adjustable by a single person using the simplest of tools such as a large screwdriver a pair of pliers or an elongated rod of about inch in diameter. Thereby I have avoided former frustrations and expenses involving special tools or fasteners which can be lost or misplaced. Moreover minimal force and exertion are expended.

Furthermore this invention does not significantly modify or depart from standard procedures currently used by motor pools for maintaining belts drives and driven devices. For example electrical connections are easily made by using a simple bayonet or coaxial connector that in form resembles the ends of modern jumper cables employed by the US Military such that positive and negative poles are axially symmetric. Similarly connections for mechanical or hydraulic systems are just as easily made by conventional methods at the rear of my invention.

It is to be understood that the readiness requirements for military vehicles are unusual and thereby necessitate more reliable and rugged designs than their commercial counterparts. The components must have a good tolerance for more frequent shocks vibrations and thermal events because they frequently go from prolonged periods at standing idle to wide open cross country travel. Further present art approaches have the potential for reducing readiness increasing maintenance frequency and costs as well as exposing personnel to undue risks to reattach or tension belts while engaged in awkward positions or extreme reaches.

For military vehicles belt performance is critical with regard to the tension that is maintained on them. With use the belts can become loose and full torque is not easily transmitted to the driven devices. Thereafter the belts can slip and become more damaged. If the belts are too tight excessive wear can result in the bearing assemblies of the driving or driven devices as well as causing belt shredding or separation. This impacts operating efficiency.

It is therefore an object of this invention to provide an EMA system that properly tensions an endless drive belt. It is a separate object to provide such a system that requires less manual force and effort while installing tensioning and operating. It is another object to provide a functional EMA system that is mechanically durable economical to produce reliable in construction simple to manufacture and capable of achieving a long or trouble free service life.

These and other objects features and advantages of this invention will be apparent to those skilled in the relevant arts upon a full reading of this specification and the appended claims which explain and define the aspects and principals of this invention.

Returning to device fits within receiving aperture of socket which preferably is fashioned of a high strength heat resistant non metallic material. Device is non rotatably seated in socket by the shape of the socket or by alternate means such as axial fixation within the socket by the use of wedges lugs flats or pins. For instance at least one lug that extends outwardly from the circular surface of driven device could be slidingly inserted within a conforming slot of the internal wall of the eccentric socket . Optionally lug and slot can be angled so they effectively have a slightly spiraled or threaded engagement such that rotation force exerted on device by a drive belt screws the device into socket thereby seating the device in the socket.

With reference to the housing member includes a cylindrical portion having an open end with the opposite end of said portion fixedly attached to rectangular base . The rectangular base has an annular resting surface which defines central aperture which is smaller in diameter than cylindrical portion . Aperture provides ventilation while surface provides a stop or rest for both socket and driven device within the socket.

As seen in automotive quality elastic bands as at are placed about the cylindrical portion so as to hold generally arcuate gripping pawls thereon. Pawls define arcuate channels that accommodate bands and prevent their escape from the pawls. Portion is shown in section in so that it can be easily distinguished from the bands. Normally each band will hold a set of two or more concentric arcuate pawls on cylindrical portion so as to retain the pawls in sets of complementary pawl slots as at and . The complimentary sets of slots and pawls are shown in . Teeth of the pawls engage tooth like elements on the outer periphery of socket when the socket is inserted in housing member . As with socket it is expected that the pawls will be fashioned of a high strength heat resistant non metallic material.

The various pawls and slots in may be regarded as being in a three by three array where apertures or slots and the associated pawls are in the first row of the array. Slots and their associated pawls are in the second row and slots and their associated pawls are in the third row. The three slots and pawls most distant from base are in the first column the next most distant slots and pawls are in the second column and the slots and pawls closest to base are in the third column. A given elastic band retains pawls of one column in slots of that column.

Pawls can be retained by bands or by a friction fit with their associated slots or by both means. Thus retained the pawls hold socket in housing member by means of pawl teeth which mesh with or grip the socket s two gear like annular regions and . Each of these regions comprises a multitude of teeth . Teeth have flat relatively more radially oriented faces alternating with relatively less radially oriented slopes . Annular regions and are separated by an annular groove . As desired for weight reduction or for cooling socket may be provided with apertures which may be cast injected or machined into the socket.

Positioned approximately 60 degrees apart within groove are adjustment holes . When socket is within housing member holes align with slots and in the second column in the array described above. Adjustment holes receive tools which turn socket within housing member about its own axis . Turning the socket clockwise moves device to tighten belt due to eccentricity of the socket s receiving aperture which holds the device. The tools used for turning the socket can be very simple such as a large screwdriver a pair of pliers or an elongated rod of about inch in diameter that will fit into adjustment holes .

As eccentric socket is turned clockwise with housing member one or more pawls ratchet on each tooth . When socket reaches a suitable position pawl teeth lock with teeth . In this position socket holds device in a placement that maintains belt tension. The pawls may be held in position not only by band but also by friction fit with the pawl slots. The pawls will friction fit within one or more pawl slots or or a combination of these. Ideally each of the gear like annular regions and will then be held in position by two or more pawls gripping teeth .

In practice not all the pawl slots will be filled by pawls. As little as two gripping pawls are all that is necessary to hold the socket in position as shown in . Some of the pawl slots can be left vacant to facilitate an immediate inspection of the sprocket . Likewise inspection can also be made of electrical or fluid connection elements s between device and engine block .

Additionally it may be preferable that the pawl teeth associated with one column not be angularly aligned with the socket teeth of another column. For example if the ratchet teeth are every 6 degrees and the pawl teeth are every 6 degrees the first column See paragraph 0021 will align the pawl teeth with ratchet teeth only every 6 degrees of rotation of the ratchet . If however the second column is offset by n 6 2 degrees n being an integer to determine the angular offset and the third column is offset by another 2 degrees the ratchet teeth will be engaged every 2 degrees by one or another of the three columns. Thus a three fold finer control of tension of the belts may be achieved.

Returning to the pertinent features of the driven device include a driven pulley having cooling means and a threaded mounting aperture bored within one or more lugs for the compatible receipt therein of a screw having complementary threading with aperture . Said screw can operate in combination with assorted locking devices and washers that are ordinarily employed to assemble driven devices in the automotive industry.

The main components of the cooling means of driven device include a fan and a plurality of cooling apertures or vents . At the rear of the driven device an electrical output connector element extends for mating with any compatible connector element. Typical connectors are a bayonet spade or coaxial connector that will connect to a complementary female acceptor coming from the engine block assembly. The connector mating is conventional and is not shown for simplicity within the drawings. Additionally the driven device could be a water pump which would require conventional fluid connectors.

I wish it understood that I do not desire to be limited to the exact details of construction or method shown herein since obvious modifications will occur to those skilled in the relevant arts without departing from the spirit and scope of the following claims.

