---

title: Supported molecular biofluid viscosity sensors for in vitro and in vivo use
abstract: A device and a method for measuring viscosity that includes attaching molecular rotors to a solid surface, exposing the solid surface to a fluid having a viscosity to be measured, and taking optical measurements to determine viscosity. The solid surface is preferably quartz, polystyrene or silicate glass, such as a fiber optic probe or a glass cuvette. The molecular rotors are of the type that includes an electron-donor group and electron-acceptor group that are linked by a single bond so that the groups may rotate with respect to one another, and that exhibit a fluorescence emission when rotation is hindered.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07670844&OS=07670844&RS=07670844
owner: La Jolla Bioengineering Institute
number: 07670844
owner_city: La Jolla
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050120
---
Pursuant to 35 U.S.C. 119 e this application is entitled to the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 537 679 filed Jan. 20 2004.

This invention was made with Government support under Contract Numbers NIH IR21 RR018399 NIH HL040696 and NIH HL062354 awarded by the National Institutes of Health. The Government has certain rights in the invention.

A field of the invention is biofluid analysis. Other exemplary fields of the invention include medical diagnosis medical test systems and medical laboratory processes.

Blood and blood plasma viscosity may become abnormal due to a variety of pathologic conditions. While the viscosity of full blood is primarily determined through hematocrit changes in viscosity are observed in conjunction with various diseases primarily those associated with altered protein levels. For example infection infarction hypertension or diabetes may alter plasma viscosity which in turn may complicate the condition. Protein induced hyperviscosity may lead to an elevated risk of atherosclerosis. Additionally one of the adverse effects of smoking is elevated plasma viscosity which may be the link between cigarette consumption and cardiovascular disease.

Non pathogenic conditions may also influence blood rheology including bed rest e.g. associated with prosthetic implants pregnancy and aging. Viscosity changes during the aging process may also be attributed to indirect effects such as age related changes in habits e.g. increased smoking or lack of exercise .

Accordingly using plasma viscosity as a diagnostic tool to allow early detection of diseases is advantageous. Even where there is no direct causal relationship between disease and plasma viscosity measurement of plasma viscosity nonetheless becomes a crucial element in sever hemorrhage when hemodilution leads to dramatically lowered hematocrit and plasma viscosity plays an important role. Blood expansion with high viscosity fluids enhances capillary perfusion and thus tissue oxygenation.

Accordingly for many related purposes including viscosity related research diagnosis of cardiovascular disease or monitoring of the blood resuscitation process a viscometer that is capable of fast serial measurement with low volumes is desirable. Mechanical devices for the measurement of fluid viscosity are presently available but they continue to pose disadvantages such as slow measurements lack of robustness the need for meticulous cleaning and susceptibility to operator errors. The most widely used conventional mechanical devices are the falling ball viscometers wherein the time required to produce a result usually measures from between 1 minute and 20 minutes which have high susceptibility toward uncleanliness and the occurrence of solid particles or air in the fluid flow resistance viscometers such as capillary or Oswald type viscometers which need high volumes of fluid and require measurement times in the order of minutes and cone and plate viscometers which have the same disadvantages of the flow resistance viscometers.

Additionally a class of molecules known as molecular rotors have been used to probe fluid viscosity in vitro. Molecular rotors are fluorescent molecules with a quantum yield that is dependent on the free volume and thus the viscosity of their environment. Molecular rotors form a twisted internal charge transfer TICT complex upon excitation. These molecules have a preferred de excitation pathway of internal conversion through rotation about a C C double bond. This internal rotation rate depends on the viscosity of the solvent leading to a viscosity dependent quantum yield. For example 9 2 2 dicyanovinyl julolidine DCVJ has been used to probe fluid viscosity in vitro by dissolving the DCVJ in a fluid having a viscosity to be measured and subsequently observing the fluorescence emission. However because the rotors are dissolved in the fluid to be observed the applications are limited to in vitro applications.

The instant invention is directed to viscosity sensors for both in vitro and in vivo applications and is more specifically directed to the use of molecular rotors disposed on a solid surface for use as a viscosity probe for in vivo applications as well as in vitro applications. In a particular embodiment of the invention a fiber optic tip has molecular rotors adhered to it. The tip may be shaped and sized for example to be inserted into animal or human vessels having a predetermined circumference. The fiber optic tip may form the end of an optical waveguide that can guide both excitation light and responsive emissions for viscosity testing. The responsive emissions are analyzed for example by a computer that determines viscosity values based upon the acquired responsive emissions.

Another embodiment of the invention includes adhering molecular rotors to one or more walls of a glass receptacle which may then be filled with a fluid having a viscosity to be measured. Measuring the fluorescence emission from the receptacle bound molecular rotors is indicative of viscosity.

Molecular rotors are fluorescent molecules with a quantum yield that is dependent on the free volume and thus the viscosity of their environment. Molecular rotors form a twisted internal charge transfer TICT complex upon excitation. These molecules have a preferred de excitation pathway of internal conversion through rotation about a C C double bond. This internal rotation rate depends on the viscosity of the solvent leading to a viscosity dependent quantum yield.

Molecular rotors have been successfully used to probe cell membrane viscosity and blood plasma viscosity in vitro. However measurement requires that a defined amount of the fluorescent dye the molecular rotor material be dissolved in a sample fluid at known concentrations. Variations in dye concentration different light absorption coefficients of the measured fluid as well as turbidity of the fluids needs to be compensated for. In addition a molecular rotor that needs to be dissolved in the fluid is precluded from in vivo measurements which prevents their use in viscosity analyses of biofluids such as blood plasma.

Embodiments of the invention provide for molecular rotors that are placed on a solid surface such as any glass or polymer substrate that may be pre functionalized e.g. quartz polystyrene or silicate glass to create a probe that may then be used for in vivo as well as in vitro viscosity measurements. Such a probe has virtually unlimited potential for viscosity measurement applications for example either in vivo or in vitro biofluid viscosity monitoring and measurement industrial viscosity monitoring e.g. in the food industry organic solvents aqueous solutions and aqueous colloid solutions e.g. the food and or soft drink industry .

For example in a first preferred embodiment molecular rotors are adhered to a fiber optic probe which may then be used as an in vivo probe of blood or biofluid viscosity via fluorescence intensity measurements. In a second preferred embodiment molecular rotors are adhered to one or more walls of a glass cuvette and once the cuvette is filled with a sample the viscosity of a boundary layer of the fluid in the cuvette can be measured via fluorescence intensity measurements. In both preferred embodiments the molecular rotors are covalently bound to the solid surface. Additionally while the invention contemplates inclusion of a virtually unlimited number of molecular rotors several exemplary molecular rotors will be shown and described.

A device for in vivo use is shown in which are schematic diagrams illustrating solid bound molecular rotors applied to a tip of a fiber optic probe fiber optic tip. The fiber optic probe designated generally at is preferably enclosed within a polymer coating or plastic cover except for a tip portion that is to be covered with molecular rotors and intended to be inserted into a blood vessel or other tube. The fiber optic probe is preferably coupled to a light proof encasing which houses a fiberoptic coupling device and a dichroic mirror . A photo multiplier tube is provided as is a pulsed light source . A longpass filter is also preferably provided. The tip is preferably etched in hydrofluoric acid to obtain a larger surface area and the rotors are attached according to . While immobilization may occur via any conventional method known in the art one possible immobilization process would briefly include the following steps 

 a etch a new tip on the fiber optic with hydrofluoric acid 40 solution approximately 4 hours total rinse in distilled water. Peel away the polymer coating to expose the tip using a razor blade and remove the cladding.

 c sonicate tip for 6 to 8 minutes in 5 solution v v of 3 aminopropyl triethoxysilane ABS from Signam cat no. A 3646 in absolute ethanol.

 e prepare working solution of 9 2 carboxy 2 cyanovinyl julolidine NHS CCVJ NHS in 50 MM sodium bicarbonate solution pH 8.5 the final concentration of dye is 0.1 g l with 10 DMSO present.

 f incubate the tip of the fiber optic in the working solution of CCVJ NHS for at least 1 hour. Sonicate in DMSO to remove excess dye.

The tip may be catheterized and inserted into blood vessels in vivo. Due to the low incidence angle excitation light is refracted out of the tip and problems with reflected or scattered incident light are expected to be minimized. Additionally a pulsed light source in combination with gated signal acquisition will be used to reduce influences of environmental light. Thus a patient with a probe inserted does not need to stay in a low light environment. The tip is also preferably autoclaved for sterility.

Fluorescent molecular rotors belong to the group of twisted intramolecular charge transfer complexes that possess free rotary vinyl groups in their molecules. Each molecular rotor is composed of two subgroups which include an electron donor group and an electron acceptor group. Both groups are linked by at least one single bond so that the two groups are able to rotate freely against each other. Photoexcitation leads to an electron transfer from a donor group to an acceptor group. Relaxation can either occur through radiation fluorescence or intramolecular rotation thermally induced nonfluorescent relaxation . The preferred relaxation mechanism intramolecular rotation is reduced in solvents with low free volume. Therefore the quantum yield of a molecular rotor increases with decreasing free volume of the solvent. Free volume and viscosity are related which links quantum yield directly to the viscosity of the microenvironment. The relationship between fluorescence quantum yield and the viscosity of the solvent has been derived analytically and experimentally and is known as the F rster Hoffmann equation log C log 

Thus a virtually unlimited number of molecular rotors may be used in conjunction with the instant invention. For example several exemplary acceptor groups include any motif that contains an OH CN COOH or its carboxylic esters and amides such as esters of n ethylene glycol attached to a vinyl C C while several exemplary donor groups include an N atom that is not bound in a cyano CN manner such as julolidine and amino benzenes. The opened structures and the three julolidine rings are especially advantageous.

For the instant embodiment as well as additional embodiments discussed herein it is anticipated that derivation of quantum yield may be obtained via both lifetime measurement as well as continuous wave fluorescence. As illustrated by the F rster Hoffmann equation viscosity and quantum yield are related so measurement of quantum yield is desirable. In addition to being proportional to quantum yield emission intensity also depends on excited state lifetime from which quantum yield may be computed. Thus using advanced instrumentation capable of lifetime measurement quantum yield may be measured via lifetime analysis as well as via continuous wave fluorescence.

Specific exemplary molecules that may act as molecular rotors are illustrated in which are respectively 9 2 carboxy 2 cyanovinyl julolidine CCVJ 9 2 carboxy 2 cyanovinyl julolidine triethyleneglycol ester CCJV TEG 2 Cyano 3 4 dimethylamino phenyl acrylic acid methyl ester DMCJ 2 Cyano 3 4 dibutylamino phenyl acrylic acid methyl ester SC1 20A 2 Cyano 3 4 diethylamino phenyl acrylic acid methyl ester SC1 40B 2 Cyano 3 4 diethylamino 2 pentyloxy phenyl acrylic acid methyl ester SC1 30B 2 Cyano 3 2 cyclohexylmethoxy 4 diethylamino phenyl acrylic acid methyl ester SC1 31B and 9 2 2 dicyanovinyl julolidine DCVJ .

In an exemplary probe of the invention a solid surface e.g. quartz glass or polystyrene is activated and reacts with 8 2 carboxy 2 cyanovinyl julolidine N succimidyl ester. Thus the rotors are covalently linked to the surface. In general the invention is directed to molecular rotors bonded upon a surface that can be placed in a biofluid. Some particular applications will now be discussed to illustrate additional aspects and variations of the invention.

Preparation of the preferred fiber optic tip may be based on commercially available polymeric supports frequently employed in combinatorial chemistry. Polystyrene based polymers such as compound in for example contain a reactive amine functionality which may be used to graft the molecular rotor. The attachment may be performed using the succinimide derivative of the rotor of choice as the coupling reagent. The general coupling strategy to afford the molecular viscometer is also illustrated in .

While the invention contemplates use of any solid bound rotor having a polar group exemplary rotors include solid bound polar rotors having one of the structures illustrated in where R2 is one of a COOH OH CHO CH and O CHOH CHOH and could be adhered to a fiber optic tip or other solid surface. In this application a catheterized fiber optic probe would be inserted into a subject blood vessel acquiring shear data at the site of insertion. For example when inserted into the ventricles of the heart or at arterial bifurcations shear data would be collected at those sites.

R1 would preferably be used as a reference moiety wherein one R1 group is preferably fluorescent but not viscosity sensitive. Intensity could be accurately calibrated by computing a ratio of rotor fluorescence to a reference fluorescence.

While it is contemplated that the invention may be used with receptacles such as glass or polymer tubes or microchannels another preferred embodiment of the invention uses a glass cuvette wherein one or more walls of a glass cuvette are covered with rotor molecules. As with the fiber optic probe preparation of the glass cuvette and subsequent attachment of the molecular rotor s on the glass could be achieved on prefunctionalized silicate glass as illustrated in .

The viscosity of the boundary layer of any fluid in the cuvette can be measured using the principle of operation of a solid bound molecular viscometer. Since the light path does not cross the fluid it becomes independent of turbidity. While it is contemplated that as many as four walls of the cuvette may be treated for exemplary purposes the second preferred embodiment will be shown and described as having a single treated wall. For example where one wall of a cuvette is treated the cuvette will include one viscosity sensitive wall. The fluid to be measured will then be filled into the cuvette and the fluorescence intensity measured. The measurement options are a comparative measurement to determine absolute viscosity using standard fluids and b timecourse measurement to determine viscosity changes over time.

More particularly illustrates the principle of the molecular viscometer designated generally at based on solid bound probes in a cuvette . One wall of the glass or polystyrene cuvette is covered with molecular rotors. The liquid to be measured will be filled into this cuvette . Excitation light is provided either by an excitation light source such as mercury arc lamp by a diode laser or by an array of high intensity blue light emitting diodes LED . The relatively broad spectrum of these LEDs will be cut off at 475 nm and above by an excitation filter . An emission filter is preferably a 10 nm bandwidth filter which allows only the emission spectrum of the rotor to pass. An emission detector such as a photomultiplier tube PMT or an avalanche photodiode APD amplifies the emission signal and feeds it into a computerized recording device not shown . Optionally an absorption filter and collimating optics may be provided as may be an absorption detector photodiode . The entire fluorescence group LED array cuvette PMT both filters is housed in a light proof cabinet which may also be kept at a constant temperature. The advantage of emission LEDs over a mercury lamp lies in the fact that the energy consumption is low which allows them to be battery driven. Since the PMT also has a lower power consumption the entire device may be designed to be transportable and fed by rechargeable batteries.

Alternatively a beamsplitter assembly is used to couple excitation light into the fiber and to collect emission light. A dichroic mirror is used to direct blue light from a light source onto the dichroic mirror and to reflect the blue light into the fiber. At a tip of the fiber the excitation evanescent wave excites the rotors attached to the surface of the tip. As the emission light which is the non reflecting wavelength of the dichroic mirror exits the fiber inside the measurement device it passes the dichroic mirror. Scattered or otherwise leaked excitation light is further filtered with a filter positioned in front of the detector photomultiplier tube or PMT . The detector then quantitatively determines emission intensity.

Both viscosity sensitive glass surfaces and rotor covered fiber optic probes will have a wide range of applications in viscosity measurement relative and viscosity monitoring in the chemical and processing industry with the emphasis on fast read outs and real time measurements. There is a high demand for real time viscometry in the biological and medical disciplines specifically blood resuscitation medicine and for clinical research as well. This is particularly valid for the in vivo probe of the invention. The use of disposable elements disposable tips disposable cuvettes promotes the ease and simplicity of the application.

Glass surfaces have been covered with molecular rotors and measurements performed. A distinct emission peak matching that of free molecular rotors indicates the presence of covalently bound rotors on the surface. This fluorescence is resistant against different solvents water various alcohols . The glass slide exhibits this fluorescence when immersed in water. The presence of dextran in water increases the intensity of the emission peak as illustrated in which are graph illustrating two representative CCVJ spectra in low viscosity and high viscosity fluid 4 mPa s and 13.35 mPa s respectively with the fluorescein spectrum dashed line as a control. Specifically Thorlabs multimode fibers 600 m core were etched in hydrofluoric acid at room temperature for 30 minutes to form tapered tips. Aminopropyl trioxysilane APS was then used to activate the exposed surface. CCVJ N hydroxysuccinimidyl ester was brought to react with the APS coated surface to form a covalent bond thus immobilizing CCVJ to the glass surface of the fiberoptic tips. Using the same reaction fluorescein was immobilized on different fibers to serve as non rotor control. Epifluorescent microscopic examination clearly showed green fluorescence emitted from the rotor coated tip. Both tips fluorescein and CCVJ were then exposed to water dextran solutions of different concentration. Emission spectra were acquired and the peak intensity was related to the viscosity of the dextran solutions in a double logarithmic fashion to verify that emission intensity follows Equation 1 log C log 

From the plot of log intensity over log viscosity it can clearly be seen that CCVJ emission intensity closely follows the F rster Hoffmann relationship while fluorescein does not show significant changes of intensity with viscosity. Thus it is clear that immobilized molecular rotors retain their viscosity sensitivity and the value of solid state fluorescent biosensors with molecular rotors linked to fiberoptics is evident.

Reagents obtained as follows Fresh frozen human plasma was obtained from Interstate Blood Bank INC. CCVJ from Helix Research and CCVJ TEG was synthesized. Fluoroscopy grade dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO was obtained from Sigma Pentaspan 10 pentastarch in 0.9 NaCl avg. MW 260 000 from B. Braun Hetastarch 6 in 0.9 NaCl avg. MW 670 000 from Abbott Laboratories. Dextran 80 000 average MW from Sigma was used to prepare 5 solution in physiologic saline. Fluorescence spectroscopy was performed with samples in 4 mL clear methacrylate cuvettes using Spex Fluoromax 3. Absorbance measurements were made with a Beckman DU 520 spectrophotometer. Indices of refraction were taken with ATAGO R 5000 hand refractometer.

Fresh frozen plasma was thawed prior to use then centrifuged at 180 g for 15 minutes and filtered through 75 mm 0.22 m SFCA filter to remove cryoprecipitate. Post processing protein concentration was determined by refractometry and confirmed by Lowry method. Crystalline dye was dissolved in DMSO to make 20 mM stock solutions of CCVJ and CCVJ TEG. Sample viscosity was modulated by varying the amount of unstained plasma mixed with the starch plasma expanders dextran hetastarch and pentastarch. Plasma prestained with CCVJ or CCVJ TEG 67 M was added in equal amounts to samples to minimize mixing errors. Final sample dye concentration was 13.3 M. Three milliliters of each sample were transferred to 4 ml cuvettes and capped. All measurements were performed at room temperature 24 C. .

Calibration sets consisting of 5 different viscosities and 5 replicates each were made according to . A test set of 5 plasma pentastarch mixtures with different viscosity values than the calibration set was made separately with 3 replicates each.

Physical viscosity measurements for plasma mixtures were made with Brookfield DV III cone plate viscometer with CPE 40 spindle. Samples of 0.5 ml were measured at discrete shear rates 150 300 450 600 and 750 s 20 40 60 80 and 100 rpm in ramp up ramp down series. Viscosity measurements were taken at 80 rpm 600 s 1 . This shear rate was chosen to remain within instrument accuracy limits and to reduce any apparent non Newtonian effects on results. While noticeable instrument fluctuations as well as apparent shear thinning effects existed at shear rates of 300 sand below no visible influence of shear rate on measured viscosity existed at 450 sand above. Reference viscosity 0ref was computed for each plasma plasma expander combination using Eq. 1 

The fluorescence emission intensity of each sample was measured from 470 530 nm at excitation wavelength of 440 nm for CCVJ and 460 nm for CCVJ TEG. Excitation and emission slits were 2 nm with integration time of 0.5 s. Peak intensity per sample was computed by averaging the emission intensity in a 5 nm window centered on the emission peak. Using the known relationship between viscosity and quantum yield of a molecular rotor Equation 2 log C log which was solved for which yielded the fluorescence based vicsosity as in Equation 3 l

The constant 10relates quantum yield and dye concentration and l describes the viscosity sensitivity of the molecular rotor. Constants and were determined from linear regression of log intensity over log viscosity for each plasma expander calibration set. Deviation d of from was computed using the following Equation 4 

Fluorescence intensities of the test set samples were measured in the same manner as the calibration set. For each sample was computed according to Eq. 3 using the constants and derived from the calibration set of plasma and pentastarch mixtures. The cone plate rheometer was also used to measure sample viscosities. Deviation from was calculated for both and rheometer results using Eq. 4.

Absorption measurements at 440 nm and 490 nm were used to normalize dye concentration between calibration set and individual test samples. A standard concentration factor was determined from the calibration set by linear regression of absorbance at 440 nm A versus absorbance at 490 nm A where the slope is related to plasma absorbance and the intercept is directly related to dye concentration. A normalization factor was calculated for each sample according to Equation 5 

Physical viscosity values of human blood plasma at the shear rates used are represented in with standard deviation shown by error bars. Deviation is lower and non Newtonian behavior is minimal at higher shear rates. Viscosity curves for plasma hetastarch mixtures are shown in and are typical of all plasma plasma expander mixtures. Deviations between viscosity measurements at 60 rpm and 100 rpm were less than 4 for plasma hetastarch mixtures 8 for plasma dextran mixtures and 5 for plasma pentastarch mixtures. Highest viscosity solution exceeded instrument limits at 750 s.

Indices of refraction varied from 1.349 for pure plasma to 1.348 for pentastarch solution. According to Lakowicz the correction factor is where is the refractive index of the sample and is the refractive index of air. This would lead to a difference of less than 0.15 of fluorescence intensity values between plasma and pentastarch solution. The influence of refractive index change was neglected in spectroscopic measurements.

Both CCVJ and CCVJ TEG dissolved completely in the plasma mixtures. Plasma autofluorescence did not significantly affect fluorescence measurements at the dye concentration used in this study. Average wavelength of peak emission was 476 nm for CCVJ and 498 nm for CCVJ TEG at excitation wavelength of 440 nm and 460 nm respectively with less than 5 nm deviation. shows the comparison of log CCVJ fluorescence intensity to log plasma hetastarch viscosity. Similar results were obtained for CCVJ and CCVJ TEG in other plasma plasma expander mixtures.

For the test set viscosity determined by fluorescence of dissolved CCVJ in plasma pentastarch mixtures was compared with values of as determined by Eq. 1 for the plasma pentastarch calibration set . Maximum deviation for physical viscosity measurements using the cone plate rheometer was 7.6 . Maximum deviation of 0F was less than 6 .

While various embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described it should be understood that other modifications substitutions and alternatives are apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. Such modifications substitutions and alternatives can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention which should be determined from the appended claims.

