---

title: Parallel, individually addressable probes for nanolithography
abstract: A microfabricated probe array for nanolithography and process for designing and fabricating the probe array. The probe array consists of individual probes that can be moved independently using thermal bimetallic actuation or electrostatic actuation methods. The probe array can be used to produce traces of diffusively transferred chemicals on the substrate with sub-1 micrometer resolution, and can function as an arrayed scanning probe microscope for subsequent reading and variation of transferred patterns.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07402849&OS=07402849&RS=07402849
owner: The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
number: 07402849
owner_city: Urbana
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050307
---
This is a continuation of application Ser. No. 10 647 724 filed Aug. 25 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 867 443 which is a continuation of application Ser. No. 10 008 719 filed Dec. 7 2001 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 642 129 which claims priority of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 307 976 filed Jul. 26 2001.

This invention was made with United States Government assistance through Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency DARPA Contract No. DAAD19 00 1 0414. The Government has certain rights in this invention.

The present invention relates generally to the art of efficient and high speed generation of fine surface patterns made of chemical resists or biological substances using micromachined or microfabricated probes.

High throughput lithography and surface patterning with extremely fine linewidths e.g. on the order of 10 100 nm are very important for the future growth of the microelectronics industry and nanotechnology. Next generation integrated circuit technology will inevitably call for efficient and low cost generation of features with a sub 100 nm linewidth. The emerging field of nanotechnology also requires patterning and functionalization of surfaces with a spatial resolution that is comparable with the scale of the molecules and cells that need to be manipulated and modified.

The resolution of conventional projection optical lithographic systems still the most widely used in the microelectronics industry is limited by optical diffraction. The resolution can be improved by using beam based direct writing tools with high energy and short wavelengths. High energy beam lines including ones that rely on electron beams and X rays are being used. However such direct write lithography systems suffer from several drawbacks. First such systems are invariably complex and expensive. Second these lithographic tools operate with a single beam and produce patterns in a serial manner resulting in low throughput. Third conventional high resolution lithography systems are not capable of depositing patterns made of biological molecules or chemical compounds. Only special chemical resists may be used.

Dip pen Nanolithography DPN is a new and recently introduced method of scanning probe nanolithography. A description of DPN is contained in PCT US00 00319 the entirety of which is incorporated herein by reference. It functions by depositing nanoscale patterns on surfaces using the diffusion of a chemical species from a scanning probe tip to the surface sometimes via a water meniscus that naturally forms between tip and sample under ambient conditions. As a DPN tip is scanned across the surface of a substrate molecules on the surface of the tip are transported through the water meniscus that forms between the tip and the substrate surface. Once on the surface the molecules chemically anchor themselves to the substrate forming robust patterns. Features in the 10 nm to many micrometer range can be fabricated with commercially available silicon nitride tips. One factor that influences the linewidth of DPN writing is the linear speed of the tip. Smaller linewidths are achieved with faster tip speeds. Other factors that influence the linewidth include the sharpness of the DPN tip and the diffusion constants of the molecules used as inks.

DPN offers a number of unique benefits including direct writing capability high resolution 10 nm linewidth resolution ultimate 5 nm spatial resolution ultrahigh nanostructure registration capabilities the flexibility to employ a variety of molecules for writing compounds including biomolecules and writing substrates such as Au SiO and GaAs the ability to integrate multiple chemical or biochemical functionalities on a single nano chip a one layer process for patterning and the ability to automate patterning using customized software.

DPN technology can be implemented using a low cost commercial scanning probe microscope SPM instrument. In a typical setup the DPN probe chip is mounted on an SPM scanner tube in a manner similar to commercially available SPM tips. Precise horizontal and vertical movement of the probes is attained by using the internal laser signal feedback control system of the SPM machine.

The present invention provides nanolithography such as Dip Pen Nanolithography as well as nanoscale imaging with individually addressable probes in dip pen arrays. A probe array having a plurality of active probes is provided which allows greater functionality than in conventional single pen DPN by allowing independent actuation of individual probes through supplying current or voltage to an actuator coupled with the probe. A plurality of independently addressable probes produces a plurality of traces of same or different chemicals.

An apparatus is provided for applying at least one patterning compound to a substrate for nanolithography. The apparatus includes an array of parallel probes each probe including a cantilever a tip at a distal end of the cantilever for applying one of the at least one patterning compound to the substrate and an actuator operatively coupled to the cantilever. The probes may be configured for Dip Pen Nanolithography. The actuator is designed to be responsive to an applied current or voltage to move the cantilever and thus move the tip away from the substrate. The contact state between individual probe tips and the writing substrate can thus be independently controlled. In the case of DPN writing the patterning process is suspended when the probe tip leaves the substrate. A number of preferred types of embodiments are disclosed. Methods are also provided for fabricating active probe arrays.

In one preferred type of embodiment of the invention the actuator deflects the cantilever in response to applied electrical current to move the tip relative to the substrate. The actuator may be thermally operated.

According to a preferred embodiment a thermal actuator includes a resistive heater connected to the cantilever and a wire connecting the resistive heater to a current source. When a current is applied through the resistive heater heat is generated due to ohmic heating thus raising the temperature of the resistor as well as the cantilever. Due to difference in the thermal expansion coefficient of the materials for the cantilever and for the metal resistor the cantilever will be bent selectively in response to the applied current. A patch of thin metal film can be connected to the cantilever for enhancing the extent of thermal bending.

In a second type of preferred embodiment of the invention the actuator deflects the cantilever in response to applied voltage. The actuator may be electrostatically operated. Preferred displacement is created by applying a voltage differential between two electrodes at least one of them being not stationary.

A preferred embodiment of an electrostatic actuator includes a paddle electrode formed at an inner end of the cantilever opposite to the tip and a counter electrode. The paddle electrode faces the counter electrode with a gap having a predefined gap spacing. When a differential electrical voltage is applied across the top electrode and the counter electrode the resultant electrostatic attraction force bends the cantilever beam and therefore moves the tip positions.

A preferred type of method of the current invention provides a method for applying at least one patterning compound to a substrate for high speed probe based nanolithography. The method includes the steps of providing an array of individually addressable probes each probe having a tip on a distal end coating tips with same or different chemical substances positioning the tips of the array of individually addressable probes over the substrate so that the tips are in contact with the substrate raster scanning the probes over the substrate surface and selectively actuating at least one selected probe from the array of probes to move the tip of the selected probe away from the substrate. Accordingly the selected probe does not apply patterning compound to the substrate when selected while the non selected probes apply at least one patterning compound to the substrate. Arbitrary two dimensional patterns can be produced by raster scanning the chip that contains the arrayed probes while controlling the position of individual probes during the scanning process. The probes may be configured for Dip Pen Nanolithography. The probes can also be generally applied to other nanolithography techniques where the interaction between a tip and a substrate alters the electrical chemical or molecular state of the surface and may be used for imaging.

According to a preferred method of the present invention the step of selectively actuating at least one selected probe includes the step of applying a current to a resistive heater connected to the cantilever so that the cantilever beam is flexed. The deflection of the cantilever moves the tip away from the substrate to suspend writing on the substrate.

According to another preferred method of the present invention the step of selectively actuating an individual probe includes applying a differential electrical voltage across a counter electrode and a moving electrode connected to an end of the selected probe. In this way the moving and counter electrodes are moved towards one another preferably to deflect the cantilever of the probe and move the tip away from the substrate.

Generally speaking the present invention provides active probes and active probe arrays which are designed to achieve direct write nanolithography such as DPN. Devices according to the present invention can generate sub 100 nm patterns in a high speed parallel and controllable fashion. The active probe arrays offer greater functionality by allowing actuation of individual probes through supplying current or voltage to an actuator of the probe. The present invention is primarily directed to methods and devices for parallel DPN using active probe arrays and methods for fabricating active probes and active probe arrays.

The active probe array can also be used for other existing or future surface patterning and lithography methods based on the scanning probe microscope SPM instrument family. An atomic force microscope AFM is considered a member of the SPM instrument family. Examples of such lithography systems include local thermal oxidation and displacement lithography.

Referring now to an example of a conventional DPN process is shown. DPN employs a tip 20 on a distal end of a cantilever of an AFM probe or other SPM probe to deposit or write nanoscale patterns onto a solid writing substrate such as gold. The tip applies a patterning compound coated on the tip to the writing substrate . The patterning compound may be a hydrophobic patterning compound with a chemical affinity for the writing substrate such as but not limited to 1 octadecanethiol ODT or mercaptohexadecanoic acid MHA .

Similar to traditional macroscopic dip pens e.g. quill fountain or ball point pens or multi pen plotters DPN employs molecular capillary transport to transfer the patterning compound from the tip to the writing substrate forming a pattern of the patterning compound. A water meniscus forms between the tip and the writing substrate due to relative humidity in a work area and carries the patterning compound from the tip to the writing substrate as the tip is moved relatively to the writing substrate in the direction of the writing W as indicated on .

Initial DPN processes involved a single probe pen . Parallel patterns also have been realized using an array of up to eight commercial probes with an inter probe spacing of 1.4 mm to write a plurality of patterns on the writing substrate . This technique also allows application of multiple patterns where each pattern contains a different patterning compound such as a biocompound. Parallel writing is also useful for example to form patterns during integrated circuit formation. Examples of parallel probe structures can be found in R. Piner et al. Dip Pen Nanolithography 1999 v. 283 pp. 661 663 S. Hong et al. Multiple Ink Nanolithography Toward a Multiple Pen Nano Plotter 1999 v. 286 pp. 523 525 S. Hong et al. A Nanoplotter with Both Parallel and Serial Writing Capabilities 288 pp. 1808 1811.

Conventional parallel probe DPN processes are performed using commercially available AFM probes . Individual probes cannot be moved independently from one another. Hence all probes must move simultaneously. Also the inter probe spacing of current parallel DPN arrays is too large for certain DPN applications and cannot fully satisfy the needs for a high throughput and high density arrayed DPN writing system. The present invention provides a nanoplotter with an array of independently active microfabricated closely spaced DPN probes.

As the tips of the active probes are in contact with the writing substrate an integrated actuator controlled by a connected auxiliary control circuit directs individual movement of the tips preferably while the probe chip is raster scanned along the substrate for patterning. The location of the integrated actuator indicated in is illustrative and other actuator locations are contemplated. The term in contact is intended to refer to a sufficient proximity between the tips and the substrate to allow patterning of the patterning compound . When supplied with current or voltage from the control unit via the probe chip the actuator moves a cantilever of the active probe to lift the tip at an end of the cantilever off the writing substrate . This suspends the chemical deposition process. In this way the active probe can be individually controlled through selective application of current or voltage to create arbitrary patterns with high throughput.

The material of the cantilever beam in the thermally actuated probes preferably is silicon nitride thin film formed by low pressure chemical vapor deposition methods LPCVD . According to a preferred type of method of the present invention the thermally actuated probes are formed by creating silicon nitride probes that include a thermal actuator having at least a resistive heater .

In operation the thermally actuated probes in response to an applied current bend along their length to move the tip as shown in due to differential thermal expansion of the metal for resistive heater and optional patch and the cantilever of the thermally actuated probe. In a preferred method of operation the control circuit sends a current through the bonding wire to the resistive heater to bend the thermally actuated probe into a circular arc of radius R due to differential thermal expansion of the silicon nitride cantilever and the gold patch .

In the thermally actuated probe the bending of the cantilever beam results in a deflection of the tip of 

Accordingly application of current I through selected bonding wires causes the cantilever of the thermally actuated probes connected to the bonding wires to deflect upwardly and thus move the tip as shown in

The throughput of probe based nanolithography can be made very high when a large number of active probes in parallel are integrated on the probe chip . The thermally actuated probe array manufactured according to the preferred type of embodiment of the present invention described above results in a compact nanoplotter with high probe densities spaced 100 m on center and integrated sharp tips and may be used for nanolithography and AFM imaging.

According to another preferred type of embodiment of the present invention an electrostatically actuated probe shown in a preferred type embodiment in is provided. Preferably the probe is formed as a unit of an electrostatic probe array shown in a preferred embodiment in in combination with the probe chip .

As shown in the electrostatically actuated probe includes an electrostatic actuator which may include a paddle shaped plate at the inner longitudinal end of the cantilever longitudinally opposite to the tip . The paddle shaped plate is preferably integrally formed with the electrostatically actuated probe . The electrostatic actuator further includes a counter electrode which is preferably stationary and may be formed on the probe chip for electrostatically interacting with the paddle shaped plate . The counter electrode may be formed as part of a parallel array of electrodes electrically connected to a number of bonding pads longitudinally opposed to the counter electrodes and both are patterned adhered or otherwise formed or attached to a glass substrate which in the completed embodiment covers the array of counter electrodes and connecting bonding pads. The bonding pads are preferably electrically connected to the control circuit for selectively applying a voltage to one or more of the bonding pads. Methods for manufacturing the glass layer including the counter electrodes and the bonding pads will be apparent to those in the art.

It is preferred that the electrostatically actuated probe is also supported at or near the midpoint of the cantilever by a compact soft spring for providing torsion support to the electrostatically actuated probe allowing deflection and thus angular motion of the probes for moving the tips of the probes. As shown in the spring for each of the array of electrostatically actuated probes is preferably a section of a unitary piece such as a twist beam laterally extending through each individual probe. It is further preferred that each section of the spring have a relatively small cross section along the longitudinal direction of the cantilever . As one in the art will appreciate dimensions of the spring such as the cross sectional area can be varied depending on boundary conditions to control the angular flexibility of the cantilever .

A preferred method of fabrication of the electrostatically actuated probe is shown in . Referring first to a silicon dioxide layer is grown on a front side of a three layered wafer containing a heavily boron doped silicon layer sandwiched between a oriented silicon wafer and an epitaxial oriented silicon layer . Alternatively the silicon layer may be doped by phosphorous. The silicon dioxide layer defines boundaries of a mask for forming the tip . Furthermore the silicon dioxide layer can define boundaries for forming a spacer which vertically separates the electrostatically actuated probe from the counter electrode which is patterned on a separate glass substrate . In the silicon tip and the spacer are formed from the epitaxial silicon wafer by EDP etching. Next as shown in a thermal oxide layer is grown over the epitaxial silicon wafer including the tip the spacer and the boron doped silicon layer to protect the front side during the final release. As shown in the silicon wafer is then etched by EDP to remove material underneath the boron doped silicon layer and release the boron doped silicon cantilever .

Next as shown in the thermal oxide layer is removed and the electrostatically actuated probes are formed from the boron doped silicon layer including preferably integrally the cantilever the soft spring and the paddle shaped plate for each probe in the array. As shown in the portion of the cantilever longitudinally disposed between the paddle shaped plate and the soft spring is preferably wider in cross sectional area along the lateral direction i.e. in the direction of the length of the soft spring than the distal portion of the cantilever. In this way the deflection of the tip is greater because the bending torque is fully transferred to the support spring . The electrostatically actuated probe is released.

Finally as shown in the layer of glass and the connected counter electrode are formed or placed over the spacer .

The preferred fabrication method results in electrostatically actuated probes having a sharp tip preferably 

Bonding wires not shown in preferably connect the paddle shaped plate to ground potential while the counter electrode is preferably electrically coupled to the control circuit via bonding pads for applying voltage to the counter electrode. It will be appreciated that the electric potentials of the paddle shaped plate and the counter electrode may alternatively be reversed i.e. the paddle shaped plate may be coupled to a voltage source while the counter electrode may be grounded. The modifications necessary for such an alternative embodiment will be understood by those in the art.

In a preferred method of operation voltage is applied to the paddle shaped plate to apply potential to the paddle shaped plate while the conductive counter electrode is grounded. Again alternatively the voltage application and grounding functions could be reversed between the top electrode and the paddle shaped plate . Either operation applies a differential electrical voltage across the top electrode and the paddle shaped plate which are preferably separated by the spacer . An attractive force develops between the plates of the counter electrode and the paddle shaped plate that pulls them toward each other thus tilting the cantilever and preferably angularly deflecting the cantilever about the soft spring to move the tip away from the substrate . As in the thermally actuated probes the tip can thus be selectively lifted to suspend the writing or imaging process.

A number of preferred embodiments have been described for active one dimensional arrays. However arrays are possible in two dimensions as well. shows a two dimensional array according to another preferred embodiment of the present invention. The two dimensional array shown in includes six rows and five columns of downwardly angled probes . The downwardly angled probes may be produced by for example modifying the formation process for the thermally actuated probe array to extend cantilevers of individual thermally actuated probes from cavities replicated cells that are preferably evenly disposed along the two dimensional array . The thermally actuated probes are preferably integrated into the two dimensional array due to a shorter required length for each cantilever . The methods for modifying steps of fabrication and operation for the thermally actuated probes in the two dimensional array will be understood by those in the art.

One skilled in the art can appreciate that several inventive devices and methods for DPN arrays have been shown and described which have various attributes and advantages. By configuring each probe to be individually addressed and actuated by application of current or voltage either thermally or electrostatically the active probe arrays according to embodiments of the present invention allow the formation of arbitrary patterns with added resolution at throughput comparable to conventional methods.

While various embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described it should be understood that other modifications substitutions and alternatives are apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. Such modifications substitutions and alternatives can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention which should be determined from the appended claims.

