---

title: Method and system for generating an echocardiogram report
abstract: An echocardiogram report generation method and system are disclosed for creating a complete medical report describing an echocardiogram without dictation, transcription or typing. The report is tailored to describe an individual patient and generated in complete grammatically complex sentences in response to the user's input with a text report that is complete and understandable for a primary care physician. The method and system provides the user the parallel options of an anatomical structure approach and a disease-specific approach in order to amplify the description of the echocardiogram in specific areas and give a more meaningful report. The echo report generated by the method and system creates a table of measurements and calculations in compact form, omitting any data fields not used. The method and system guides the user through the various areas of the heart which merit comment on the report and provides clear color coded segments of the heart muscle and provides several heart segment classifications so that the user can use his favored classification scheme. Diagnostic possibilities are provided for inclusion in the report conclusions.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07822627&OS=07822627&RS=07822627
owner: 
number: 07822627
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050502
---
The present invention relates to a computer software product for generation of a medical report. More particularly the present invention is related to the generation of a medical report describing an echocardiogram.

The echocardiogram is a well known diagnostic procedure that uses ultrasound to take moving pictures of the heart. It is estimated that there are over ten million echocardiograms performed annually in the United States. Among other things the echocardiogram allows measurements of the chambers of the heart and the appearance and motion of the heart. A large amount of detailed information must be reviewed and evaluated by the interpreting physician sometimes called an echocardiographer. Echocardiogram reports hereinafter echo reports are typically arranged by the different anatomical structures in the heart such as chambers or valves. On the basis of this anatomical structure approach the echocardiographer may identify a particular condition. The echo report is then dictated or hand written before being typed and returned to the interpreting physician for review and signature. Only then is the echo report which must be complete and understandable sent to the primary care physician who ordered the report. Aside from the loss of time and money in this process the echocardiographer must review and approve a report without the benefit of the echocardiogram images in front of him for review.

In addition to the large amount of information that must be reviewed and evaluated by the echocardiographer there are differences in opinion among echocardiographers as to the number of segments appropriate for classification of the heart muscle. For example some use a sixteen segment classification and others use a fifteen segment classification.

Aside from differences in preferred classification of the heart muscle segments the number of measurements actually taken on a particular patient is usually less than the possible number of measurements. It is also true that some areas of the heart cannot be visualized well in every patient. What this means is that many data fields may be empty and make a report longer than necessary and require additional time on the part of the evaluation physician to dictate an explanation for the missing items.

Although there have been attempts to generate echo reports by computer software there is a need for a method or system that allows the user having identified a specific condition by an anatomical based approach to cross reference and compare other options by a condition or disease based approach. Likewise there is a need for a method or system which gives the user the ability to create an echo report with minimal interaction and to edit the elements of the report as selections are made or to generate a report in grammatically correct sentences that is complete and understandable for the primary care physician.

What is also needed is a method or system that can quickly and easily guide the user through the various areas of the heart with color coded diagrams of the various segments of the heart which merit comment on the report. Likewise what is needed is a method or system that can be easily installed in a doctor s personal computer PC or laptop and is suitable for both general cardiologists and echocardiographers.

The present invention is directed to a computer readable storage method and system allowing a physician to create a complete and well organized medical report describing an echocardiogram an echo report without dictation transcription or typing. The inventive method and system quickly and easily guides the doctor through the various areas of the heart which merit comment on the echo report. The inventive method and system allows the physician to create an echo report with minimal interaction and without the need to enter any measurements. However any measurements entered by the technician can be corrected by the physician if needed.

The inventive method and system provides clear color coded diagrams of the various named segments of the heart muscle. As there is a lack of unanimity among echocardiographers as to whether a fifteen segment classification or a sixteen segment classification is preferable this invention provides each as well as a third classification so the user can choose whichever classification scheme is desired.

In addition to the standard anatomical based approach by which traditional echo reports are structured the inventive method and system provides a parallel disease or condition specific section with a separate set of tabbed pages or interfaces each devoted to a specific disease entity. Thus the user having identified the presence of a certain condition by a standard anatomical based approach may if desired shift to a specific disease oriented page and be presented with a set of options reminding the user of all of the various possible echo findings in that disease. This gives the user the option to amplify the description of the echo in certain specific areas and give a more meaningful echo report

The inventive method and system provides a list of normal values for certain measurements of artificial heart valve functions important to the interpretation of artificial heart valve echo studies and also provides diagrammatic prompts to aid in the interpretation of certain Doppler echo measurements that are infrequently made but important in certain cases.

The inventive method and system collects diagnostic possibilities based on the descriptive choices made by the user and presents a list of these diagnoses which list can be amended from a predetermined list of common cardiac conditions or with free text additions. ICD 9 codes for each diagnosis are added automatically eliminating the time consuming and expensive stage of coding the diagnosis.

The invention is compatible with a Windows based operating system and can be installed and used on a PC in a physician s office or in a hospital. The invention operates by controlling Microsoft Word as its word processing output and uses Microsoft Access as a database. The invention will also operate with Windows 98SE and Windows XP. It can utilize Word 2000 or later and likewise can utilize Access 2000 or later.

Although mainly intended for use in a PC the invention is easily adaptable to a larger echocardiogram processing package or can be built into an echocardiogram machine.

The invention provides graphic user interfaces herein referred to as screen pages or screens for use with any mouse type pointing device or equally effective in a touch screen computer totally eliminating any mouse motion. The various sections of the echo report are shown live on the graphic user interface in the form of text in text boxes as the user s input occurs. This input is editable by the user at any stage if there are any nuances that need to be recorded. At the end of the user interface is another blank text box for additional free text comments. In addition a user can customize a number of check boxes with statements unique to that user which will be displayed each time the user initiates or logs in to the inventive system.

It is an object of this invention that the echo report includes a table of measurements and calculations on an individual patient which table shall be compact and only include those measurements taken on that patient and omitting any unused data fields. In practice each patient will normally have only five to ten measurements out of a possible fifty.

It is an object of this invention that an echo report to describe an individual patient is created in complete sentences including complex sentences grammatically tailored by the software in response to the user s input.

The invention will create a final echo report instantly allow its review immediately on the computer screen and allow the immediate finalization of the echo report either with an electronic signature or an on the spot hard copy. The final product will be an ordinary Word document which can be sent electronically to a patient s chart or referring doctor s office.

It is therefore an object of this invention to provide a computer implemented method of generating a medical report from an echocardiogram for a patient comprising the steps of creating at least one database comprising echocardiogram measurements for at least one patient providing a user with a prompting graphical user interface to log in and gain access to said database and the echocardiogram measurements for a patient providing the user with a start up graphical user interface for display of echocardiogram measurements for the patient said start up graphical user interface having a plurality of tabbed anatomical based graphical user interfaces pertaining to specific anatomical parts of a human heart for entry of a diagnosis by the user pertaining to any of said anatomical parts of the human heart based upon the echocardiogram measurements for the patient available in said data base providing the user with a plurality of disease based graphical user interfaces pertaining to disease states of the human heart accessible from the anatomical based graphical user interfaces to assist the user in the entry of a diagnosis by the user pertaining to any of the specific anatomical parts of the human heart based upon the echocardiogram measurements for the patient available in said data base generating complete grammatically correct sentences in response to the entry of diagnosis by the user pertaining to any of the specific anatomical parts of the human heart based upon the echocardiogram measurements for the patient available in said data base generating complete grammatically correct sentences in response to the entry of diagnosis by the user pertaining to any of the disease states of the human heart based upon the echocardiogram measurements for the patient available in said data base providing the user with a graphical user interface to create a medical report in complete grammatically correct sentences based on the entry of diagnoses by the user and generating a medical report in complete grammatically correct sentences based on the entry of diagnoses by the user.

It is a further object of this invention to provide a computer readable storage medium for use with a graphics display device bearing program code for instructing a computer to perform a method of generating a medical report from an echocardiogram for a patient said method comprising the steps of comprising the steps of creating at least one database comprising echocardiogram measurements for at least one patient providing a user with a prompting graphical user interface to log in and gain access to said database and the echocardiogram measurements for a patient providing the user with a start up graphical user interface for display of echocardiogram measurements for the patient said start up graphical user interface having a plurality of tabbed anatomical based graphical user interfaces pertaining to specific anatomical parts of a human heart for entry of a diagnosis by the user pertaining to any of said anatomical parts of the human heart based upon the echocardiogram measurements for the patient available in said data base providing the user with a plurality of disease based graphical user interfaces pertaining to disease states of the human heart accessible from the anatomical based graphical user interfaces to assist the user in the entry of a diagnosis by the user pertaining to any of the specific anatomical parts of the human heart based upon the echocardiogram measurements for the patient available in said data base generating complete grammatically correct sentences in response to the entry of diagnosis by the user pertaining to any of the specific anatomical parts of the human heart based upon the echocardiogram measurements for the patient available in said data base generating complete grammatically correct sentences in response to the entry of diagnosis by the user pertaining to any of the disease states of the human heart based upon the echocardiogram measurements for the patient available in said data base providing the user with a graphical user interface to create a medical report in complete grammatically correct sentences based on the entry of diagnoses by the user and generating a medical report in complete grammatically correct sentences based on the entry of diagnoses by the user.

It is a further object of this invention that the user be provided with graphical user interfaces pertaining to specific anatomical parts of a human heart comprising a graphical user interface for the aortic valve a graphical user interface for the left ventricle and left atrium a graphical user interface for the right ventricle and right atrium a graphical user interface for the mitral valve a graphical user interface for the tricuspid valve the pulmonic valve and the inferior vena cava a graphical user interface for the pericardium a graphical user interface for the aorta thrombus and foreign bodies a graphical user interface for vegetations a graphical user interface for atrial septal defect patent foramen ovale and ventricular septal defect a graphical user interface for M mode and Doppler left ventricular signs a graphical user interface for abnormal septal motion a graphical user interface for prosthetic valves and a graphical user interface for segmental wall motion. It is not intended that this invention be limited to this listing of anatomical parts of the human heart.

It is a further object of this invention that the user be provided with graphical user interfaces pertaining to disease states of the human heart comprising a graphical user interface for cardiac source of emboli a graphical user interface for diastolic analysis a graphical user interface for myxoma a graphical user interface for restrictive cardiomyopathy a graphical user interface for aortic dissection a graphical user interface for infective endocarditis a graphical user interface for dilated cardiomyopathy a graphical user interface for hypertropic cardiomyopathy and a graphical user interface for myocardial infarction. It is not intended that this invention be limited to these disease states.

Start up screen page also contains boxes for entry of patient name and data as well as boxes for entry of all measurements taken in an echocardiogram test for that patient. As shown in start up screen allows the user to access a database and find an existing patient through a drop down box or by a Show Search Form button which opens a search form screen page as shown in . Search form screen page has a box for the patient s name and a button for entry of the patient s data from the database. By use of the drop down box or the search form screen page the data for an existing patient can be accessed and automatically entered into boxes and . For a new patient the user can depress the New Patient button which will open a new patient database form illustrated in which contains boxes for entry of patient name and data as well as boxes for entry of all measurements taken in an echocardiogram test for that patient. Also included on new patient database form are command buttons to perform various functions with the patient data. As indicated on form the form may be used to add new patient data to the. database update that data or delete an existing patient from the database.

All measurements visible in boxes on the start up screen page are brought forward to each screen page as needed.

This screen page has option box for entry of comments specific to the right ventricle RV and option box for entry of comments specific to the right atrium RV .

Another tabbed section under the Mitral Valve tab on the start up screen page is shown in . shows a Mitral Valve Prolapse MVP tab and screen page with option boxes for various comments appropriate to MVP with text boxes to display grammatically correct sentences reflecting the user s selections from the option boxes . The sentences are constructed in the text boxes as the selections are made in the option boxes and are intended to appear in the final report with minor editing if needed.

Another tabbed section under the Mitral Valve tab on the start up screen page is shown in . shows a Mitral Regurgitation MR tab and screen page with option boxes for various comments appropriate to MR with text boxes to display grammatically correct sentences reflecting the user s selections from the option boxes . The sentences are constructed in the text boxes as the selections are made in the option boxes and are intended to appear in the final report with minor editing if needed.

Another tabbed section under the Mitral Valve tab on the start up screen page is shown in . shows a Mitral Stenosis MS tab and screen page with option boxes for various comments appropriate to MS with text boxes to display grammatically correct sentences reflecting the user s selections from the option boxes . The sentences are constructed in the text boxes as the selections are made in the option boxes and are intended to appear in the final report with minor editing if needed.

The last tabbed section under the Mitral Valve tab on the start up screen page is shown in . shows an Other Mitral Motion tab and screen page with option boxes for various comments appropriate to Other Mitral Motion with text boxes to display grammatically correct sentences reflecting the user s selections from the option boxes . The sentences are constructed in the text boxes as the selections are made in the option boxes and are intended to appear in the final report with minor editing if needed.

The second section under the Conclusions tab on the start up screen page is opened by clicking on the User Controls and Free Text tab and is shown in as screen page . This screen page contains any entries from boxes on the maintenance form screen page and also allows the entry of any free text that the user may desire.

As defined herein a computer readable storage medium is any article of manufacture that contains data that can be read by a computer or a carrier wave signal carrying data that can be read by a computer. For example the inventive computer readable storage medium for generating a medical report for a patient from an echocardiogram may be distributed on magnetic media such as a floppy disk flexible disk hard disk reel to reel tape cartridge tape and cassette tape optical media such as a CD ROM and writable compact disk and paper media such as punched cards and paper tape or on a carrier wave signal received through a network wireless network or modem including radio frequency signals and infrared signals.

