---

title: Autoantibody detection for cancer diagnostics
abstract: The present invention relates to compositions and methods for the detection of anti-ECPKA autoantibodies in a biological sample, and to the use of such compositions and methods in the diagnosis of cancer in humans and non-human mammals.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07838305&OS=07838305&RS=07838305
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Department of Health and Human Services
number: 07838305
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050307
---
This application claims a right of priority to U.S. Patent Application Ser. Nos. 60 550 348 filed Mar. 8 2004 and 60 551 776 filed Mar. 11 2004 which applications are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety.

This invention was funded by NCI Intramural Research Program CCR at the National Institutes of Health. The United States Government has certain rights to this invention.

The present invention relates to compositions and methods for the detection of anti ECPKA autoantibodies in a biological sample and to the use of such compositions and methods in the diagnosis of cancer in humans and non human mammals.

Tumor markers are synthesized by malignant cells and released into the bloodstream. Such markers may also be produced by host tissues in response to invasion or as a result of tumor induced metabolic changes. Tumor marker levels in blood or tissue fluids are helpful in diagnosing screening and monitoring tumor progression or regression. An ideal tumor marker would allow a simple blood test to detect cancer and its levels would correlate with the stage of tumor progression. Due to the lack of sensitivity and specificity however no single marker has been previously established in a general healthy population or in most high risk populations. The use of tumor markers in cancer diagnostics is well described Sluss P. M. et al 2004 EOA CLSTMSOA CIP DOPS SI AOE Clin Leadersh Manag Rev. 18 1 25 31 Gion M. 2000 STM FQCTTQM Breast 9 6 306 11 Wiesner A. 2004 DOTMWP T Curr Pharm Biotechnol. February 5 1 45 67 Crawford N. P. et al. 2003 TMACC UIM J Surg Oncol. 84 4 239 48 Agnantis N. J. et al 2003 TM. AUAFTPS. PI. IV 17 6 609 18 Riley R. D. et al. 2004 A SROMABTMIN Clin Cancer Res. 10 1 Pt 1 4 12 Given M. et al. 2000 TPOTMCA 15 3 TPS ACEA IBCR Breast. 9 5 277 80 .

Currently available cancer markers measure cancer antigens. For example prostate cancer can be diagnosed by measuring the prostate specific antigen PSA cancer marker Gretzer M. B. et al. 2003 PSA MIPCD Urol Clin North Am. 30 4 677 86 . The Carcino Embryonic Antigen CEA marker has been found to have diagnostic utility in assessing colorectal cancer Crawford N. P. et al. 2003 TMACC UIM J Surg Oncol. 84 4 239 48 . The cancer antigen CA15 3 has been correlated with breast cancer Cheung K. L. et al. 2003 OMORAND IMBCBTUOSTM Minerva Chir. June 58 3 297 303 . The cancer antigen CA19 9 has been employed to diagnose gastrointestinal cancer Grotowski M. 2002 A CEA ACA 19 9 IDAPCC Pol Merkuriusz Lek. 12 67 77 80 Trompetas V. et al. 2002 GBTCOTSWHSLOCA 19 9 Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 14 1 85 8 . The cancer antigen CA125 has been used to diagnose ovarian cancer Anderiesz C. et al 2003 SFOC Med J Aust. 178 12 655 6 .

The majority of solid tumors show chromosomal instability caused by aberrations in chromosomal segregation during cell division. Several enzymatic kinases are involved in maintaining proper chromosomal segregation and regulating cell cycle progression. One such kinase cAMP dependent protein kinase PKA appears to have a functional role in many aspects of cell signaling metabolism and proliferation Matyakhina L. et al. 2002 PKA Ann NY Acad Sci. 968 148 57 Tortora G. et al. 2002 PKA ATFNISOCT Ann NY Acad Sci. 968 139 47 .

Mammalian cells possess two types of cAMP dependent protein kinase PKA species Krebs E. G. et al 1979 P DOE Annu Rev Biochem. 48 923 39 . These protein kinases are designated type I PKA I and type II PKA II they are distinguished by different regulatory subunits R subunits RI and RII and share a common catalytic subunit C subunit Beebe S. J. et al. 1986 CN DPK In The Enzymes Control by Phosphorylation E. G. Krebs et al. Eds Academic Press Orlando and London. pp. 43 11 .

Traditionally the enzyme activity of protein kinases has been assayed by following the transfer of a radioactive phosphate group from P ATP to a residue of a suitable protein or peptide substrate See e.g. Witt J. J. et al. 1975 Anal Biochem. 66 253 8 Casnellie J. E. 1991 Methods Enzymol. 200 115 20 U.S. Pat. No. 6 498 005 . PKA enzyme assays have been described Cohen C. B. et al. 1999 A M BEAPKA Anal Chem. 1999 273 89 97 Cho Y. S. et al 2000 EPKA AA CB IEBTCARBA M LCAND RIISO Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 97 2 835 40 .

Through biochemical studies and gene cloning four isoforms of the R subunits RI RI RII and RII have been identified Amieux P. S. et al 2002 TERORI AITMORPKA A Ann NY Acad Sci. 968 75 95 McKnight G. S. et al. 1988 AOAMP DPKSUMGA Recent Prog Honn Res. 44 307 35 Levy F. O. et al. 1988 MC CDASAPF LAASOTH IRSO3 5 CAM DPKFHT Mol Endocrinol. 2 1364 73 .

Importantly the ratios of PKA I to PKA II can change dramatically during cell development differentiation and transformation Lohmann S. M. et al. 1984 ROTCASCADOCN DPK In Advances in Cyclic Nucleotide and Protein Phosphorylation Research P. Greengard et al. Eds Raven Press New York. pp. 63 117 Cho Chung Y. S. 1990 ROCAMP RPIG D ASOM NATT Cancer Res. 50 7093 100 Cho Chung Y. S. 2003 cAMP SICGAT Cancer Treat Res. 115 123 43 .

The cAMP signaling pathway has been proposed as a therapeutic target in lymphoid malignancies Lerner A. et al. 2000 TAMP SPAA TTILM Leuk Lymphoma. 37 1 2 39 51 Cho Chung Y. S. et al. 1995 AMP DPK RINAMG Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 21 1 3 33 61 Cho Chung Y. S. et a. 1993 TRSOAMP DPKAA TFCOCAOCD RD Pharmacol Ther. 60 2 265 88 . Increased expression of RI PKA I has been shown in human cancer cell lines and primary tumors as compared with normal counterparts Cho Chung Y. S. 1990 ROCAMP RPIG D ASOM NATT Cancer Res. 50 7093 100 Miller W. R. et al 1993 TOCAMP BPIHBC Eur J Cancer. 29A 989 91 in cells after transformation with chemical or viral carcinogens and the Ki ras oncogene or transforming growth factor and on stimulation of cell growth with the granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor or phorbol esters Cho Chung Y. S. 1990 ROCAMP RPIG D ASOM NATT Cancer Res. 50 7093 100 Cho Chung Y. S. et al. 2002 DTCOPKA AAMP SICG A M GO ATFD Ann NY Acad Sci. 968 22 36 . Conversely a decrease in the expression of RI PKA I correlates with growth inhibition induced by site selective cAMP analogs and antisense oligonucleotides targeted against the RI subunit of PKA in a broad spectrum of human cancer cell lines and human tumors grown in nude mice Cho Chung Y. S. et al. 1989 S SCAMP AANBTIGC DAP OR Cancer Inv. 7 161 77 Cho Chung Y. S. et al 1999 ADNA TPKA RI S A NATCT Front Biosci. 4 D898 D907 .

It has been previously demonstrated that various cancer cell types excrete PKA into the conditioned medium Cho Y. S. et al. 2000 EPKA AA CB IEBTCARBA M LCAND RIISO Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 97 2 835 40 . This extracellular protein kinase A ECPKA is present in active free catalytic subunit C subunit form PKA C and its activity is specifically inhibited by the PKA inhibitory protein PKI. Overexpression of the C or RI subunit gene of PKA in an expression vector which upregulates intracellular PKA I markedly upregulates ECPKA expression. In contrast overexpression of the RII subunit which eliminates PKA I upregulates PKA II and reverts the transformed phenotype downregulates ECPKA. A mutation in the C gene that prevents myristylation allows intracellular PKA upregulation but blocks the ECPKA increase suggesting that the NH terminal myristyl group of C is required for ECPKA expression. In the serum of cancer patients ECPKA expression is markedly upregulated in contrast to normal serum Cho Y. S. et al. 2000 EPKA AA CB IEBTCARBA M LCAND RIISO Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 97 2 835 40 .

The development of monoclonal antibodies has led to the identification of numerous tumor associated antigens in the serum and tissues of patients with malignancies. Protein products of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes can be detected in extracellular fluids and serve as potential markers for carcinogenesis in vivo. Some of these growth factors are encoded by oncogenes. For example higher levels of p21 ras protein are encoded by the ras oncogenes found in patients blood. Circulating antibodies against p53 tumor suppressor protein have been found in sera of patients with breast and lung carcinomas and in children with B lymphomas Winter S. F. et al. 1992 DOAAP53 ILCPATBDOTTO53 M. Cancer Res. 52 4168 74 Lubin R. et al. 1993 AOP53AIPWVCDB CEOH53 DOPSAEOPS. Cancer Res. 53 5872 6 Crawford L. V. et al. 1982 DOAATCP53 ISFPWBC. Int. J. Cancer. 30 403 8 . Antibodies against oncogenes such as c myc and c myb have also been found in sera of patients with colorectal and breast tumors Sorokine I. K. et al. 1991 POCA C MOPAIHS. Int. J. Cancer. 47 665 9 Ben Mahrez K. et al. 1988 DOCAAC MPICPS. Br J Cancer. 57 529 34 Ben Mahrez K. et al. 1990 CAAC MOPISOCCP. Int J Cancer. 46 35 8 .

In addition to the above mentioned novel markers some other proteins hormones and enzymes have been used as markers for the past 30 years. Notable among these are carcinoembryonic antigen CEA fetoprotein AFP human chorionic gonadotropin HCG and prostatic acid phosphatase PAP . Most of these markers lack specificity however. These levels are also increased under benign conditions and during gestation. All of these markers are based on the antigen determination method the markers are lack of specificity and sensitivity. There is great need to discover novel biomarkers and translate them to routine clinical use. The present invention is directed to such need.

The present invention relates to a highly sensitive enzyme immunoassay EIA for measuring IgG antibody against extracellular protein kinase A ECPKA . Sera from 295 patients with various types of cancer and 100 persons without cancer was tested. It was found that the frequency of anti ECPKA IgG antibody was significantly higher in cancer patients 92 than in those without 14 cancer. There was no significant correlation between anti ECPKA IgG antibody measured by EIA and ECPKA antigen measured by PKA enzymatic assay and the anti ECPKA IgG antibody EIA method gave greater sensitivity and specificity than the ECPKA enzymatic assay. These results demonstrate that the approach of autoantibody analysis rather than conventional antigen analysis provides a useful approach for diagnosing cancer.

In detail the invention provides an immunoassay that measures the presence or concentration of an anti ECPKA autoantibody in a biological sample of a mammal wherein the immunoassay comprises the steps of 

The invention further concerns the embodiment of the above described immunoassay wherein the antigen specific for an anti ECPKA autoantibody is an extracellular PKA protein.

The invention further concerns the embodiments of the above described immunoassays wherein in the anti ECPKA autoantibody is an antibody of a mammalian species that differs from that of the mammal and is specific for antibodies produced by the mammal.

The invention further concerns the embodiments of the above described immunoassays wherein the mammal is a human and the anti ECPKA autoantibody is a human IgG antibody. The invention further concerns the embodiments of the above described immunoassays wherein the anti ECPKA autoantibody binding molecule is detectably labeled especially with a chemical or enzyme label .

The invention further concerns the embodiments of the above described immunoassays wherein in the step a the antigen specific for an anti ECPKA autoantibody is immobilized to a solid support prior to the contacting with the biological sample.

The invention further concerns the embodiments of the above described immunoassays wherein in the step a the antigen specific for an anti ECPKA autoantibody is immobilized to a solid support subsequent to the contacting with the biological sample.

The invention further concerns the embodiments of the above described immunoassays wherein the immunoassay is an immunochromatographic immunoassay wherein 

The invention an immunological complex comprising an antigen specific for an anti ECPKA autoantibody bound to an anti ECPKA autoantibody wherein the anti ECPKA autoantibody is additionally bound to an anti ECPKA autoantibody binding molecule.

The invention further concerns the embodiment of the above described immunological complex wherein the antigen specific for an anti ECPKA autoantibody is an extracellular PKA protein.

The invention further concerns the embodiments of the above described immunological complexes wherein the anti ECPKA autoantibody binding molecule is detectably labeled especially with a chemical or enzyme label .

The invention further concerns the embodiments of the above described immunological complexes wherein the anti ECPKA autoantibody binding molecule is an immunological molecule. The invention further concerns the embodiments of the above described immunological complexes wherein the anti ECPKA autoantibody is a human autoantibody and the anti ECPKA auto antibody binding molecule is an anti human IgG antibody.

The invention further concerns a kit for measuring the presence or concentration of an anti ECPKA autoantibody in a biological sample of a mammal wherein the kit comprises a hollow casing comprising a multilayer filter system and first and second porous carriers wherein the second porous carrier is in communication with the first porous carrier and the first porous carrier is in communication with the multilayer filter system a portion of which is accessible from the casing wherein 

The invention further concerns the embodiment of the above described kit wherein the labeled PKA C is ECPKA especially a chemical or enzyme label .

The invention further concerns the embodiments of the above described kits wherein the kit detects human anti ECPKA autoantibodies and the antibody that binds to human IgG is an antibody of a nonhuman mammal.

The present invention relates to compositions and methods for the detection of anti ECPKA autoantibodies in a biological sample and to the use of such compositions and methods in the diagnosis of cancer in humans and non human mammals especially canine feline bovines ovine porcine and equine mammals .

An extracellular form of PKA ECPKA is secreted from cancer cells Cho Y. S. et al. 2000 EPKA AA CB IEBTCARBA M LCAND RIISO Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 97 2 835 40 . The present invention derives in part from the recognition that ECPKA secretion elicits the formation of serum autoantibodies and that the presence and or concentration of such autoantibodies can serve as a cancer diagnostic and prognostic marker. As described herein the invention provides a highly sensitive immunoassay that measures the concentration and or presence of anti ECPKA autoantibody especially an anti ECPKA IgG antibody in biological samples of suspected and confirmed cancer patients. This autoantibody based immunoassay method provides a routine diagnostic procedure for detecting various cancer cell types.

The present invention concerns the binding of antigens and antibodies. As used herein an epitope is a 2 or 3 dimensional region of an antigen that is recognized by and that specifically binds to an antibody. As used herein an antigen and antibody are said to be specific for one another or to recognize one another or to bind to one another if they are capable of immunospecific binding to one another.

Any of a wide variety of assay formats may be used in accordance with the methods of the present invention. Such formats may be heterogeneous or homogeneous sequential or simultaneous competitive or noncompetitive. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 563 036 5 627 080 5 633 141 5 679 525 5 691 147 5 698 411 5 747 352 5 811 526 5 851 778 and 5 976 822 illustrate several different assay formats and applications. Such assays can be formatted to be quantitative to measure the concentration or amount of an anti ECPKA autoantibody or they may be formatted to be qualitative to measure the presence or absence of an anti ECPKA autoantibody.

Heterogeneous immunoassay techniques typically involve the use of a solid phase material to which the reaction product becomes bound but may be adapted to involve the binding of nonimmobilized antigens and antibodies i.e. a solution phase immunoassay . The reaction product is separated from excess sample assay reagents and other substances by removing the solid phase from the reaction mixture e.g. by washing . One type of solid phase immunoassay that may be used in accordance with the present invention is a sandwich immunoassay. In the sandwich assay the more analyte present in the sample the greater the amount of label present on the solid phase. This type of assay format is generally preferred especially for the visualization of low analyte concentrations because the appearance of label on the solid phase is more readily detected.

In accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention antigen that is specifically reactive with an anti ECPKA autoantibody is bound to a solid support i.e. immobilized and incubated in contact with the biological sample being tested for the presence of anti ECPKA IgG antibody. As will be appreciated the antigen may be incubated with the biological sample in an unbound state and then subsequently bound to the solid support i.e. immobilizable . The supports are then preferably extensively treated e.g. by washing etc. to substantially remove non ECPKA IgG antibodies that may be present but which failed to bind to the bound antigen. In consequence of such treatment an immune complex forms between the antigen and anti ECPKA IgG antibody.

A detectably labeled second antibody e.g. an anti human IgG antibody is then preferably added and the support is incubated under conditions sufficient to permit the second antibody to bind to any anti ECPKA IgG antibody that may be present. The support is then preferably extensively treated e.g. by washing etc. to substantially remove any unbound second antibody. If the anti ECPKA IgG antibody is present in the test sample then the two antibodies will form an immune complex with the analyte i.e. a second antibody anti ECPKA IgG antibody antigen sandwich . In such an assay the detection of second antibody bound to the support is indicative of anti ECPKA IgG antibody in the fluid being tested. Sandwich assay formats are described by Schuurs et al. U.S. Pat. Nos. 3 791 932 and 4 016 043 and by Pankratz et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 876 935. The second antibody may be a natural immunoglobulin isolated from nonhuman primates e.g. anti human IgG murine antibody anti human IgG goat antibody etc. or can be produced recombinantly or synthetically. It may be an intact immunoglobulin or an immunoglobulin fragment e.g. FAb F Ab etc. . As desired other binding molecules capable of binding to anti ECPKA autoantibodies may be employed in concert with or in lieu of such second antibodies. For example the anti ECPKA autoantibodies can be biotinylated and the second antibody can be replaced with labeled avidin or streptavidin.

To eliminate the bound free separation step and reduce the time and equipment needed for a chemical binding assay a homogeneous assay format may alternatively be employed. In such assays one component of the binding pair may still be immobilized however the presence of the second component of the binding pair is detected without a bound free separation. Examples of homogeneous optical methods are the EMIT method of Syva Inc. Sunnyvale Calif. which operates through detection of fluorescence quenching the laser nephelometry latex particle agglutination method of Behringwerke Marburg Germany which operates by detecting changes in light scatter the LPIA latex particle agglutination method of Mitsubishi Chemical Industries Tokyo Japan the TDX fluorescence depolarization method of Abbott Laboratories Abbott Park Ill. and the fluorescence energy transfer method of Cis Bio International Paris France . Any of such assays may be adapted for use in accordance with the objectives of the present invention.

The binding assay of the present invention may be configured as a competitive assay. In a competitive assay the more anti ECPKA IgG antibody present in the test sample the lower the amount of label present on the solid phase.

In a manner similar to the sandwich assay the competitive assay can be conducted by providing a defined amount of a labeled anti ECPKA IgG antibody and determining whether the fluid being tested contains anti ECPKA IgG antibody that would compete with the labeled antibody for binding to the support. In such a competitive assay the amount of captured labeled antibody is inversely proportional to the amount of analyte present in the test sample. Smith U.S. Pat. No. 4 401 764 describes an alternative competitive assay format using a mixed binding complex that can bind analyte or labeled analyte but in which the analyte and labeled analyte cannot simultaneously bind the complex. Clagett U.S. Pat. No. 4 746 631 describes an immunoassay method using a reaction chamber in which an analyte ligand marker conjugate is displaced from the reaction surface in the presence of test sample analyte and in which the displaced analyte ligand marker conjugate is immobilized at a second reaction site. The conjugate includes biotin bovine serum albumin and synthetic peptides as the ligand component of the conjugate and enzymes chemiluminescent materials enzyme inhibitors and radionucleotides as the marker component of the conjugate. Li U.S. Pat. No. 4 661 444 describes a competitive immunoassay using a conjugate of an anti idiotype antibody and a second antibody specific for a detectable label in which the detectable response is inversely related to the presence of analyte in the sample. Allen European Patent Appln. No. 177 191 describes a binding assay involving a conjugate of a ligand analog and a second reagent such as fluorescein in which the conjugate competes with the analyte ligand in binding to a labeled binding partner specific for the ligand and in which the resultant labeled conjugate is then separated from the reaction mixture by means of solid phase carrying a binding partner for the second reagent. This binding assay format combines the use of a competitive binding technique and a reverse sandwich assay configuration i.e. the binding of conjugate to the labeled binding member prior to separating conjugate from the mixture by the binding of the conjugate to the solid phase. The assay result however is determined as in a conventional competitive assay in which the amount of label bound to the solid phase is inversely proportional to the amount of analyte in the test sample. Chieregatt et al. GB Patent No. 2 084 317 describe a similar assay format using an indirectly labeled binding partner specific for the analyte. Mochida et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 185 084 also describe the use of a double antigen conjugate that competes with an antigen analyte for binding to an immobilized antibody and that is then labeled. This method also results in the detection of label on a solid phase in which the amount of label is inversely proportional to the amount of analyte in the test sample. Sadeh et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 243 749 describe a similar enzyme immunoassay in which a hapten conjugate competes with analyte for binding to an antibody immobilized on a solid phase. Any of such variant assays may be used in accordance with the present invention.

In all such assay formats at least one component of the assay reagents will preferably be labeled or otherwise detectable by the evolution or quenching of light. Such component may be a second antibody anti ECPKA IgG antibody or an antigen that binds to an anti ECPKA IgG antibody depending on the immunoassay format employed. Radioisotopic binding assay formats e.g. a radioimmunoassay etc. employ a radioisotope as such label the signal is detectable by the evolution of light in the presence of a fluorescent or fluorogenic moiety see Lucas et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 698 411 and Landrum et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 976 822 . Enzymatic binding assay formats e.g. an ELISA etc. employ an enzyme as a label the signal is detectable by the evolution of color or light in the presence of a chromogenic or fluorogenic moiety. Other labels such as paramagnetic labels materials used as colored particles latex particles colloidal metals such as selenium and gold and dye particles see U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 313 734 4 373 932 and 5 501 985 may also be employed. The use of enzymes especially alkaline phosphatase galactosidase horse radish peroxidase or urease as the detectable label i.e. an enzyme immunoassay or EIA is preferred.

The presence of enzymatic labels may be detected through the use of chromogenic substrates including those that evolve or adsorb fluorescent UV visible light etc. in response to catalysis by the enzyme label. More preferably chemical labels may be employed e.g. colloidal gold latex bead labels etc. . Detection of label can be accomplished using multiple detectors multipass filters gratings or spectrally distinct fluors see e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 5 759 781 etc. It is particularly preferred to employ peroxidase as an enzyme label especially in concert with the chromogenic substrate 3 3 5 5 tetramethylbenzidine TMB . In the case of labeling of the antibodies with peroxidase as enzyme it is possible to use the periodate technique Nakane P. K. et al. 1974 P LA. A NMOC J Histochem Cytochem. 22 1084 90 or a method reported in which the partners are linked with a heterobifunctional reagent Ishikawa E. et al. 1983 E LOAATFFEIAIS J Immunoassay. 4 3 209 327 .

Any of a wide variety of solid supports may be employed in the immunoassays of the present invention. Suitable materials for the solid support are synthetics such as polystyrene polyvinyl chloride polyamide or other synthetic polymers natural polymers such as cellulose as well as derivatized natural polymers such as cellulose acetate or nitrocellulose and glass especially glass fibers. The support can take the form of spheres rods tubes and microassay or microtiter plates. Sheet like structures such as paper strips small plates and membranes are likewise suitable. The surface of the carriers can be permeable and impermeable for aqueous solutions.

Although the foregoing description pertains to assaying for the presence of anti ECPKA autoantibodies in biological samples that are fluids e.g. sera blood urine saliva pancreatic juice cerebrospinal fluid semen etc. it will be appreciated that any fluidic biological sample e.g. tissue or biopsy extracts extracts of feces sputum etc. may likewise be employed in the assays of the present invention. Most preferably the biological sample being assayed will be serum.

Materials for use in the assay of the invention are ideally suited for the preparation of a kit. Such a kit may comprise a carrier means being compartmentalized to receive in close confinement one or more containers means vials tubes and the like each of the containers means comprising one of the separate elements to be used in the method. For example one of the containers means may comprise a suitable antigen such as ECPKA PKA C or C fragments or an extract of one or more different types of cancer cells and tumors bound to a solid support. A second container may comprise soluble detectably labeled second antibody preferably in lyophilized form or in solution. In addition the kit may also contain one or more containers each of which comprises a different predetermined amount of ECPKA PKA C or C fragments or anti ECPKA PKA C autoantibody. These latter containers can be used to prepare a standard curve into which can be interpolated the results obtained from the sample containing the unknown amount of autoantibodies to ECPKA.

In using the kit all the user has to do is add to a container a premeasured amount of a sample suspected of containing a measurable yet unknown amount of autoantibodies to ECPKA a premeasured amount of support bound antigen present in the first container and a premeasured amount of the detectably labeled second antibody present in the second container. After an appropriate time for incubation an immune complex is formed and is separated from the supernatant fluid and the immune complex or the supernatant fluid are detected as by radioactive counting addition of an enzyme substrate and color development or by inclusion of a chemical label e.g. colloidal gold latex beads etc. .

The present invention particularly relates to the use of immunochromatographic assay formats to detect anti ECPKA autoantibodies. In a preferred immunochromatographic assay format two contacting but spatially distinct porous carriers are employed. The first such carrier will contain a non immobilized labeled PKA C or C fragments e.g. ECPKA C or protease digests or C and the second such carrier will contain an immobilized but unlabeled antibody that binds to IgG e.g. where human anti ECPKA autoantibodies are being assayed the unlabeled antibody may be an anti human IgG antibody .

Preferably the device will comprise a hollow casing constructed of for example a plastic material etc. in which the first carrier will communicate indirectly with the interior of the casing via a multilayer filter system that is accessible from the device e.g. by protruding therefrom or by being incompletely covered by the device such that a serum plasma or whole blood test sample can be applied directly to the filter system and will permeate therefrom into the first porous carrier. In such a device the permeation of fluid containing anti ECPKA autoantibodies will cause the non immobilized labeled PKA C or C fragments of the first carrier to become bound to the migrating antibodies and will then permeate into the second carrier. Because the second carrier contains immobilized antibody that binds human IgG any labeled PKA C or C fragments entering the second carrier will be entrapped therein.

Detection of labeled PKA C or C fragments in the carrier containing the immobilized unlabeled antibody thus indicates that anti ECPKA autoantibodies are present in the sample being evaluated. The assay can be made quantitative by measuring the quantity of labeled PKA C or C fragments that become bound within the second porous carrier.

Having now generally described the invention the same will be more readily understood through reference to the following examples which are provided by way of illustration and are not intended to be limiting of the present invention unless specified.

Subjects Serum samples are taken from 295 human patients with various cancer cell types and from 100 persons without cancer.

Enzyme linked immunoabsorbent assay ELISA Anti ECPKA IgG autoantibody in the sera of cancer patients and healthy individuals are measured by solid phase ELISA assay. For such assays round bottom polyvinyl chloride microtiter plates Thermolab System Helsinki Finland are coated with 100 l of diluted 50 g per ml concentration with PBS purified recombinant human PKA C antigen see Purification of PKA C Materials and Methods . The plates are incubated at room temperature for 1 hour then washed one time with washing buffer 20 mM Hepes 0.9 NaCl 30 mM sucrose 0.1 bovine serum albumin BSA pH 7.0 and each well is blocked for 2 hours at room temperature with 100 l of Blockace Serotec http www.serotec.com dissolved in water 4 g 400 ml then the plates are washed two times with Na citrate washing solution 50 mM Na citrate 0.15 M NaCl 0.1 polyoxyethylenesorbitan monolaurate Tween 20 pH 5.0 5.2 . The serum samples are diluted to 25 000 fold with sample dilution buffer PBS pH 7.4 0.25 BSA fatty acid free fraction V 0.05 Tween 20 and 100 l of diluted samples are added to each well then incubated for 1 hour at 37 C. After three washes with the Na citrate washing solution 100 l of 20 000 fold diluted anti human IgG HRP antibody enzyme conjugate Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories West Grove Pa. in PBS 1 BSA is added to the wells after which the plates are incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. After washing the plates five times in Na citrate washing solution 100 l of TMB substrate is added. The reaction is stopped with 100 l of 0.45 M HSOreagent after which the absorbance at 450 nm is recorded on an ELISA reader BioRad Hercules Calif. microplate reader benchmark . ELISA specificity is confirmed by performing the inhibition test simultaneously on serum samples that have been incubated for 1 hr at room temperature with the above antigen at a final concentration of 1 mg mL.

Purification of PKA C The recombinant human PKA C 1.1 kb from OT1529 C plasmid Cho Y. S. et al. 2000 EPKA AA CB IEBTCARBA M LCAND RIISO Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 97 2 835 40 is infused with pQE31 DNA leading to production of pQE C Hong S. H. Seoul National University Seoul Korea unpublished . pQE C plasmid was expressed in and purification of native PKA C protein was achieved Paragon Baltimore Md. .

PKA Assays The enzyme activity of PKA is measured by the method of Rohlff C. et al. 1993 8 Cl AMP ITAD ROTRI ASAU ROTRII BSOC DPKLTTII H DGIADOHL 60 LC J Biol Chem. 268 5774 82 . For the measurement of serum ECPKA activity the assay total volume 50 l is carried out for 20 min at 37 C. in the reaction mixture containing 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5 1 mM DTT 10 mM MgCl 5 M Kemptide a synthetic substrate for PKA GIBCO BRL 1.2 M P ATP 25 Ci mmol ICN with or without 5 M cAMP and 5 M PKI and 10 l of serum. After incubation the reaction mixtures are spotted onto phosphocellulose disks GIBCO BRL and washed three times in 0.5 phosphoric acid. Filters are air dried and counted by liquid scintillation counter. One unit of PKA activity is defined as the amount of enzyme that transferred 1 pmol of P from P ATP to recovered protein in 1 min at 37 C. in the standard assay system. LDH activity is measured by the use of a commercial kit Sigma .

The sera of human patients and normal control individuals is tested using the above described ELISA expressing anti ECPKA autoantibody titers arbitrarily as ratios to the mean absorbance of the normal control sera. From anti ECPKA autoantibody titers of normal controls a ratio greater than 1.0 is considered positive.

The sensitivity and specificity of the ELISA assay calculated at different cut off values are graphically presented in a receiver operating characteristic ROC curve . At the point of interaction the cut off value for anti ECPKA autoantibody titer is 1.0 and the sensitivity and specificity for the ELISA test are 90 and 89 respectively.

Immunoblotting identified anti ECPKA autoantibody in cancer patients serum . Randomly selected patients sera exhibited immunocross reactivity toward the purified PKA C protein 40 kDa strips while no such immunocross reactivity for C protein was observed in normal serum strips .

The ECPKA enzymatic assay which measures antigen concentration gives a significant overlap between cancer patients n 66 and normal controls n 66 in frequency and mean values patients frequency 83 mean value 130 mU ml normal controls frequency 21 mean value 60 mU ml indicating a lack of sensitivity and specificity .

A comparison of individual anti ECPKA autoantibody titers obtained by ELISA and ECPKA measured by PKA enzymatic assay is shown in . There is no correlation between the titers of anti ECPKA IgG antibody obtained by ELISA and ECPKA measured by enzymatic assay ECPKA antigen measurement .

The present invention demonstrates that the sera presence of autoantibody directed against ECPKA is highly correlative of cancer. The ELISA developed for anti ECPKA autoantibody is highly sensitive and specific exhibiting markedly high anti ECPKA autoantibody titers mean titer 2.2 frequency 92 in cancer patients but exhibits low or negative titers and frequency 14 in normal individual controls. A comparison of the frequency detected by ELISA with that detected by enzymatic assay shows that the ELISA that detects the autoantibody for ECPKA is highly sensitive and specific compared with the enzymatic assay that measures antigen activity.

To examine whether the autoantibody detection method of the present invention can be extended to other cancer antigens extracellular secreted the following experiment is performed HCT 15 tumor a multidrug resistant human colon carcinoma grown in nude mice is used as a cancer antigen source. The tumor is homogenized in Buffer 10 20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4 100 mM NaCl 0.5 sodium deoxycholate 5 mM MgCl protease inhibitor cocktail set 1 Calbiochem 1 3 1 part tumor weight 3 parts buffer volume . The homogenate is centrifuged for 10 min at 10 000 rpm and the supernatant is collected Extract . The Extract is incubated with protein A sepharose 3 1 rotating 1 hr 4 C. and the preparation is centrifuged for 2 min at 6 000 rpm. The supernatant is collected and dialyzed against PBS overnight at 4 C. After such dialysis the extract is ready to use for coating microtiter plates in an ELISA. shows the titer of anticancer antigen antibodies in sera from cancer patients n 36 and healthy persons n 25 . Values 1.5 broken line are positive. shows the observed titers of antigen antibodies in sera from cancer patients with different types of cancer lung renal melanoma pancreatic ovarian colon liver gastric bladder and cervical carcinomas and sarcoma and leiomyoma. The patients sera n 36 and normal sera n 25 are the same as those of .

The results demonstrate that it is possible to use the autoantibody detection method of the present invention to detect cancer antigens in humans and animals. The results indicate that ELISA for detecting autoantibodies rather than antigens for ECPKA and other cancer antigens provides a new approach for diagnosing cancer in humans and animals.

All publications and patents mentioned in this specification are herein incorporated by reference to the same extent as if each individual publication or patent application was specifically and individually indicated to be incorporated by reference.

While the invention has been described in connection with specific embodiments thereof it will be understood that it is capable of further modifications and this application is intended to cover any variations uses or adaptations of the invention following in general the principles of the invention and including such departures from the present disclosure as come within known or customary practice within the art to which the invention pertains and as may be applied to the essential features hereinbefore set forth.

