---

title: System and method for executing a seamless handoff in a network environment
abstract: A method for providing a handoff in a network environment is provided that includes a mobile station operable to conduct a call. The mobile station is further operable to initiate a call leg autonomously such that a generic transfer function is invoked. The mobile station leverages the generic transfer function in order to execute a handoff for the mobile station.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08213936&OS=08213936&RS=08213936
owner: Cisco Technology, Inc.
number: 08213936
owner_city: San Jose
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051129
---
The present invention relates generally to network communications and more particularly to a system and a method for executing a seamless handoff in a network environment.

Networking architectures have grown increasingly complex in communications environments. In recent years a series of protocols and architectures have been developed in order to accommodate a diverse group of end users having various needs. Some of these protocols relate to issues associated with handoffs.

As both public and private network systems grow in size and in sophistication proper routing and efficient management of communication sessions and data flows becomes even more critical. Advances in technology have resulted in the deployment of various types of wireless networks. However while most of these wireless networks often provide service to adjacent and or overlapping physical spaces most cellular and enterprise network protocols are susceptible to dropped calls.

Accordingly the ability to provide an effective mechanism to properly process and direct communications for an end user of a mobile device offers a significant challenge to network operators component manufacturers and system designers.

In accordance with some of the teachings of the present invention techniques for providing an effective handoff between circuit switched cellular and packet switched wireless networks are provided. According to some embodiments these techniques can leverage a transfer function to enable a mobile station to maintain a communication session that is switched between circuit switched cellular and packet switched wireless networks. In particular these techniques can enable a mobile station alone or in combination with a mobility application to coordinate multiple calls or call legs to achieve optimal connectivity during a communication session.

According to a particular embodiment a method for providing a handoff is provided that includes a mobile station operable to conduct a call. The mobile station is further operable to initiate a call leg autonomously such that a generic transfer function is invoked. The mobile station leverages the generic transfer function in order to execute a handoff for the mobile station.

In more particular embodiments the function is invoked after the mobile station has roamed from an enterprise network to a cellular network. In still other more specific embodiments the function is invoked after the mobile station has roamed from a cellular network to an enterprise network. Additionally the generic transfer function is a selected one of a blind call transfer BCT function and an explicated call transfer ECT function.

Embodiments of the invention provide various technical advantages. For example the architecture of the present invention provides improved connectivity for the end user who may freely roam between networks. This is a result of the configuration of the present invention which can readily utilize a simple transfer function to achieve a handover operation.

Another advantage of the present invention is its simplicity. The architecture of the present invention can execute a handover across different networks without additional inter working handover hardware or software. The present invention can leverage features inherent in the mobile device to achieve an optimal handoff as outlined herein.

Yet another advantage of the present invention is that its deployment can be done without special relationships or deals between a public service provider and other phone service providers. This would allow for a simplification of billing for the providers and further offer a considerable cost savings for those involved in such communications.

Certain technical advantages of the present invention may be readily apparent to one skilled in the art from the following figures descriptions and claims. Moreover while specific advantages have been enumerated above various embodiments may include all some or none of the enumerated advantages.

Communication system also includes mobile station which may communicate with a remote device through cellular network using base station and or through enterprise network using a wireless local area network access point WLAN AP . The elements of communication system can operate to permit mobile station to maintain a communication session that is handed between cellular network and enterprise network . According to particular embodiments mobile station can utilize one or more of various private branch exchange PBX functions e.g. a transfer function to effect a handoff between cellular network and enterprise network .

Prior to discussing the following FIGURES the problems or situations that are being addressed by the proposed operations should be understood. Consider a scenario in which an end user initiates a call on mobile station . In such an example the end user roams from his enterprise network to cellular network which has to pick up the call.

Conventionally a call associated with mobile station is properly anchored by mobility application . In order to execute a handoff a new cellular call must be made. Hence mobile station can make the cellular call over cellular network to mobility application whereby a switch occurs over to that new call leg. Mobility application is handling multiple calls and multiple mobile stations.

When a call is placed the call lands on mobility application which recognizes and is aware of the call. Hence when mobile station moves to cellular network mobility application receives a stealth call from mobile station and in response to the stealth call mobility application collaborates with Call Manager to switch or to transfer on the fly the call. In a similar reciprocal fashion when mobile station moves back to enterprise network it communicates with mobility application which transfers the call from a cellular call leg to a voice over IP VoIP call leg.

Hence it can be appreciated that as a general networking proposition a wireless telephone has incredible value because it is portable as it can readily traverse multiple networks without losing connectivity. Current wireless phone handovers between different networks require extensive work in adding an additional network handover control unit.

Aside from technical complexity issues and additional costs to make a multimode phone functional the operational model in such a scenario typically involves a roaming agreement between a public service provider and an enterprise network. This can present a problem because generally fee based cellular service providers do not want to divert their revenue by handing off calls made on their own networks. In a similar vein corporations have no intent on paying for calls initiated on its own premises. As outlined in the scenarios described above conventionally a handover is enabled between networks by adding an inter networking function e.g. hardware and or software whereby handover intelligence is built on the network side.

Communication system proposes a new solution in which existing features of the public wireless phone network and the office phone system e.g. VoIP are leveraged to execute a handoff. Such a protocol involves minimal work for the handset and potentially no modifications on the mobility application side of the architecture. This arrangement allows the mobile phone to achieve handovers between different networks more easily and in a seamless fashion. Additional details related to these operations are provided below with reference to A and B. Before turning to those discussions the components of are detailed extensively below.

Cellular network represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for providing wireless telephony services using cellular protocols and technology. Various cellular protocols and technologies may be used by cellular network including but not limited to global system for mobile communications GSM time division multiple access TDMA code division multiple access CDMA and any other appropriate analog or digital cellular protocol or technology. Furthermore cellular network may utilize signaling system 7 SS7 protocol for signaling purposes. Cellular network may include any number of base stations as well as base station controllers mobile switching centers and other appropriate communications equipment for use in communicating with mobile station and PSTN . Thus as illustrated cellular network may couple to base station to receive and transmit wireless signals to and from mobile station .

Enterprise network represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for interconnecting elements coupled to enterprise network . Thus enterprise network may represent a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN and or any other appropriate form of network. Furthermore elements within enterprise network may utilize circuit switched and or packet based communication protocols to provide for wireline telephony services. For example elements within enterprise network may utilize Internet Protocol IP . In addition elements within enterprise network may utilize wireless standards such as the 802.11 family of wireless standards to provide for wireless telephony services. Note that the 802.11 family of wireless standards includes among others 802.11a 802.11b and 802.11g. Enterprise network may also utilize interactive voice response IVR . Enterprise network may include any number of wireless network devices gateways Call Managers and other appropriate communications equipment for use in communicating with mobile station and PSTN . In the embodiment illustrated enterprise network includes access point gateway Call Manager and mobility application . Access point represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for providing wireless access to enterprise network . Access point may utilize one or more of the 802.11 standards. However any appropriate wireless standard or protocol may be used.

Gateway represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for interconnecting enterprise network with cellular network and or PSTN . Gateway may be used to convert communications between different communication protocols. For example gateway may convert communications received from cellular network in SS7 protocol to any of various other protocols that may be used by enterprise network such as protocols associated with the an integrated services digital network ISDN standard in the case of circuit switched trunking and H.323 session initiation protocol SIP or other appropriate protocols in the case of IP based trunking.

Call Manager represents communications equipment or a communications platform including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic for providing telephony services over enterprise network . For example Call Manager may support VoIP communications using any of various protocols such as SIP signaling connection control point SCCP protocol media gateway control protocol MGCP H.323 and or any other appropriate protocol for VoIP. Furthermore Call Manager may act as an IP PBX and support PBX functions such as hold park transfer redirect and or other high level and low level call management features.

Mobility application represents a server in one embodiment of the present invention but alternatively could be replaced with any other appropriate device e.g. a router switch bridge gateway etc. that facilitates the operations detailed herein. Mobility application includes any suitable collection of hardware software and controlling logic to support a handoff between cellular network and enterprise network as outlined herein in this document. For example mobility application may when appropriate utilize PBX features to effect a handoff of a communication session between cellular network and enterprise network .

It should also be noted that the internal structure of mobility application and mobile station are malleable and can readily be changed modified rearranged or reconfigured in order to achieve their intended operations as they pertain to the handoff function and or the generic transfer function. As used herein in this document the term generic transfer function is inclusive of the blind call transfer BCT function and the explicated call transfer ECT function as well as any other mobile device feature that is operable to execute any such operation. For example a simple conference operation e.g. a 3 way conference is included within such broad terminology. Software and or hardware may reside in these elements or in just one in order to achieve the teachings of the present invention. Hence software and or hardware is provided in mobile station which knows how to autonomously invoke cellular features e.g. conferencing transfer redirect three way calling barging operations HOLD resume call waiting caller ID etc. to achieve an effective handoff.

However due to their flexibility these elements mobility application and mobile station may alternatively be equipped with or include any suitable component device application specific integrated circuit ASIC processor microprocessor algorithm read only memory ROM element random access memory RAM element erasable programmable ROM EPROM electrically erasable programmable ROM EEPROM field programmable gate array FPGA or any other suitable element or object that is operable to facilitate the operations thereof. Considerable flexibility is provided by the structures of mobility application and mobile station in the context of communication system and accordingly they should be construed as such.

PSTN represents communications equipment including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic through which cellular network and enterprise network may communicate. PSTN may include switches wireline and wireless communication devices and any other appropriate equipment for interconnecting cellular network and enterprise network . PSTN may include portions of public and private networks providing network transport services between various geographic areas and networks.

Mobile station represents a mobile device including hardware and any appropriate controlling logic capable of communicating with devices through cellular network and enterprise network and maintaining communication sessions with remote devices during handoff between cellular network and enterprise network . Mobile station may communicate through cellular network using base station and through enterprise network using access point . Furthermore mobile station may interact with Call Manager and or mobility application when appropriate to utilize PBX features to effect a handoff between cellular network and enterprise network .

In operation mobile station may initiate and receive telephone calls through cellular network and or enterprise network to establish communication sessions with remote devices. Note that as used herein a remote device refers to any communications device capable of establishing communications sessions with mobile station such as devices located in cellular network enterprise network PSTN or other linked networks. Furthermore as used herein a communication session refers to the transfer of voice video data and or other information between two or more communication devices. For example according to particular embodiments a communication session may involve a call between two communication devices or a conference call involving two or more communication devices.

At any point in time mobile station may determine to handoff a communication session from cellular network to enterprise network or from enterprise network to cellular network . For example after establishing a communication session mobile station may lose or begin to lose connectivity with base station or WLAN access point . Signal degradation may occur due to various causes. For example mobile station may begin to lose wireless connectivity due to physical movement. When possible mobile station may switch between using base station and WLAN access point for communications. Moreover in certain circumstances mobile station may maintain a communication session during handoff between cellular network and enterprise network .

Handoff may occur when mobile station travels from an area serviced by cellular network to an area serviced by enterprise network . Handoff may also occur in the opposite direction when mobile station travels from an area serviced by enterprise network to an area serviced by cellular network . However handoff may occur at any other appropriate time. For example handoff may occur when mobile station is located in an area serviced by both network types due to a predetermined preference of one type of network due to a spontaneous choice of a user of mobile station or in response to analyzing error rates or other data associated with signaling provided by one or both types of networks. For example error rates may be associated with signal strengths of base station and access point and may be dependent upon a location of mobile station .

The actual handoff may be invoked by mobile station which is capable of leveraging a transfer function or a conferencing function to achieve this operation. Details relating to these operations in both directions are provided below with reference to .

It should be noted that communication system represents only one embodiment of a system that supports handoff between cellular and enterprise wireless networks. Various alternative embodiments are possible. For example while in the illustrated embodiment enterprise network couples to cellular network through PSTN using gateway various other embodiments may include enterprise network coupling to cellular network in other ways. For example enterprise network may couple to cellular network using a service provider that supports VoIP. Thus in alternative embodiments cellular network and gateway may not be included in communication system .

Handoff processing module knows how to invoke a mobile device feature autonomously such that a handoff can be achieved. This ability is present when mobile station is on cellular network or in enterprise network . Mobile station also performs general feature invocation when it is on enterprise network .

Processor controls the operation and administration of elements within mobility application . For example processor operates to process information received from network interface and memory . Processor includes any hardware and or logic elements operable to control and process information. For example processor may be a programmable logic device a microcontroller a microprocessor and or any other suitable processing device.

Network interface communicates information to and receives information from devices coupled to enterprise network . For example network interface may communicate with gateway Call Manager and access point . Furthermore network interface may receive information from and transmit information to remote devices as well as mobile station . Thus network interface includes any suitable hardware or controlling logic used to communicate information to or from elements coupled to mobility application .

Memory stores either permanently or temporarily data and other information for processing by processor and communication using network interface . Memory includes any one or a combination of volatile or nonvolatile local or remote devices suitable for storing information. For example memory may include random access memory RAM read only memory ROM magnetic storage devices optical storage devices or any other suitable information storage device or a combination of these devices. As illustrated memory may include one or more memory modules such as code .

Code includes software executable files and or appropriate logic modules capable when executed to control the operation of mobility application . For example code may include executable files capable of supporting handoff between cellular network and enterprise network . Code may include instructions to enable mobility application to utilize PBX features. In addition code could also be provided in order to offer both or multiple calls to mobile station as outlined herein.

In operation network interface may receive an indication from mobile station that mobile station intends to utilize a second network for example cellular network . In some embodiments processor may communicate a handoff number to mobile station through network interface . Note that mobility application may use any appropriate protocol to communicate with other elements of communication system . For example mobility application may utilize Java telephony application programming interface JTAPI to interact with Call Manager .

While this example includes specific functional components for mobility application and mobile station these elements may include any collection and arrangement of components including some or all of the enumerated functional components for supporting feature invocation. Moreover mobility application contemplates implementing each of the functional components using any suitable combination and arrangement of hardware and or logic and implementing any of the functionalities using a computer program stored on a computer readable medium. Furthermore mobility application may be implemented as a stand alone device or aspects of mobility application may be distributed among various devices within enterprise network . Alternatively in some embodiments mobility application may be incorporated into Call Manager .

Turning now to are simplified flowcharts associated with a method for providing a seamless handoff in communication system . illustrates an in to out protocol i.e. from an enterprise network to a public network while provides an out to in protocol as outlined below. Communication system can leverage existing features of PLMN VoIP and other systems to accomplish a seamless handover function among different networks. Concisely stated mobile station can recognize that a transferred call is an inter network roaming call and therefore answer the call automatically without the attention of user.

Note that there are typically two major components in the effort for the handover 1 multimode radios work simultaneously to maintain radio links such that radio frame exchanges as between mobile station and a network e.g. the GSM network and the WLAN network will not be lost and 2 continuous monitoring of the quality of both networks. An appropriate handoff is performed when it is determined that one radio link is inferior to the other link with a sufficient margin over a period of time .

Features such as call transfer and conference call modified can be used to serve as the platform for the handover. Mobile station can initiate an automatic handover based signal quality and subsequently connect a transferred or a conference call. Mobile station can also drop the unused call leg. These operations are further detailed below with reference to .

In operation of a flow that considers an in to out protocol consider the example of where an end user is within a building and is conducting a call on his mobile device. This is illustrated by step . There is typically good wireless LAN coverage during a call in such an environment. Also there is generally overlapping coverage between cellular network and enterprise network .

If the end user begins to walk to his car the signal may degrade at step . The mobile device may initiate a transfer of this call to another user such that a handoff can be executed at step . That user is actually the same end user of this phone but the system does not distinguish between the two. Stated otherwise the system is not aware of the fact that the transferee and the transferor are the same entity.

By using the BCT function which is already configured on the mobile device the mobile device can execute a handoff such that the call is handed to the public network such as cellular network . This is illustrated by step . The BCT or the ECT function is normally done manually. For example if a person is involved in the call the end user can physically invoke this feature. In the present invention the BCT and ECT functions are invoked autonomously by the mobile device.

These operations can be initiated and performed by handoff processing module which is responsible for feature invocation and for determinations related to handoff scenarios. In other embodiments any other suitable element is used to perform these operations. At step the call is handed off in a seamless fashion such that the call continues with no or minimal disruption for the end user.

The scenario illustrated by is not as critical as the one depicted by because without the scenario of calls may be lost or dropped. Notwithstanding the scenario of is significant as it represents a handoff going from out to in from a public network to an enterprise network .

In this scenario an end user is already using the public network e.g. cellular network at step . At step the end user elects to roam to a location that is proximate to a building which has coverage provided to it by enterprise network . Note that the mobile device includes intelligence that constantly scans its environment for signal strength or for the presence of other networks.

As the end user enters the building at step the mobile device elects to initiate the transfer function. In a GSM environment the mobile device leverages the ECT function which is inherent in this architecture to perform the handoff. This is illustrated by step . Enterprise network effectively picks up the call at step . Hence an effective handoff has been executed via a generic transfer function although only one end user was involved in the transfer.

For the scenarios of only mobile station needs an upgrade e.g. software to perform the outlined functions. In other embodiments for example in a conferencing scenario mobility application may also require intelligence to accommodate the conferencing scenario. In the conferencing scenario the primary call should be dropped but not the second leg of the call.

Note that while the preceding examples include specific functional components for mobile station mobile station may include any collection and arrangement of components including some or all of the enumerated functional components for communicating with remote devices using cellular network and or enterprise network and effecting a handoff between cellular network and enterprise network . Moreover mobile station contemplates implementing each of the functional components using any suitable combination and arrangement of hardware and or logic. Thus in one embodiment mobile station is a mobile phone. In other embodiments mobile station may be a personal digital assistant PDA any type of telephone an electronic notebook a laptop computer or any other device operable to establish communications with cellular network and enterprise network .

The preceding discussions illustrate particular methods for effecting handoffs between cellular network and enterprise network . However these discussions illustrate only exemplary methods of operation. While discussions often focus on particular transfer mechanisms e.g. ECT and BCT communication system contemplates devices using any suitable techniques elements and applications for performing these handoff functions. Furthermore many of the steps in the discussions may take place simultaneously and or in different orders than as shown. In addition the devices may use methods with additional steps or fewer steps so long as the methods remain appropriate. Moreover other devices of communication system may perform similar techniques to support feature invocation and handoffs between cellular network and enterprise network .

It is critical to note that the stages and steps in the FIGURES illustrate only some of the possible scenarios and operations that may be executed by or within the present system. Some of these stages and or steps may be deleted or removed where appropriate or these stages and or steps may be modified enhanced or changed considerably without departing from the scope of the present invention. In addition a number of these operations have been described as being executed concurrently with or in parallel to one or more additional operations. However the timing of these operations may be altered. The preceding example flows have been offered for purposes of teaching and discussion. Substantial flexibility is provided by the tendered architecture in that any suitable arrangements chronologies configurations and timing mechanisms may be provided without departing from the broad scope of the present invention. Accordingly communications capabilities data processing features and elements suitable infrastructure and any other appropriate software hardware or data storage objects may be included within communication system to effectuate the tasks and operations of the elements and activities associated with executing handoffs.

Although the present invention has been described in detail with reference to particular embodiments it should be understood that various other changes substitutions and alterations may be made hereto without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. The illustrated network architecture of has only been offered for purposes of example and teaching. Suitable alternatives and substitutions are envisioned and contemplated by the present invention such alternatives and substitutions being clearly within the broad scope of communication system . For example the use of gateway could be supplanted by bridges switches routers or any other suitable devices that are conducive to network communications.

Numerous other changes substitutions variations alterations and modifications may be ascertained to one skilled in the art and it is intended that the present invention encompass all such changes substitutions variations alterations and modifications as falling within the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

