---

title: System and method for voicemail privacy
abstract: An integrated messaging system for performing various types of messaging across different types of networks, including integrated user interfaces and administrator interfaces. Embodiments include a communication server that couples among networks of different types, and an interface module that couples to the communication server. The interface module may be hosted on a messaging server of a network. The interface module pulls various user information from the messaging server, including information relevant to at least the network that includes the messaging server. A cache couples to the communication server and to the interface module to hold information from the communication server and/or the user information pulled from messaging server. The interface module directs a message from the messaging server and/or the cache to at least one device on the networks using the user information.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08059793&OS=08059793&RS=08059793
owner: Avaya Inc.
number: 08059793
owner_city: Basking Ridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050207
---
Integrated Multi Media Communication System U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 271 invented by Jens Skakkebaek Heine Frifeldt and Anthony Shaffer filed Feb. 7 2005 

Form Based User Interface For Controlling Messaging U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 537 invented by Heine Frifeldt Anthony Shaffer and Willem R. B. Potze filed Feb. 7 2005 

Controlling Messaging Actions Using Form Based User Interface U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 146 invented by Heine Frifeldt Anthony Shaffer and Willem R. B. Potze filed Feb. 7 2005 

Caching Message Information In An Integrated Communication System U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 147 invented by Shahriar Vaghar Yang Wang and Jens Skakkebaek filed Feb. 7 2005 

Distributed Cache System U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 411 invented by Shahriar Vaghar Yang Wang and Jens Skakkebaek filed Feb. 7 2005 

Caching User Information In An Integrated Communication System U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 272 invented by Jens Skakkebaek Willem R. B. Potze and Heine Frifeldt filed Feb. 7 2005 

Integrating Messaging Server Directory Service With Communication System Voice Mail Message Interface U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 709 invented by Heine Frifeldt David Forney and Anthony Shaffer filed Feb. 7 2005 

Improved Message Data Access In Multi Media Communication System U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 736 invented by Jens Skakkebaek and Heine Frifeldt filed Feb. 7 2005 

Networked Voicemail U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 425 invented by David Forney Jens Skakkebaek Heine Frifeldt and Anthony Shaffer filed Feb. 7 2005 

Extensible Diagnostic Tool U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 270 invented by David Forney Heine Frifeldt and Anthony Shaffer filed Feb. 7 2005 

System And Method For Providing Code On Voicemail Appliance U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 538 invented by Jens Skakkebaek and Lutz Birkhahn filed Feb. 7 2005 

Integrated Voice Mail User Email System User Setup in Integrated Multi Media Communication System U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 539 invented by Heine Frifeldt David Forney and Anthony Shaffer filed Feb. 7 2005 and

System And Method For Providing Data On Voicemail Appliance U.S. application Ser. No. 11 053 376 invented by Jens Skakkebaek and Lutz Birkhahn filed Feb. 7 2005.

The disclosure herein relates generally to communication systems and more particularly to integrated communication and messaging systems.

As methods of communication continue to proliferate enterprises continue to desire integrated systems for handling all aspects of multi media communication for enterprise users. An enterprise can be any collection of users of communication media having some common purpose but a typical example is a company with one or more sites and some number of employees who are users of communication media. Communication media include electronic mail email messaging Short Messaging Service SMS messaging voice messaging and more. Users receive and send messages over a variety of wired and wireless networks via a variety of devices such as desktop computers wired phones wireless devices e.g. phones and personal digital assistants PDAs and more.

Enterprises currently have the ability to centralize and manage email messaging using commercially available groupware that centrally stores information about all of the users and their messages. Enterprises also have the ability to centrally manage traditional voice messaging using a Private Branch Exchange PBX . However the systems for managing email messaging and the systems for managing voice mail messaging are not at all well integrated. For example when a new user is added to the enterprise a system administrator for the enterprise sets up the user in the email system using the groupware application and its set methods data and protocols. In addition a different administrator specializing in telephony must set up the user in the voice messaging system using different methods data and protocols. Voice data and email data are typically stored in separate databases. Both initial user setup and updating user information are complicated by the fact that the email and voice systems are so distinct.

The management of and access to the voice mail message information and email information in the enterprise is also complicated by the current lack of integration of the two voice and email systems. There are various challenges to be overcome if one were to attempt to integrate the two systems.

All publications and patent applications mentioned in this specification are herein incorporated by reference to the same extent as if each individual publication or patent application were specifically and individually indicated to be incorporated by reference.

In the drawings the same reference numbers identify identical or substantially similar elements or acts. To easily identify the discussion of any particular element or act the most significant digit or digits in a reference number refer to the Figure number in which that element is first introduced e.g. element X is first introduced and discussed with respect to .

An embodiment of the invention is directed to a voicemail system. A caller using the system is able to leave a voicemail message request that the voicemail be private. When the voicemail is private this may mean various things. For example the system may be configured such that the voicemail may be read by only the recipient. The voicemail system uses an e mail system to store the voicemail and provide the voicemail to the recipient. The system prepares an e mail message containing the voicemail. Before placing the voicemail message into the e mail system and providing the message to the recipient the e mail containing the voicemail is protected using a protection scheme of the e mail system. The protection scheme enforces the privacy requested by the caller. Then the e mail containing the voice message is provided to the recipient. The e mail system s protection scheme prevents the recipient of the e mail from taking an action not allowed for the private message. For example if the recipient attempts to forward the e mail the e mail protect scheme will not take this action with the e mail.

Private communications network is coupled to the public communications network . This allows for the private communications network such as a PBX found in an enterprise to connect users of the private communications network to communicate with others in the outside world. Private communications network is also coupled to the voicemail system and to various users of the private communications network such as user B user C and user D. According to various embodiments of the invention private communications network may couple to telephone devices of these users such as telephone devices and . According to other embodiments of the invention private communications network may also be coupled to the computer systems of these users such as computer system computer system and computer system .

Voicemail system is coupled to voicemail system to e mail system connector which is coupled to e mail system . E mail system is coupled to the various computer systems of users such as computer system of user B. Thus the various users are able to receive the voice communications from private communications network over the respective telephone devices and e mail and other data communication from e mail system over the respective computer systems. Various forms of integration between private communications network voicemail system and e mail system are possible according to various embodiments of the invention.

Voicemail system to e mail system connector may exist in various forms according to various embodiments of the invention. For example such a connector may comprise software on e mail system . Alternatively voicemail system to e mail system connector may comprise software on a messaging and collaboration server that works in connection with e mail system . For example voicemail system to e mail system connector may comprise software running on a system such as Microsoft Exchange which also provides messaging capability to support e mail system . Alternatively voicemail system to e mail system connector may be included within voicemail system or may be a separate system according to other embodiments of the invention.

Voice message is converted to an e mail in voicemail system to e mail system connector . This conversion takes place in voicemail to e mail conversion block . The e mail is protected in block which provides protection of the e mail to enforce the privacy requested by user A. This is protection that is recognized by e mail system . Thus when e mail system receives the resulting e mail e mail system can enforce the privacy requested by user A.

In this example e mail contains a voicemail intended for user B. Thus e mail is delivered to computer system which is associated with user B. Computer system displays e mail as a message on the user interface. The e mail system enforces the privacy of the message through a policy enforcement mechanism of e mail system . Policy enforcement may be implemented in various forms. For example software code or logic may be included in e mail system as shown with block . Alternatively a portion of e mail system running on computer system may include the appropriate software code or logic to provide the policy enforcement. The requested form of privacy is enforced for the message. For example here the message may be played by user B for example by pressing play button . However the message may not be forwarded to other users such as to user C or user D as illustrated by the disabled forward button .

The voicemail is converted to an e mail block . This e mail is protected in a scheme that is recognized by the e mail system block . For example the e mail system may have a mechanism that prevents certain types of e mails to be forwarded under certain circumstances. This may be a protection system that is used to protect the e mail in order to achieve the privacy that was requested. The protected e mail is sent through the e mail system block . The e mail may be displayed to the user block . The display may indicate that the e mail contains a voicemail message to the user.

The user is not allowed to take an action prohibited by the protection system for this message given that the message has been marked private by the caller. A command is received from the user block . The command may be a command to take an action on the e mail such as to play the voicemail message. If the user is authorized to have the command executed under the protection scheme that protects the e mail block then the requested action is taken block . For example in a case where the user is the recipient of the voicemail and the user is intended to be able to play the voice message the voice message is played block . If the user is not authorized to execute a particular command with respect to the particular message then such action is not undertaken block . For example the message may have been marked private in a system in which marking private means that the message is only to be listened to by the intended recipient and not to be forwarded to others. In such a system the protection scheme does not allow the message to be forwarded to another user.

The protection scheme may be implemented in various ways. For example if the user is not allowed to forward the message the option of forwarding may not appear in the user interface for the particular message. Alternatively a button for forwarding may be greyed out to indicate that this option is not available. In another example when the user attempts to forward the message the user may receive a message that the message is private and or that the user is not allowed to forward this message.

Voicemail system is coupled to messaging and collaboration server through voicemail system to e mail system connector . Voicemail system to e mail system connector may be implemented in various ways for example as a module contained on the same computer system as messaging and collaboration server or as a separate block or system. Computer system communicates with e mail application which is located on messaging and collaboration server . Voicemail system to e mail system conversion block communicates with rights management application which uses encryption block . Although shown separately according to an embodiment of the invention rights management application and rights management application may be included with a common software application or suite of applications that is called by each of voicemail system to e mail system connector and e mail application .

The caller leaves a voicemail and requests that the voicemail be protected or made private. The recipient of the voicemail is then not able to take actions prohibited by the protection. As shown here user A the caller leaves voice message on voicemail system . User A may be a subscriber or an outside caller who is not a subscriber on voicemail system . In an example where user A is using equipment connected to private communications network user A may leave voice message by communicating through a private communications network. In another example user A makes a call from outside for example where user A is a caller such as a customer or other unrelated individual who is not a subscriber on the system. User A indicates that the voice message is to be protected requesting for example that the voicemail can only be listened to by the intended recipient. This intended recipient may be the subscriber whom user A was calling when user A encountered the voicemail system.

Voice message is converted to an e mail in voicemail to e mail conversion block of voicemail system to e mail connector . First according to one implementation a plain text e mail version of the voicemail is created. The e mail may be either passed internally within the same system or via a network to another machine. According to an embodiment of the invention the message headers e.g. to from cc and bcc fields are converted into an access control list. In the event that a message and collaboration server such as Microsoft Exchange is used as messaging and collaboration server active directory user identities are used to convert the message headers into the appropriate access control list. As shown the message headers from and to are passed to rights management application . Additionally the audio information which contains the voice message is also passed to rights management application . Rights are assigned to viewers of the message. The rights may depend on input from the system user and or administrator and may be set through the administrator s user interface. The access control list the desired rights and the audio message itself are packaged into various structures defined by the rights management application and encryption system . Encryption block returns an encrypted version of the e mail encrypted e mail . Encrypted e mail is returned to e mail conversion block and stored in the data store of messaging and collaboration server as e mail .

When the recipient user B accesses e mail through computer system user B is prevented from taking actions prohibited by the rights management application for this message. Rights management application may exist on messaging and collaboration server . Alternatively appropriate portions of rights management application may be included in other parts of the system such as in a portion of e mail application that runs on computer system . According to an embodiment of the invention if user B attempts to save the message to disk an encrypted copy of the message is saved but not a plain text version. User B is able to take allowed actions with the message such as playing the message through play button on message display . Prohibited actions are not allowed such as forwarding in the event that the requested protection includes a prohibition against forwarding the message. For example as shown here forwarding button is disabled. The user interface may include an indication that the message is a voicemail message as shown here with the indication You have a voice message . The message may include an icon that symbolizes the audio content of the message. According to an embodiment of the invention the user may click icon to take certain actions on the message such as a playing saving deleting or other action on the message. These actions may be limited by the rights management scheme.

A certain level of protection is provided for voicemail messages marked private. However this does not mean that completely hack proof protection is provided in all embodiments of the invention. There may exist some embodiments in which the protection can be defeated under certain circumstances.

The message is prepared for the e mail system so that the privacy requested by the caller may be implemented. For example access control rights and the voice audio message are packaged into structures defined by the e mail system and rights management system block . Depending on the rights management scheme the e mail may be encrypted in a form accessible by the rights management system block . The encrypted e mail is sent through the e mail system block . A command is received from the user block . This user is ordinarily the intended recipient of the voice message. If the command is authorized under the rights management system for this message given that the message has been marked private block then the requested action is taken block . For example the user may request to play the voice message or to forward it to an authorized recipient. If the rights management system authorizes this action with respect to the particular message the system may take such action. If the user attempts an action which is not authorized under the rights management system the system does not take such unauthorized action block . For example if the message is marked private and the system does not offer forwarding of private messages then the system does not take this action.

When user B accesses e mail in message storage user B does so through system user . System user is thus able to access e mail and enforces the protection that was implemented for the particular message to effect the privacy. Voice application communicates with system user in order to access the message and play the message for user B. Thus the rights management scheme is enforced for the message for a voice user using the rights management protection scheme of the e mail application.

A command is received from the user via the voice call block . For example the user may request to listen to the message. The system user passes the request to the e mail system block . The rights management system helps to determine whether the command is authorized under the protection scheme under which the e mail was stored block . If the user command is authorized under the protection scheme the requested action is taken block . For example the user may play the voicemail or forward the voicemail to an authorized recipient if these actions are allowed under the protection scheme. If the action is not authorized the system does not take the respective action block . For example if the message has been marked private and private means the message cannot be forwarded to another recipient or to a particular recipient such action is not taken.

According to an embodiment of the invention the rights of a user to take actions on a voicemail depend on the user s Class of Service. Additionally or alternatively the rights of a user to take actions on a voicemail depend on the Group Policy associated with a user. Additional protection may be applied to voicemails such as temporal expiration the voicemail expires and cannot be accessed and or listened to after a particular time period or after a particular time. The voicemail system and or the messaging and collaboration server include logic to implement the expiration according to various embodiments. According to another embodiment security logic or a rights management system coupled with the messaging collaboration server or the email system applies various restrictions on who can listen to a particular message. For example only members of a particular organization may be able to access and or listen to a voicemail. Other restrictions may include that the voicemail can be accessed and or listed to only once or a limited number or times or that the voicemail may be accessed and or listed to only through the local voice mail system.

The Class of Service may be stored in the active directory AD on the messaging and collaboration server as an attribute associated with a user. Class of service COS is one of the MCS or voice application specific attributes assigned to an MCS user. In telephony a COS includes values for various permissions or levels of service such as dialout privileges none local long distance international etc. voice mailbox privileges voice mailbox capacity length of recorded greeting and so on. Traditionally several telephony COSs are defined by a telephone administrator who is distinguished from the enterprise IT administrator as described herein and each enterprise telephone system user is assigned one of the defined COSs. In traditional enterprises this assignment is accomplished when the telephone administrator sets up a new user of the enterprise telephone system. This is a relatively rigid scheme. For example in order to grant a telephone user one additional privilege not included in his or her current COS typically requires the creation of a new COS.

In the enterprise software world groupware applications typically have a different method for assigning enterprise network resource using a host of capabilities and privileges including specific login times for the user s computer the network printers to which the user is allowed to print the shared files and applications the user is allowed to access etc. In various embodiments the MCS user setup enable process integrates with the existing groupware application schemes for assigning permissions levels of service privileges etc. pertaining to telephony and voice applications which are not traditionally provided for. In one embodiment the MCS user setup enable process integrates with the MS Exchange AD Group Policy GP schema which is considerably more flexible and expandable than the telephony COS method. As such the enterprise IT administrator is able to assign Group Policies in the accustomed manner but the Group Policies effectively encompass all of the required telephone COS concepts. According to the embodiments described a telephone administrator is not needed to define or assign COSs to users of the enterprise telephone system.

In AD a Group Policy Object GPO is a policy setting. The setting of a default desktop for instance is configured in a GPO. A Group Policy Container is an AD object where GPOs are linked. Only sites domains and organizational units OUs can have GPOs linked to them. The Group Policy GP schema is hierarchical with multiple OUs to a domain and multiple domains to a site. There is typically some overlap resulting from the ability to create multiple settings in multiple areas for an enterprise structure. There are therefore inheritance rules in GP to avoid conflicts and assure proper function. GP is applied to a user or computer object in a specific order e.g. local computer site domain domain controller s and OU. In the case of nested OUs GP is applied in order from the highest level OU or parent down to the lowest level OU. Examples of OUs include geographical locations and organizational units e.g. sales and development . Very generally OUs lower in the hierarchy inherit their GPO s from above in such a manner that once a privilege is restricted at a point in the hierarchy it is restricted the rest of the way down. For example if executive management is above sales which is above development executive management may have unlimited dialout privileges. Sales may have dialout to exclude international calls. Development therefore cannot have international call privileges but may have an even lesser dialout privilege such as local only.

Thus a member of the organization has an effective GPO EGPO that needs to be calculated from the schema. In one embodiment the AD GP schema is extended to include telephony related and voice mail related permissions levels of service and privileges. This allows the GPO process for the administrator to remain unchanged. In one embodiment the enterprise is supplied with a compliant GP text file template that is specifically written to include all of the telephony related and voice mail related information currently lacking in groupware applications. The template is mapped into a UI that prompts the administrator to add GP. When the template is brought up in the UI it lists the various telephony related and voice mail related items or COS parameter. Each item includes its own selection box or button which the administrator can check or click to select all the values to be set for different groups. In one embodiment the COS parameters include MaxNumber of Greetings ExtendedAbsenceGreetingAllowed ExtendedAbsenceGreetingLength MaxGreeting Length ExtendedAbsenceGreetingBlockMsgRecord GeneralDialoutPrivileges PasscodeAgingEnabled AccessToSystemDistLists AllowToSendBroadcastMessage ActiveMobileNumber MobilePhoneNumber ExtendedAbsenceText MailboxLanguage CallerFirstLanguage CallerSecondLanguage CallerThirdLanguage and AttendantSchedule.

This process is a one time setup process. The administrator receives the template and goes through the process of extending GP once. After that the user setup process is the same as before for the administrator.

In one embodiment the EGP is retrieved from AD and stored in a cache on the MCS as described in more detail below. In another embodiment as part of the process of populating the custom attribute as described with reference to the EGP is retrieved and stored in the custom attribute as COS. In yet another embodiment the enterprise is relatively simple and each user has a GPO assigned. In that case the GPO for the user can also be cached and retrieved in the same manner as previously described with reference to the EGPO but the amount of time required to retrieve the GPO will be reduced.

The following is a non exhaustive description of various embodiments of systems and methods with which the methods and systems described above may be combined.

Integrated multi media communication systems and methods are provided below. These communication systems and methods collectively referred to herein as integrated communication systems or ICS integrate different types of messaging so that a user of the ICS can access multiple types of messages e.g. voice mail messages electronic mail email messages instant messaging messages SMS Short Messaging System messages MMS Multimedia Messaging System messages etc. with a single message interface. In providing integrated messaging functionality via a single message interface the ICS of an embodiment relieves the dependency of a voice mail system for example by providing users with access to voice mail messages and capabilities of the voice mail system through the local groupware applications and email messaging system.

The ICS generally includes a communication server a cache system and an interface module. The ICS integrates with a messaging and collaboration system and the corresponding groupware applications in a network environment for example. In providing integrated messaging capabilities the communication server and interface module function to route a call received from a caller to a user and in the event the user is not available to receive and route a voice mail message left by the caller. The ICS uses caching processes during the receiving and routing of voice mail messages that provide users with fast access to voice mail messages user information and contact information. Using caching process the ICS also provides access to the voice mail messaging system during periods when the messaging and collaboration system is offline. The ICS also leverages the storage capability of the messaging and collaboration system to eliminate the need for a separate voice mail database.

The message interface of the ICS includes a form based interface for use in retrieving voice mail messages and controlling actions taken on voice mail messages received in the enterprise network system. This form based interface enables a user to retrieve and take various actions on voice mail messages using data of a form provided to the user s client device by the enterprise network email system. Use of the form based interface thus provides users with access to the integrated messaging functions offered by the ICS without a requirement to install or run a dedicated client application on the user s client device.

In the following description numerous specific details are introduced to provide a thorough understanding of and enabling description for embodiments of the ICS. One skilled in the relevant art however will recognize that these embodiments can be practiced without one or more of the specific details or with other components systems etc. In other instances well known structures or operations are not shown or are not described in detail to avoid obscuring aspects of the disclosed embodiments.

IM X of ICS X couples to transfer information or data with communication server X. Additionally IM X couples to transfer information with one or more components of a messaging server X where transferring information includes one or more of pulling receiving retrieving polling transmitting and pushing operations to name a few. As an example of an information transfer between IM X and messaging server X IM X pulls user information from messaging server X and makes the pulled user information available to other components of ICS X wherein the user information includes information relevant to at least network X.

The components of messaging server X may include for example one or more processors X also referred to as central processing units or CPUs and one or more databases X coupled to CPU X. In an embodiment IM X may be hosted on or running under control of messaging server X but is not limited to this configuration. Further messaging server X may be a component of network X that hosts communication server X but is not so limited. For example messaging server X may be hosting a groupware application e.g. Microsoft Exchange LotusNotes etc. of an enterprise network X.

Cache X couples to communication server X and communicates to transfer information with one or more of communication server X IM X and one or more components of messaging server X as described below. Cache X may also couple to additional components not shown of network X.

As an example of information transfers between cache X and communication server X cache X may receive caller information e.g. voice mail messages caller identification etc. from client devices X via communication server X. An example of information transfers between cache X and messaging server X includes transfers in which cache X receives user information from messaging server X where the user information may be routed from messaging server X via IM X and or communication server X. Another example of information transfers between cache X and messaging server X includes transfers in which messaging server X receives information from cache X routed from cache X via communication server X and or IM X.

Examples of information transfers between cache X and IM X include transfers of user information pulled from messaging server X by IM X and directed to cache X and transfers in which IM X directs a message from at least one of messaging server X and cache X to at least one device on networks X and X using the user information. Cache X holds or temporarily stores the received information under the above examples.

Networks X and X include various network components not shown of one or more communication service providers or carriers but are not so limited. Further networks X and X and corresponding network components can be any of a number combination of network types known in the art for providing communications among coupled devices X and X including but not limited to proprietary networks local area networks LANs metropolitan area networks MANs wide area networks WANs backend networks public switched telephone networks PSTN the Internet and other public networks for example. Additionally networks X and X may include hybrid networks that use a proprietary network for some portion of the communications routing for example while using one or more different public networks for other portions of the communications routing.

Client devices X and X include communication devices like telephones cellular telephones and radio telephones. Client devices X and X also include processor based devices like for example portable computers PC portable computing devices personal digital assistants PDA communication devices cellular telephones portable telephones portable communication devices and user devices or units. Client devices can include so called multi modal devices where the user can interact with the device and or the ICS through any form of input and output such as text input speech recognition text output text to speech graphics recorded files and video. In such devices the speech recognition and text to speech generation may partly take place in the device and partly in the ICS. Sound and or video may be generated by the ICS by a continuous stream of sound and or video data sent to the device. Client devices can include all such devices and equivalents and are not limited to any particular type of communication and or processor based device. In an embodiment client devices X are client devices operating in a private network environment like an enterprise network while client devices X are client devices operating in different private network environments or under any number of public networks.

Continuing processes X include pulling user information from a messaging server coupled to the ICS at block X as described above. The user information includes information relevant to users of at least the network hosting the ICS but is not so limited. Processes X also include caching pulled user information from the messaging server at block X. Additionally processes X include use of the user information of the cache to direct a message from at least one of the messaging server and the cache to one or more client devices on any of the networks at block X.

The ICS of an embodiment integrates different types of messaging so that a user of the ICS can access all of the message types e.g. voice mail messages electronic mail or email messages etc. with a single message interface also referred to as a user interface or UI . In providing integrated messaging functionality via a single message interface the ICS of an embodiment relieves the dependency on a voice mail system with a dedicated voicemail and user database for example by providing users with access to voice mail messages and capabilities of the voice mail system through the local email messaging system.

Components of ICS X include a communication server and an interface not shown . The interface of ICS X may run under control of messaging server X as described above but is not so limited. Information flow X begins when in response to receiving data streams from networks X of different types ICS X generates a first message X and transfers first message X to messaging server X via a communication with messaging server X. First message X may be a voice mail message Voice Mail Type or VMT but is not limited to this type of message. For purposes of the description herein a voice mail message is left by a caller to the ICS. For example in an embodiment where Microsoft Exchange is the messaging server X the VMT may be implemented using Message Class and or Message Type fields associated with messages in Microsoft Exchange.

Following or simultaneous with receipt of first message X the messaging server X detects or identifies a type of first message X using information of the first message and generates a second message X. Second message X is of a different type from that of first message X and includes information of first message X. Second message X may for example be an email message but is not limited to this type of message. Second message X is transferred to a client device X via a communication with client device X where the communication uses a communication protocol of network X.

Responsive to receipt of second message X client device X determines a type of the second message and requests form data X that corresponds to second message X. Messaging server X in response to the request for form data X transfers form data X to client device X via the second coupling. One or more components of ICS X generate and or provide form data X for storage in messaging server X and form data X is generated under the communication infrastructure of network X. The form data may be displayed to the user using the corresponding form.

Client device X uses form data X to view contents of second message X. The client device also uses form data X to establish communications with communication server X of ICS X via a third coupling. The communication protocol of the third coupling is different than the communication protocol of the second coupling but is not so limited. An embedded control controls activation of the third coupling. Furthermore the client device allows a user using the client device to direct actions X on first message X via the third coupling with the ICS using the form data. For purposes of the description herein a user is an individual with enabled capability to use functions within the ICS.

As an example under information flows X is a flow diagram for integrated communication processes X using ICS X under an embodiment. Processes X include transferring a first message to a messaging server from a communication server via a first coupling at block X. Processes X also include generating a second message at the messaging server in response to a type of the first message and transferring the second message to a client device via a second coupling at block X. The second message may be of a different type than the first message and includes data of the first message. Processes X further include transferring to the client device form data that corresponds to the first message at block X. Additionally processes X include establishing a third coupling between the client device and the communication server using the form data at block X. Moreover processes X include directing actions on the first message from the client device using the form data the actions directed via the third coupling at block X.

The ICS of an embodiment integrates messages of different types to enable a user to access a number of message types through components of the ICS. Thus an application of the ICS of an embodiment is as a substitute for a voice mail system in an enterprise network where the ICS enables a user to receive and or take action on voice mail messages using the enterprise email system.

Communication server X couples to any number of client devices X external to enterprise network X via one or more networks not shown as described above with reference to . Similarly communication server X couples to any number of client devices X local to enterprise network X.

Communication server X includes an operating system X as well as numerous components or subsystems. These components include but are not limited to one or more Voice Applications X an Execution Engine X and any number of Mobile Application Modules X as described below or any other type of application module.

The MCS of an embodiment includes an Operating System along with an Execution Engine some number of Voice Applications and some number of Mobile Applications. The Operating System includes for example a Linux kernel with a journaling file system that provides integrity of file system tables and the data structure. The storage on the MCS may be configured as a RAID Redundant Array of Independent Disks configuration to provide high reliability access to software and data. The Operating System supports operations of numerous other components of the MCS as described below.

With regard to the Operating System the MCS includes a Telephony Interface that couples calls and connects callers and users to from the MCS. The Telephony Interface couples call information to from a private branch exchange PBX not shown for example where the PBX is a component of enterprise network system X. The Telephony Interface couples to the PBX using a variety of telephony integrations that include one or more of analog Simplified Message Desk Interface SMDI T E Voice over Internet Protocol VOIP and Digital Set Emulation DSE signals but may couple using other signals signaling protocols. When receiving a call from the PBX for example the MCS receives data of an incoming call from the PBX where the data includes called party information a reason for transfer of call e.g. called party line busy no answer by called party called party using call forwarding etc. and calling parting information caller ID etc. .

A Driver couples information received at the Telephony Interface to the Telephony Services component of the MCS. The Driver may perform low level signaling and or data conversion as appropriate to the received signals. The Telephony Services include one or more components for use in processing the received signals. These components include for example voice processing switching control and PBX signaling but are not limited to these components.

The MCS of an embodiment includes at least one Voice Browser that when the MCS receives a call receives voice information of the call. The Voice Browser controls the use of automatic speech recognition ASR for speech recognition and DTMF recognition. The Voice Browser of an embodiment couples to a cache or other temporary store that holds voice recordings and or name grammars Voice Recordings Grammars the name grammars are cached after being generated from names in a user list as described below . The ASR may use information of the name grammars. Further the Voice Browser controls the use of text to speech TTS as well as the play of any number of pre recorded prompts e.g. WAVE format files . The Voice Browser uses voice extensible markup language VXML but is not limited to this protocol. Alternative embodiments of the MCS may not include the Voice Browser. As an alternative to a Voice Browser the MCS may directly communicate with or use other software or processes for communication between the voice application and the Telephony Services and or Driver.

The Virtual Machine Voice Applications and Execution Engine form a hierarchical state machine framework in which the Virtual Machine runs a number of APIs and modules. Consequently the Voice Applications can include one component controlling the user interfaces UI to the MCS and another component handling lower level communications with the modules. Use of a loose coupling between the modules and the Voice Browser provided by the state machine framework allows independence between the languages used in the different modules and the Voice Browser. The state machine framework may receive hypertext transport protocol HTTP requests from the Voice Browser for example and generate VXML or Speech Application Language Tags SALT SALT extends existing mark up languages such as hypertext markup language HTML extensible hypertext markup language XHTML and extensible markup language XML and enables multimodal and telephony enabled access to information applications and web services from devices like PCs telephones and PDAs for example .

The Voice Applications of an embodiment include a number of components including an automatic attendant a caller interface a user interface and a system main menu but may include other types of voice applications. The automatic attendant is speech enabled but may be dual tone multi frequency DTMF enabled. The automatic attendant which can be enabled or disabled uses information of contact lists e.g. User List in the Cache.

The Voice Applications also include at least one voice mail application. The voice mail application uses information of the Cache e.g. User List Global Address List Public Folders Personal Contact Folders in operations that include sending a new voice mail and or forwarding a received voice mail. The voice mail application also uses Cache information in support of voice mail networking in which voice mails and corresponding information are exchanged with groupware applications of enterprise network system X as described below.

The voice mail application couples to the MCS state machine framework described above via one or more application programming interfaces API . The APIs handle the different data formats types in use by enterprise network system X e.g. greeting data PIN Personal Identification Number code data voice mail message data system parameters etc. . Similarly the Cache also couples to the state machine framework where the Cache includes one or more of local cache and distributed cache. Therefore communications among the voice mail application the Cache and the MSERV take place via the state machine framework and the APIs as appropriate to the state e.g. offline online of the MSERV.

In addition to the Voice Applications the modules running under the Virtual Machine of an embodiment include Mobile Applications. The Mobile Applications provide access to user information via mobile devices where the access may include transferring information of email calendar and or contacts to a user s mobile client device via an electronic message e.g. SMS MMS and or pager .

The MCS also includes an Administration Configuration manager. The Administration Configuration manager provides access to and control of a unified configuration file of the MCS. The Administration Configuration manager uses information of the unified configuration file to provide separate Configuration Files to one or more of the components of the MCS as appropriate. The unified configuration file can be copied from the MCS and stored for backup purposes. Additionally a predefined configuration file may be uploaded to the MCS to provide the appropriate configuration for the MCS. A browser interface to the Administration Configuration manager allows remote access to the MCS.

The MCS also includes a Self Maintenance Supervisor or reliability server that monitors MCS components and restarts failed processes when necessary for example. In addition the MCS also includes Security Restrictions for use in controlling MCS port security.

As described above the MCS of an embodiment interfaces with the MSERV via the IM. The MCS communicates with the IM via the Groupware Connector for example but is not so limited. The Groupware Connector of an embodiment includes a Web Server but is not so limited. The MSERV functions as a messaging and collaboration server. The IM is an interface that runs under the MSERV in one embodiment to provide communications and information transfers between components of the MCS and components of the MSERV. In other embodiments the IM may run under control of the MCS for example. The IM includes and or couples with Management Console X as well as with a diagnostics component Diagnostics Component and or a run time component RTC not shown .

Management Console X supports access to the MCS by a system administrator of enterprise network system X for purposes of managing user access. Consequently Management Console X allows a system administrator to enable new users with integrated messaging functionality of the ICS and administer and monitor one or more MCSs.

The Diagnostics Component of the IM supports on the fly diagnostics gathering computing and or compiling of pre specified diagnostics information or parameters from the MSERV. In this manner the MCS may provide diagnostics information and a user may provide dynamically updateable diagnostics information.

The RTC translates communications between components of the MCS and components of the MSERV. As an example the RTC may be used to retrieve user information from the directory service e.g. Active Directory of a groupware application in response to a request from the MCS as described below. Communications between the RTC and components of the MCS use for example XML and Web Services. Communications between the RTC and the MSERV may use one or more APIs of the MSERV e.g. MAPI Collaboration Data Objects CDO Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning WebDAV etc. .

The MSERV of an embodiment represents a messaging and collaboration server. The messaging and collaboration server includes a groupware application that runs on one or more servers and enables users via local client devices to send and or receive electronic mail and other forms of interactive communication through computer networks. The MCS of an embodiment interoperates with groupware applications that include but are not limited to Microsoft Exchange Server but alternative embodiments may use other types of messaging and collaboration servers. Therefore the MCS of an embodiment interoperates with client device applications client applications such as Microsoft Outlook as well as with other email client applications e.g. Microsoft Outlook Express .

The MSERV sends and receives email messages through what is commonly referred to as a client device such as a personal computer workstation or a mobile device including mobile phones or PDAs. The client device typically connects to the LAN which may include any number and or combination of servers or mainframe computers where the email mailboxes and public folders are stored. The centralized servers connect to numerous other types of networks e.g. private or proprietary and the Internet to transmit and receive email messages to other email users. Consequently the MCS uses the MSERV for storing and forwarding email messages in an embodiment.

The MSERV also couples to a directory service not shown which is a database of information on each user account in the enterprise network system. Access to the directory service may use for example a Lightweight Directory Access Protocol LDAP .

With regard to client device access functionality the MSERV provides integrated collaborative messaging features such as scheduling contact and task management capabilities. As an example MSERV configuration when the MSERV is Microsoft Exchange the MSERV runs on a version of the Microsoft Windows Server operating system. A version of Microsoft Office Outlook runs on Windows based local client devices and communicates with the MSERV through the messaging application programming interface MAPI protocol. The MSERV also accommodates other client device access by supporting one or more of Post Office Protocol 3 POP3 and Internet Message Access Protocol 4 IMAP4 protocols as well as support for Simple Mail Transfer Protocol SMTP . Using this same MSERV configuration example the MCS of an embodiment along with Microsoft Outlook Web Access a service in Microsoft Exchange accommodates web browser based access clients also referred to as thin clients.

The MSERV collaboration features support information sharing among users. Collaborative scenarios include maintaining shared address lists that all users can view and edit scheduling meetings that include people and conference rooms by viewing associated free or busy schedules the ability to grant other people such as administrators access to user mailboxes on behalf of the user.

As described above the IM serves as an interface for the transfer of information between components of the MCS and components of the MSERV. Transferring information includes for example pulling receiving retrieving polling transmitting and pushing operations to name a few. As an example of information transfers between the MCS and the MSERV the IM pulls information from one or more components of the MSERV and makes the pulled information available to for example the MCS Cache. The IM also pushes information from one or more components of the MCS to the MSERV.

In serving as an interface between the MCS and the MSERV the components of the IM e.g. RTC translate communications between components of the MCS e.g. Virtual Machine Cache etc. and components of the MSERV environment. As an example the IM retrieves user information from components of the directory service e.g. Active Directory in response to a request from the MCS Cache.

Embodiments of the IM may include one or more of the following components an RTC a Management Console a desktop component messaging actions control component Diagnostics Component and or a message waiting indication component. The desktop component allows the user to configure aspects of the user s integrated messaging account such as voice message greetings extended absence greeting PIN code data and presence information. The messaging actions control component receives and responds to user generated requests from the FBUI defined herein to take actions such as playing replaying to and forwarding voice messages as well as calling the sender of a voice mail message. The message waiting indication component receives events from the user s message inbox folder and requests corresponding action from the PBX or other aspect of the telephony system such turning on message waiting indicators on the user s device s . The message waiting indication component may send notifications by way of SMS MMS and or pager.

Directory service X provides a location for storage of information about network based entities such as applications files and printers to name a few. Directory service X also stores information about individuals also referred to as users and this information is referred to herein as User Information. As such directory service X provides a consistent way to name describe locate access manage and secure information about individual resources in an enterprise network environment. Directory service X uses the stored information to act as the main switchboard of the enterprise network operating system and is therefore the central authority that manages the identities and brokers the relationships between distributed resources of the enterprise network thus enabling the resources to work together. Directory service X of an embodiment may be Microsoft Active Directory AD but is not so limited.

In embodiments including AD there is a user object stored in an AD Database for each enterprise user. For example the user object for enterprise USER 2 is shown as USER 2 object X. The user object includes many fixed attributes such as user name user phone number user mailbox location and user email address.

The user object further includes a number of Custom Attributes. The number of Custom Attributes is small for example fifteen compared to the number of fixed attributes. The Custom Attributes are usable to store information not provided for in the predefined fixed attributes. In one embodiment a Custom Attribute stores user specific data that is used by the Voice Applications. Examples of such user specific data include a class of service COS for the user a voice mail extension for the user whether voice mail is enabled for the user etc. The data is stored as a data stream in the Custom Attribute with a maximum size of 2048 bytes. In an alternative embodiment the user specific data that is used by the Voice Applications is stored as individual data items in fixed attributes by extending AD in a known manner.

The user mailbox location fixed attribute indicates where the user s email mailbox is stored in the enterprise. In some large enterprises there may be many MSERVs each including a database storing many user mailboxes. As shown the mailbox location fixed attribute points to USER 2 mailbox X on an MSERV called MSERV .

User mailbox X stores email messages sent to the user as well as outgoing messages and other items for predetermined periods of time. In an embodiment the messages can be of at least two types one of which is a normal message that is routinely accessible by the user. Another message type is a hidden message that is not routinely accessible by the user through the normal user email interfaces. In an embodiment a hidden message is used to store data used by the Voice Applications. In contrast to the data stored in the Custom Attribute however the data stored in the hidden message can be much larger than the 2048 byte limit of the custom attribute. In one embodiment among the data stored in the hidden message are audio files stored as attachments to the hidden message such as a busy greeting for the user s voice mail mailbox a no answer greeting for the user s voice mail mailbox and a recorded name for the user s voice mail mailbox.

An example of the MCS accessing the MSERV environment X through IM X is a phone caller calling the voice mail mailbox of USER 2 when USER 2 is on the phone. The MCS transmits an action via IM X with a request to play busy greeting. The transmission includes information to access the USER 2 object X fixed attributes to determine the user s email mailbox location. In addition the transmission includes information to access the USER 2 object X Custom Attribute and to transfer the contents of the Custom Attribute to the MCS via IM X. When the user s email mailbox is accessed the hidden message is opened to transfer the appropriate audio file busy greeting in this case to the MCS for playing over the phone to the caller. In many cases it may not be necessary to transfer either the Custom Attribute or the audio file from the MSERV environment X because the current custom attributes and audio file are cached on the MCS.

As described above operations of the Voice Applications and the Virtual Machine couple the Cache and other components of the MCS to components of the MSERV via the IM. As such the MCS and the IM support the transfer of information between the Cache and backend network components like the MSERV and the database. This configuration provides transparency between the Voice Applications and data stored in the database when using information of the database to support voice mail messaging functions of the MCS as described below.

The information transfers between the Cache and the MSERV along with use of the Custom Attributes and Hidden Messages as described above allow the ICS to overcome the need for an external database to store information stored by a typical voice mail system. This is because the information used by the MCS in providing voice mail message capabilities integrated with the email messaging capabilities of the enterprise network is pulled by the MCS from the MSERV via the IM. The pulling or retrieving may be performed periodically continually on demand and or in response to particular events e.g. update of the information in the MSERV but is not so limited. The information pulled by the MCS includes information of a Global Address List GAL information of one or more Public Folders Personal Contacts and information of a User List. 

The GAL includes information of all users in the enterprise network having access privileges that include the use of email. Public Folders include information of the network enterprise e.g. contacts calendars etc. that are shared with all users. The Personal Contacts include contact information for each user.

The User List includes User Information for a subset of users in the GAL each of whom has access privileged that include the use of the ICS. The User List therefore is a subset of the GAL and is retrieved and or cached as a separate list or stream in order to improve efficiency of communications and minimize the delays associated with having the MCS search the entire contents of the GAL for information used in executing a user requested action on a voice mail message. The User List of an embodiment includes one or more of the following parameters corresponding to each user but is not limited to these parameters Site identification mail box number pronounceable name office telephone extension COS automatic attendant state e.g. enabled disabled voice mail state e.g. enabled disabled Voice User Interface VUI state e.g. enabled disabled mobile access state e.g. enabled disabled bad logins locked out attendant destination force change of PIN code mobile gateway identification full name first name last name user name home telephone number office telephone number cellular telephone number identification email address department active greeting state time and date announcement voice mail notification state e.g. enabled disabled mail box status PIN code in encrypted or raw form no answer greeting busy greeting extended absence greeting recorded name and system greeting.

Instead of storing the information pulled from the MSERV in a separate voice mail database as would be done in a typical voice mail system the pulled information is pushed by the IM to the MCS and held in the Cache. The MCS uses the pulled information in subsequent voice mail message manipulation operations as described below. This pulling and caching of information by the MCS improves the speed and efficiency of voice mail message operations and prevents unnecessary loads on the MSERV resulting from the nearly continuous stream of read requests to the MSERV database in typical messaging systems.

The pulling of information from the MSERV by the MCS includes pulling and caching of information including the GAL Public Folder and User List. The pulled information is cached by the MCS on a system or non individual basis because this information applies throughout the enterprise. This information is pulled and cached periodically for example at 24 hour intervals e.g. each morning at 2 00 am or may be loaded on demand but is not so limited.

In contrast the MCS pulls and caches information of the Personal Contacts on a per user basis because this information is different for each user. The Personal Contacts may be requested and cached by the MCS periodically or on demand e.g. at the time a user logs in to the ICS in response to modifications of the Personal Contacts etc. .

In operating to provide integrated messaging capabilities the MCS and the IM function to route a call placed by a caller to a user and in the event the user is not available to receive and route a voice mail message left by the caller. The MCS and the IM also function to provide a user with access to voice mail messages using the messaging server of the enterprise email system. The voice mail access supports both online and offline modes of the messaging server.

An example of call routing by the MCS and with further reference to the MCS receives and detects a call at the Telephony Interface. Data of the call e.g. called party information calling party information reason for call transfer etc. invokes the Voice Browser. The Voice Browser transfers a request to the Voice Applications in response to the call data.

A Dispatcher component of the Voice Applications routes the call to one or more other Voice Application components in accordance with information of the User List. As an example the Dispatcher identifies the target user for the call and determines whether the target user s automatic attendant is enabled. If the automatic attendant is enabled then the automatic attendant receives the call request and provides the caller with one or more call routing options e.g. caller selects call routing by selecting and or saying extension number selecting and or saying name etc. and routes the call according to the caller s input.

As an example one or more of the Voice Applications determine an active greeting currently designated by the user for use in responding to calls e.g. system greeting no answer greeting busy greeting extended absence greeting etc. and retrieve the designated active greeting from one of the Cache or MSERV as appropriate to a state of the MSERV. The respective application s play the greeting activate a record mode to record the voice mail message of the caller and provide the caller with additional options available for call and or message routing e.g. message marking options message delivery options send message route message to additional users etc. . Upon completion of the recording and or selection of a message routing option by the caller the respective application s terminate the call hangs up and transfer the recorded voice mail message to one or more locations in the Cache and or MSERV e.g. a mail box that correspond to the user as described below with reference to X and X. Alternatively the voice mail message may be transferred before the application terminates the call.

As referenced above the MCS of an embodiment in conjunction with the IM supports availability of and access to the voice mail applications when the MSERV is both online and offline through the use of the Cache. The MCS of an embodiment includes an Offline Detector that monitors an availability state of the MSERV and detects unavailability offline condition or offline state of the MSERV. Upon detecting MSERV unavailability the MCS transitions to a mode that supports voice mail message recording and retrieval during the MSERV offline condition.

Caching of select information received and or generated in the MCS including User Information and voice mail information enhances performance of the enterprise network voice messaging system by reducing the instances of data retrieval from the MSERV. Further caching of select information improves the reliability of the enterprise network voice messaging system by allowing access to the voice messaging system during periods when the MSERV is offline.

Information received at the MCS is routed and held in the Cache in accordance with policies running in the state machine framework and or the availability state of the MSERV. Examples of information held in the Cache include but are not limited to the User List Global Address List information of Public Folders information of Personal Contact Folders voice mail message information both the text description portion and the audio message portion of the voice mail message greetings and other user parameters permissions and personal information of users e.g. PIN codes .

Regarding actions taken by the MCS following receiving and recording of a voice mail message when the MSERV is online the MCS generally holds information of the recorded message in the Cache. The MCS may also transfer the recorded voice mail message via the IM to the MSERV where it is stored in the Database.

As an example is an information flow X for routing and accessing voice mail messages via the ICS when the MSERV is in an online state under an embodiment. This information flow X shows one MCS and one MSERV in an enterprise network environment but this is shown only as an example and does not limit the network environment to the types numbers and or coupling of components shown as alternative embodiments may have any number of MCSs and or MSERVs.

Information flow X begins when a caller places a call X to a user and availability of the user results in the caller leaving a voice mail message referred to herein as the VMSG for the user. The voice mail message VMSG is received at the MCS and routed C X to the Cache where it is assigned an identification referred to herein as the CACHEID and held. The voice mail message VMSG may be held in the Cache for a pre specified period of time but the embodiment is not so limited. The voice mail message VMSG and the CACHEID are also routed M X to the MSERV via the IM as described above. The MSERV assigns an identification referred to herein as the VMSGID to the incoming voice mail message VMSG and stores X the voice mail message VMSG along with the VMSGID and CACHEID in one or more areas of memory not shown available to the MSERV. Memory may include any various form of storage or computer readable memories such as but not limited to volatile memory random access memory RAM non volatile memory read only memory ROM EEPROM disk and or other storage devices that may include one or more of magnetic and optical storage media.

As described above the MCS pulls information e.g. periodically on demand etc. from the MSERV via the IM and uses the pulled information in providing voice mail message capabilities integrated with email messaging capabilities of the enterprise network. Therefore pulling operations by the IM include pulling of information identifying the stored voice mail message VMSG where the information identifying the voice mail message VMSG includes but is not limited to the CACHEID. Upon request from the MCS the IM may pull X a voice mail list referred to herein as a VMLIST X which includes CACHEIDs and VMSGIDs for any stored messages from the MSERV environment. The IM pushes X VMLIST X to the MCS where it is held. VMLIST X may be generated from the user s inbox upon each request from the IM or may be stored and maintained in the MSERV or in the cache as a current representation of the contents of a user s voice mailbox or inbox. If and when a time period for holding a VMSG in the Cache expires the VMSG is still identifiable from VMLIST X and can be found in the MSERV if requested using the VMSGID.

Information flow X continues when a user accesses X the enterprise network system to retrieve his her voice mail messages. In an embodiment the user access X causes the VMLIST to be pulled X from the MSERV and pushed X by the IM to the Cache and also or alternatively to the MCS Upon being provided with access to the MCS the user selects one or many voice mail message s by selecting a VMSGID CACHEID item from the VMLIST. In response to the user selection MCS searches X the Cache for a message using the Cache identification CACHEID of the selected message. In a scenario in which the message was left by the caller and the time period for holding the message VMSG in the Cache has not expired the MCS will locate the CACHEID and the message contents VMSG in the Cache. Once located through use of the CACHEID the MCS retrieves R X the voice mail message contents VMSG from the Cache and plays the voice mail message for the user as appropriate to the action selected by the user.

In this manner the MCS provides user access to the contents of the voice mail message VMSG via a mapping and without storing voice mail message contents in the MCS. The mapping includes a mapping of voice mail message contents to identification information of the email environment MSERV environment and mapping identification information of the email environment to identification information of the voice mail environment MCS . In this embodiment therefore the mapping includes mapping of voice mail message contents to the message identification VMSGID and mapping of the message identification VMSGID of the email environment to the MCS identification CACHEID.

As used herein pushing data or information indicates an action of a component or entity that has the affect of transferring the data or information to another component or entity. Transferring includes sending in response to a request query or command and sending on the initiative of the transferring component or entity. The transfer may be an internetwork transfer an intranetwork transfer or a transfer between a network component or entity and a non network component or entity.

As used herein pulling data or information indicates a component or entity receiving transferred data or information. Receiving includes receiving in response to a request query or command and retrieving in response to a request query or command. The transfer may be an inter network transfer an intra network transfer or a transfer between a network component or entity and a non network component or entity.

Information flow X begins when a caller places a call X to a user and availability of the user results in the caller leaving a voice mail message VMSG for the user. The voice mail message VMSG is received at the MCS and routed C X to the cache as described above and the VMSG and CACHEID is routed X to the MSERV via the IM also as described above. The MSERV assigns identification VMSGID to the incoming voice mail message VMSG and stores X the voice mail message VMSG along with the VMSGID in one or more areas of memory not shown available to the MSERV.

Information flow X continues when a user accesses X the enterprise network system to retrieve his her voice mail messages. VMLIST X is pulled X from the MSERV and pushed X by the IM to the MCS. Upon being provided with access to the MCS the user selects a voice mail message from VMLIST X by selecting a CACHEID VMSGID item. The MCS searches X the Cache for the Cache identification CACHEID of the selected message in response to the user selection. Because the message was left by the caller and stored in the MSERV environment and expired in the cache before the user calls in the MCS will not locate the CACHEID in the Cache. Consequently the MCS accesses the MSERV identifies the message VMSG and pulls R X the voice mail message contents from the MSERV environment via the IM. The MCS plays the pulled voice mail message VMSG for the user as appropriate to the action selected by the user.

In addition to the online scenarios described above the MCS of an embodiment provides offline behavior that allows for holding storing and retrieving voice mail messages when the MSERV is offline or unavailable for some reason or during times when the connection between the MCS and the MSERV is unreliable. Offline behavior means absence of a coupling between the MSERV and the MCS. Regarding actions taken by the MCS following recording of a voice mail message when the MSERV is offline a component of the MCS e.g. Offline Detector detects the MSERV is offline. The MCS holds the recorded voice mail message in the in response to detecting the MSERV state as offline. At such time as the MCS detects the MSERV is online the Groupware Connector pulls the voice mail message from the Cache and transfers the recorded voice mail message via the IM to the MSERV where it is stored in the Database.

As an example is an information flow X for routing and accessing voice mail messages via the ICS when the MSERV is in an offline state under an embodiment. This information flow X shows one MCS and one MSERV in an enterprise network environment but this is shown only as an example and does not limit the network environment to these components as alternative embodiments may have any number of MCSs and or MSERVs.

The information flow X begins when a caller places a call X to a user and availability of the user results in the caller leaving a voice mail message VMSG for the user. The voice mail message VMSG is received at the MCS however a component of the MCS detects an unavailable or offline condition of the MSERV. In response to detecting the offline condition the MCS assigns a CACHEID to the incoming message VMSG and holds C X the message contents VMSG along with the CACHEID in the Cache.

Information flow X continues when a user accesses X the enterprise network system to retrieve his her voice mail messages while the MSERV remains in an offline condition. Upon being provided with access to the MCS the user selects a voice mail message from a list of CACHEIDs generated from the collection of voice mail messages held for him her by in the cache. In response to the user selection the MCS searches X the Cache using the Cache identification CACHEID of the selected message. Upon locating the voice mail message by its CACHEID in the Cache the MCS pulls R X the voice mail message contents from the Cache and plays the voice mail message for the user as appropriate to the action selected by the user.

The MCS continues to monitor the condition of the MSERV. At such time as the MCS detects a return of the MSERV to an online condition the MCS pulls P X the voice mail message VMSG and its CACHEID from the Cache and transfers M X the voice mail message and CACHEID via the IM to the MSERV. The MSERV assigns an identification VMSGID to the incoming voice mail message VMSG and stores X the voice mail message VMSG along with the VMSGID and CACHEID in one or more areas of memory as described above.

In addition to the capabilities described above the ICS of an embodiment provides a Form Based User Interface FBUI . The FBUI is a form based messaging or communication interface for use by users in retrieving voice mail messages and controlling actions taken on voice mail messages received in the enterprise network system. This FBUI enables a user to retrieve and take various actions on voice mail messages using data of a form referred to herein as the FBUI FORM that is presented to the user s client device by the enterprise network email system. Use of the FBUI Form thus provides the user with access to the integrated messaging functions offered by the ICS without a requirement to install or run a dedicated client application on the user s client device.

Messaging server environment X includes the MSERV and a Database X but is not so limited. The LAN couples to any number of other networks X and X using any of a variety of communication protocols where the networks X and X may be of the same or of different types. As an example the networks may include a public communications network X and a private communications network X. Private communications network X may be a PBX coupled to the LAN of the enterprise network for example. Networks X and X allow for information transfers between client devices X that are local to enterprise network X and client devices X that are external to enterprise network X. The client devices may alternatively be referred to as user devices X and X.

ICS X replaces the voice mail server typically found in enterprise networks with at least one MCS X. MCS X is coupled to the private communications network e.g. PBX of each network enterprise. While one MCS is shown in this example system X the enterprise network may include multiple MCSs X coupled to enterprise network in an N 1 configuration where N is any number 1 2 . . . X.

For security reasons communication to and from the MCS is restricted in an embodiment. The MCS communicates with the IM servers the private communications network other MCSs and selected client devices. According to an embodiment of the invention communications with the MCS may be restricted to network components having particular known addresses. Additionally or alternatively communications with the MCS may require authentication by passcode or other security measures for certain kinds of access for example for access by the administrator. Security may also or alternatively be encrypted and or provided by requiring a physical connection between the MCS and other component such as in the case of a connection between an MCS and a private communications network through a direct cable connection.

The MCS via the FBUI generally provides a form to a client device from a first server e.g. messaging server MSERV etc. via a network connection. The form includes data or code that when executed by the receiving client device results in presentation of a FBUI on a display of the client device. The FBUI includes a number of buttons or icons that allow a user to select an action on an item via a second server e.g. communication server MCS etc. where the item is stored on the first and or second servers and the first and second servers are different servers. The FBUI of an embodiment uses a web browser embedded in the form as the means for coupling and or communicating with a corresponding browser control of the second server. Communications between the client device and the second server thus avoid security and or other network policy issues that would prohibit the client device from communicating with the second server via the network coupling between the client device and the first server.

As described above the FBUI operates as a form based messaging interface to transfer a first message e.g. voice mail message to a messaging server e.g. MSERV from a communication server e.g. MCS via a first coupling e.g. IM . The messaging server generates a second message e.g. email message in response to a type of the first message and transfers the second message to a client device via a second coupling e.g. LAN . The type of the first message is specified by the communication server using properties on the message that identify the message as a Voice Mail Type VMT message. The second message is of a different type and includes data of the first message but is not so limited. The communication server also transfers to the client device form data that corresponds to the first message. The client device uses the form data to establish a third coupling e.g. browser link between the client device and the communication server. The user may direct actions on the first message from the client device via the third coupling using the form data.

The ICS of an embodiment provides the FBUI X to a user via his her local client device. The FBUI is provided to the client device through the use of a FBUI Form where the structure of the FBUI Form conforms to the message structure of the messaging server environment. For example when the messaging server environment includes the use of Microsoft Exchange and Microsoft Outlook the FBUI Form is generated to comply with Microsoft formats as appropriate to Exchange and Outlook

Information for generation of the FBUI Form is provided to the messaging server environment by the MCS via the IM and the code used for FBUI Form generation is hosted by the MSERV in an embodiment. The FBUI Form of an embodiment includes code that generates information of the FBUI display as well as the buttons of the display. The FBUI Form further includes an embedded browser control for use in establishing communications between the client device displaying the FBUI Form and a web server e.g. MCS IM other server for example. The embedded browser control therefore allows the host client device to couple and communicate with a server that is different from the MSERV via a communication channel that is outside the enterprise network LAN. Thus the FBUI Form enables a communication channel between the local client device currently executing the form and a component like the MCS and or IM in spite of network policy issues that otherwise might prohibit the client device from communicating outside the enterprise network message infrastructure.

Using the FBUI a user can access view and take a variety of actions on his her voice mail messages within an email framework of the host enterprise network system. As an example when the MCS of an embodiment receives a voice mail message it transfers the voice mail message to the MSERV as described above. In transferring the voice mail message to the MSERV the MCS specifies properties on the message that identify the message as a Voice Mail Type VMT message. The message is received and stored by the MSERV as a VMT message using the same storage and retrieval structure as used with other message types like email messages.

At such time as a user wishes to access his her messages via his her client device the active message browser of the client device receives the VMT message along with any other mail messages currently stored in his her electronic mail box. The message browser corresponds to the message structure of the messaging server environment e.g. Outlook in a Microsoft environment . Upon receipt of the message the message browser identifies the message as a VMT message. As the code that implements the FBUI Form is stored on the MSERV implementation of the functionality and or features associated with the FBUI Form uses communication between the user s client device and the MSERV via the LAN. For example the client device message browser requests the FBUI Form from the MSERV in response to identifying a message as a VMT message because this is the form that corresponds to the VMT message type. The MSERV transfers the FBUI Form to the requesting client device and the client device message browser launches the form in response to the user selecting a VMT message for viewing.

The message browser uses data or code of the FBUI Form to display the FBUI on the user s client device. is a sample FBUI X as displayed on a client device under an embodiment. The FBUI X includes three areas X X that present information to a user. The areas include a folder area X a contents area X and a function area X but are not limited to these areas as the UIs of alternative embodiments may present any number and or type of areas. In alternative embodiments all three areas X X may be presented at the same time as shown in FBUI X or various subsets of the three areas may be presented at the same time in various combinations.

Folder area X presents one or more folders to which the user has access via the FBUI X and the client device. The INBOX may contain a list of voice mail messages in the same listing as other messages including email messages. Alternatively the Inbox may include a subfolder VOICE MESSAGES which includes the voice mail messages and selection of this folder results in the presentation of voice mail messages of the user s mail box in the contents area X.

The contents area X generally presents the contents of the folder selected using the folder area X. As an example the contents area X presents information corresponding to any number of voice mail messages in the user s mail box when the INBOX or VOICE MESSAGES folder is selected. Contents area X allows the user to select a particular voice mail message by placing a cursor on VOICE MESSAGE 1 INFORMATION for example. By double clicking a message in the contents area X or otherwise indicating to the message browser to display a voice message a new window referred to as the ICS Window is displayed. The ICS Window now includes function are X.

Function area X of FBUI X presents one or more voice mail action buttons A X E X also referred to herein as buttons each of which represents an action the user may select for a voice mail message. In this example the VOICE MESSAGES folder is selected and selection of a message in contents area X allows the user to take an action on the selected message using buttons A X E X. Placing the cursor of contents area X on a particular message and choosing an action on the selected message with a button A X E X therefore invokes operations on the message via components of the ICS e.g. MCS Cache IM .

The buttons A X E X of an embodiment include a Play on Phone button A X a Play on Computer button B X a Call Sender button C X a Reply by Voicemail button D X and a Forward by Voicemail button E X but the embodiment is not limited to this same number of buttons or to buttons offering the same functionality.

In other embodiments presentation of areas or information of the FBUI may vary in many ways. For example in one embodiment the action buttons X appear after the user has selected for example by double clicking a particular voice message from the contents area X. Action buttons X may also appear when the user right clicks on a particular voice message in the contents area X.

The folder area X may also include a subfolder VOICE MESSAGE SYSTEM under the Public Folder. As such the VOICE MESSAGE SYSTEM folder may not be considered an actual folder but instead a uniform resource locator URL that when selected sends an HTTP request to a web server and launches displays an ICS browser inside the client device message browser. The web server may for example be a component of the MCS and or IM but is not so limited. The ICS browser is an embedded or hidden browser that displays the ICS Window in the area of the client device message browser where emails would typically appear and the voice mail messages are displayed in the ICS Window.

As an example the ICS Window is displayed in the contents area X of an embodiment. The ICS Window may be served from the IM and may contain any information related to the voice messaging system that is user specific. In one embodiment the ICS Window will display a user login prompt where the user enters the user name and PIN code. Subsequently the system displays the user s configuration date such as PIN code attendant extension greeting type and other applicable information.

The hidden browser enables an HTTP link and communications with the IM for example which then brokers communications via HTTP with the MCS via the MCS Web Server for example. Therefore while typical messaging servers and LANs use security policies that restrict the use of special code in form data use of the hidden browser embedded in a form structure that is native to the host system overcomes this restriction because the browser is not detected or considered as special code. Use of the hidden browser thus supports communication with the corresponding browser control in the MCS and or the IM thereby allowing the integration of voice mail messaging provided by the MCS with the email messaging system of the enterprise network

A voice mail message in the ICS is generally any message created using a client device generating an audio stream. A voice mail message is also any VMT message such as a message created using the Reply by Voice Message and Forward by Voice Message buttons of the FBUI. An email is any message created using buttons of a host mail message system that function to generate a reply message or to forward a message in response to receipt of a message even if replying or forwarding a voice mail message. The ICS of an embodiment presents a voice mail message to a user in an email message system using the FBUI as the presentation form.

As described above FBUI X allows a user to take action on a voice mail message via buttons A X E X of FBUI X. Therefore placing the cursor of contents area X on a particular message and choosing an action on the selected message with a button A X E X invokes the action on the message via components of the MCS and or the enterprise network environment.

As one example of an action on a voice mail message and with further reference to the user may select a Play on Phone action using button A X. In response the user s client device couples to a component of the ICS e.g. IM using the hidden browser of the FBUI. The client device receives a pop up message from the ICS via the browser link and the ICS Window where the pop up message allows the user to choose or enter a telephone number to which he she would like the selected voice mail message routed. The pop up message also includes a connect button by which the user initiates routing of the selected voice mail message to the selected telephone. In response to selection of the connect button the IM couples with an MCS and the MCS causes the PBX to initiate a call to the telephone number selected by the user via the pop up window. Upon connection of the call from the PBX to the selected telephone the MCS pushes the contents of the voice mail message to the selected telephone.

Another example of an action on a voice mail message includes selection of a Play on Computer action by the user via button B X. In response the user s client device couples to a component of the ICS e.g. IM using the hidden browser of the FBUI. In response to selection of the Play on Computer button the IM couples with an MCS and the MCS pushes a form to the user s computer that resembles a typical email. The form includes an attachment that is an audio file e.g. WAVE MP3 other audio formats etc. . When the user selects the attachment the client device may launch the default audio player of the client device.

Alternatively selection of the attachment in a Play on Computer action may result in the browser form controlling launch of a pre specified audio player instead of the default audio player. This is similar to the hidden browser described above with reference to presentation of the FBUI.

The user may also select a Call Sender action on a voice mail message using button C X. In response the user s client device couples to a component of the ICS e.g. IM using the hidden browser of the FBUI. In response to selection of the Call Sender button the IM couples with an MCS and the MCS retrieves the selected message from the Cache or the MSERV. Using the caller information from the retrieved message the MCS causes the PBX to connect the call to the user s local telephone. Upon connection of the call from the PBX to the user s telephone the MCS causes the PBX to initiate a call to the sender s telephone number as determined from the caller information associated with the voice message.

Additionally the user may select a Reply by Voice Message action on a voice mail message using button D X. In response the user s client device couples to a component of the ICS e.g. IM using the hidden browser of the FBUI. In response to selection of the Reply by Voice Message button the IM couples with an MCS and the MCS retrieves the selected message from the Cache or the MSERV. The MCS causes a reply message to be generated corresponding to the received message and prompts the user to record an audio message for the reply. The user records the audio for the reply via a microphone coupled to his her client device. Alternatively the user may record the audio for the reply via his her local telephone. Upon completing the audio reply recording the MCS causes the reply message to be transmitted to the designated addressees via the MSERV. A user is not required to listen to a message to invoke the Reply by Voice Message action.

The user may also select a Forward by Voice Message action on a voice mail message using button E X. In response the user s client device couples to a component of the ICS e.g. IM using the hidden browser of the FBUI. The client device receives a pop up message from the ICS via the browser link where the pop up message allows the user to choose or enter a telephone number to which he she would like the selected voice mail message routed. The pop up message also includes a connect button by which the user initiates routing of the selected voice mail message to the selected telephone. In response to selection of the connect button the IM couples with an MCS and the MCS causes the PBX to initiate a call to the telephone number selected by the user via the pop up window. Upon connection of the call from the PBX to the called telephone selected by the user the MCS pushes the contents of the voice mail message to the called telephone and the user. During the session and in addition to the contents of the voice mail message the MCS may provide a verbal prompt to the user requesting information of the party to whom the message is to be forwarded and or a prompt to the user to record an audio message to be forwarded along with the forwarded message. A user is not required to listen to a message to invoke the Forward by Voice Message action.

Thus shows a system X that is scalable in a number of different dimensions according to various embodiments of the invention. Two MSERVs are shown coupled by a network. This configuration allows for sharing of voicemail messages user lists global address lists distribution lists and public folders between the various MSERVs that connected by a network and which may be placed at the same or different locations. Additionally use of multiple MSERVs allows for scaling of the overall system through the increased capacity provided by the multiple MSERVs.

Multiple MCSs are shown. Increased number of MCSs can help to increase overall system capacity and or redundancy by providing increased number of ports storage and processing capacity. According to an embodiment of the invention information on the MCSs is derived from the MSERVs and automatically cached on the MCSs. This allows for easy deployment of new MCSs by which the data and configuration settings for the new MCSs are acquired from the MSERV s and or caches of other MCSs. Additionally an MCS may be coupled to more than one private communications network. In some cases an MCS may operate with multiple private communications networks simultaneously. Also an MCS that is coupled to multiple private communications networks may continue operation with a non failing private communications network in the event that one of the private communications networks to which the MCS is coupled fails. In one embodiment the MCS that is coupled to multiple private communications networks operates with at least one of the private communications networks but begins to operate with another non failing private communications network in the event that a private communications network to which the MCS is coupled fails.

Multiple IMs are shown in which help to support the capacity of additional MCSs. The multiple IMs also may provide fail over support for each other in the event that one of the IMs fails.

In the equipment and users associated with a particular private communications network referred to as members of a Site. Accordingly a user may have a Site identification. The Site identification may be used to filter user information associated with a particular Site from the a broader set of user information stored on the MSERV servicing multiple Sites. Additionally Sites may be combined into auto attendant groups. The auto attendant groups are Sites that share a common dial plan. For example members of an auto attendant group may able to place calls using extension numbers instead of full numbers.

According to an embodiment of the invention various subsets of users may be defined from among the users in an MSERV or set of networked MSERVs. Such subsets of users may be defined by a Site identification. In this way various subsets of users may be associated with different respective private communications networks such that the users access to respective Sites within a network of MSERVs depends on the users membership in the various defined subsets of users. For example members of a subgroup of users associated with a particular Site may be able to use functions such as message waiting indication and control of messaging actions at their associated Site but not at other Sites.

An embodiment of the invention is directed to a method for processing voice messages. A voice message is received from a call and a request is received from the caller to make the voice message private. The voice message is converted into an e mail message. The e mail message is protected in a protection scheme recognized by a particular e mail system and the email is sent through the e mail system. According to an embodiment of the invention a user command is received and if the user command is authorized under the protection scheme then the user command is executed. If the user command is not authorized under the protection scheme then the command is not executed.

According to an embodiment of the invention the protection scheme prevents the recipient of the message from forwarding the message. According to other embodiments to the invention the protection scheme may provide other forms of protection such as not allowing the recipient to save the message or not allowing the recipient to listen to the message more than a preset number of times preventing forwarding of the message outside of a network associated with the recipient preventing forwarding of the message outside of a network associated with the recipient s enterprise or other restrictions.

The protection scheme may prevent actions depending on the class of service COS of the recipient. The COS may be stored in a messaging and collaboration server that stores user information not directly associated with voice mail. The protection scheme may prevent actions depending on the group policy GP associated with the recipient.

Another embodiment of the invention is directed to a method for processing voice messages involving encryption. A voice message is received from a call and a request is received from the caller to make the voice message private. The voice message is converted to an e mail message and the e mail message is protected and encrypted in a rights management scheme recognized by a particular e mail system. The e mail is then sent through the e mail system. According to an embodiment in the invention the access control rights and the voice message are packaged into structures defined by the e mail system and rights management scheme. According to another embodiment of the invention the email is delivered to the recipient and an action requested by the recipient is taken only if the action is permitted under the rights management scheme for the particular e mail.

Another embodiment of the invention is directed to a voice mail system. The voice mail system includes logic that processes a voice message from a call logic to processes a request from the caller to make the voice message private logic that converts the voice message to an e mail message logic that protects the e mail message in a protection scheme recognized by a particular e mail system and logic that sends the e mail through the e mail system.

Another embodiment of the invention is directed to a system. The system includes a voice mail system and an email system. The voice mail system includes logic that processes a voice message from a call logic to processes a request from the caller to make the voice message private logic that converts the voice message to an e mail message logic that protects the e mail message in a protection scheme recognized by a particular e mail system and logic that sends the e mail through the e mail system.

The protection scheme may comprise a rights management system and may be included within the email system. The protection scheme may prevent the recipient of the message from forwarding the message.

Another embodiment of the invention is directed to a system including a network a set of devices coupled to the network the set of devices including personal computers a voice mail system and an email system coupled to the network. The voice mail system is coupled to the email system and includes logic that processes a voice message from a call logic to processes a request from the caller to make the voice message private logic that converts the voice message to an e mail message logic that protects the e mail message in a protection scheme recognized by a particular e mail system and logic that sends the e mail through the e mail system.

Another embodiment of the invention is directed to a message. The message includes message headers including a header with an identification of the recipient of the message audio information including a voice message to the recipient and information corresponding to rights that the recipient will have to act upon the message. The message headers audio information and information corresponding to the rights are packaged within structures defined by a protection scheme and at least the audio information is encrypted.

The components of the ICS described above include any collection of computing components and devices operating together. The components of the ICS can also be components or subsystems within a larger computer system or network. The ICS components can also be coupled among any number of components not shown for example other buses controllers memory devices and data input output I O devices in any number of combinations. Further components of the ICS can be distributed among any number combination of other processor based components.

Aspects of the ICS described herein may be implemented as functionality programmed into any of a variety of circuitry including programmable logic devices PLDs such as field programmable gate arrays FPGAs programmable array logic PAL devices electrically programmable logic and memory devices and standard cell based devices as well as application specific integrated circuits ASICs . Some other possibilities for implementing aspects of the ICS include microcontrollers with memory such as electronically erasable programmable read only memory EEPROM embedded microprocessors firmware software etc. Furthermore aspects of the ICS may be embodied in microprocessors having software based circuit emulation discrete logic sequential and combinatorial custom devices fuzzy neural logic quantum devices and hybrids of any of the above device types. Of course the underlying device technologies may be provided in a variety of component types e.g. metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor MOSFET technologies like complementary metal oxide semiconductor CMOS bipolar technologies like emitter coupled logic ECL polymer technologies e.g. silicon conjugated polymer and metal conjugated polymer metal structures mixed analog and digital etc.

It should be noted that the various functions or processes disclosed herein may be described as data and or instructions embodied in various computer readable media in terms of their behavioral register transfer logic component transistor layout geometries and or other characteristics. Computer readable media in which such formatted data and or instructions may be embodied include but are not limited to non volatile storage media in various forms e.g. optical magnetic or semiconductor storage media and carrier waves that may be used to transfer such formatted data and or instructions through wireless optical or wired signaling media or any combination thereof. Examples of transfers of such formatted data and or instructions by carrier waves include but are not limited to transfers uploads downloads e mail etc. over the Internet and or other computer networks via one or more data transfer protocols e.g. HTTP FTP SMTP etc. . When received within a computer system via one or more computer readable media such data and or instruction based expressions of components and or processes under the ICS may be processed by a processing entity e.g. one or more processors within the computer system in conjunction with execution of one or more other computer programs.

Unless the context clearly requires otherwise throughout the description and the claims the words comprise comprising and the like are to be construed in an inclusive sense as opposed to an exclusive or exhaustive sense that is to say in a sense of including but not limited to. Words using the singular or plural number also include the plural or singular number respectively. Additionally the words herein hereunder above below and words of similar import refer to this application as a whole and not to any particular portions of this application. When the word or is used in reference to a list of two or more items that word covers all of the following interpretations of the word any of the items in the list all of the items in the list and any combination of the items in the list.

The above description of illustrated embodiments of the ICS is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the ICS to the precise form disclosed. While specific embodiments of and examples for the ICS are described herein for illustrative purposes various equivalent modifications are possible within the scope of the ICS as those skilled in the relevant art will recognize. The teachings of the ICS provided herein can be applied to other processing systems and methods not only for the systems and methods described above.

The elements and acts of the various embodiments described above can be combined to provide further embodiments. These and other changes can be made to the ICS in light of the above detailed description.

In general in the following claims the terms used should not be construed to limit the ICS to the specific embodiments disclosed in the specification and the claims but should be construed to include all processing systems that operate under the claims. Accordingly the ICS is not limited by the disclosure but instead the scope of the ICS is to be determined entirely by the claims.

While certain aspects of the ICS are presented below in certain claim forms the inventors contemplate the various aspects of the ICS in any number of claim forms. For example while only one aspect of the ICS is recited as embodied in machine readable medium other aspects may likewise be embodied in machine readable medium. Accordingly the inventors reserve the right to add additional claims after filing the application to pursue such additional claim forms for other aspects of the ICS.

