---

title: GSM/UMTS emulator
abstract: A GSM/UMTS emulator is disclosed for emulating a real network so that certain device functionalities can be easily tested. The architecture of such a GSM/UMTS emulator may include a terminal PC and a server. The terminal PC runs the device (including a radio interface layer and a multiplexer). The server acts as the application server to emulate UMTS network performance. Such an emulator may enable testing of both control information and data applications.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07747249&OS=07747249&RS=07747249
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07747249
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050329
---
Generally the invention relates to GSM UMTS emulators. More particularly the invention relates to systems for emulating a wireless connection between a GSM UMTS mobile phone and the corresponding network over the Ethernet in a local environment.

In order for a WINDOWS MOBILE platform to support GSM UMTS networks the functionalities of certain operating system OS modules should be tested and evaluated. Such modules may include Radio Interface Layer RIL Multiplexer MUX Telephony API TAPI SMS etc. For example before marketing a new mobile cellular device it may be desirable to test the functionalities of the new design for GSM UMTS including RIL MUX TAPI etc.

Typically a real wireless network is required for such a testing. Real network testing has several limitations however such as unavailability instability high cost hard to reproduce error limited supported features inconvenience etc. Therefore it would be desirable if a GSM UMTS emulator were available to emulate the real network so that OS functionalities for GSM UMTS support could be easily tested locally.

The invention provides a GSM UMTS emulator to emulate the real network so that certain device functionalities can be easily tested. The architecture of the GSM UMTS emulator may include a CEPC and a server. The CEPC runs the device including RIL and MUX and the server acts as the application server to emulate the UMTS network performance. An emulator according to the invention may enable testing of both control information and data applications.

Although not required the invention can be implemented via an application programming interface API for use by a developer or tester and or included within the network browsing software which will be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by one or more computers e.g. client workstations servers or other devices . Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures and the like that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Typically the functionality of the program modules may be combined or distributed as desired in various embodiments. Moreover those skilled in the art will appreciate that the invention may be practiced with other computer system configurations. Other well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers PCs automated teller machines server computers hand held or laptop devices multi processor systems microprocessor based systems programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. An embodiment of the invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network or other data transmission medium. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an example system for implementing the invention includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus .

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to random access memory RAM read only memory ROM Electrically Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology compact disc read only memory CDROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic radio frequency RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as ROM and RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data . RAM may contain other data and or program modules.

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the example operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies. A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard and pointing device commonly referred to as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB .

A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer although only a memory storage device has been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on memory device . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

One of ordinary skill in the art can appreciate that a computer or other client devices can be deployed as part of a computer network. In this regard the present invention pertains to any computer system having any number of memory or storage units and any number of applications and processes occurring across any number of storage units or volumes. An embodiment of the present invention may apply to an environment with server computers and client computers deployed in a network environment having remote or local storage. The present invention may also apply to a standalone computing device having programming language functionality interpretation and execution capabilities.

A system according to the invention may emulate the wireless connection between a GSM UMTS mobile phone and the corresponding network over the Ethernet in a local environment. Based on a typical architecture of a wireless system the GSM UMTS emulator system may include a terminal PC and a server as shown in . The terminal PC may emulate the terminal equipment TE part of the mobile phone and may run a Windows Mobile based Operating System OS .

The server may emulate the mobile terminal MT and the application server which may be for example a video server web server dial up server etc. The server may also include a point to point protocol PPP server and a MUX that corresponds to the MUX in terminal PC. A generic Wired and Wireless Network Emulator WiNE that is provided by Microsoft may be installed in the server to emulate the GSM UMTS network performance. The WiNE is a driver that can influence a packet s behavior according to some user defined profile or configurations which actually emulates the effect of network to a packet such as bandwidth restriction packet delay and loss. It may be used to process both the incoming packets from the terminal PC and the outgoing packets to the terminal PC so that the basic GSM UMTS network behaviors are simulated.

The server may include an AT command manager an application program server a TCP UDP IP driver a PPP server an NDIS a MUX and a virtual driver . The server may also include a WiNE driver and an NIC for communication with the network .

The MUXs may be based on 3GPP TS 27.010 and may expose multiple virtual ports from the upper layer point of view over just one physical port between the TE and the MT. These ports may separately handle data command voice etc.

The virtual drivers and binding driver are for redirecting the packet down from the MUX to the NIC and the packet from the NIC to the MUX . The WiNE driver in the server side may also include binding driver functionality. In addition it may process incoming and outgoing packets. In particular it may delay a packet for any configured time. It may also drop a packet with a configured packet loss probability. Note that the WiNE may be binding to the Ethernet NIC and both emulator packets and normal Ethernet packets may go through the WiNE. In order to distinguish the packets from to emulator and normal Ethernet signaling packets a header may be added in the Ethernet packet header before the packet leaves the NIC .

There are two kinds of supports for IP data between the mobile station and the UMTS network. The first is through the PPP and the other is through the NDIS interface . The PPP client in the terminal PC may be used to initiate the PPP connection between the PPP server in the MT or the PPP server in a remote server not shown . There may be two modes for PPP connections one is the PPP server in the MT where the protocol loop is locally between the MT and the TE the other is the PPP server in GGSN and the PPP protocol loop is between the TE and the network server. With the architecture shown in both modes can be emulated.

In the first case because the MT and TE are connected via a local link e.g. a serial port and the PPP packets go through two MUX ports the speed is usually limited by the MUX standard and the local link used say 128 kbps. At the same time the frame transmission error is determined by the local link and the MUX mode. In this case the WiNE driver will emulate the behaviors of this local link instead of wireless link.

In the second case because the PPP client and PPP server are located in the mobile station and the network separately and their connection needs to go through the wireless link the WiNE driver will mainly emulate the behaviors of the wireless link e.g. data rate packet loss rate delay etc.

The NDIS based IP data may always go through the wireless channel. Thus similar to the second case in PPP based IP connection the NDIS based IP packets will be processed by the WiNE driver which may include delay packet loss bandwidth restriction etc.

The AT Command Manager may handle the AT command sent from the TE to the MT . The functionalities supported may include checking the syntax correctness of the AT command and sending a response maintaining the corresponding state e.g. registration or not etc. Similar to the PPP packet between the MT and the TE the AT command between the MT and the TE will also be subject to error due to the local link e.g. serial link. Thus the WiNE driver will also emulate this kind of error.

The other elements of the emulation system depicted in perform according to their normal operations which are well known to those skilled in the art and therefore need not be described in detail herein.

In such an embodiment the emulator may be designed to support the data connection. Note that not all AT commands need to be supported. For example the focus may be on AT commands needed for data channel especially those of QoS which could be used to adjust WiNE settings.

There may be two network environments for data connection IP based and PPP based transparent. In case of the IP based services the PPP server may be deployed in the MT so that the PPP connection will not be affected by the radio error but the data transfer will. In the case of PPP based transparent services the PPP server is deployed in GGSN. Therefore the PPP connection may be fail due to the radio error. Preferably the design of the emulator should be compatible with both conditions.

According to the protocol stacks of the two scenarios the architecture of the emulator must be a general one to support both conditions. An overview of this architecture is given in . As shown in the terminal equipment TE emulator may include a PPP client and a connection manager that communicates with a radio interface layer RIL . The RIL and PPP client each may communicate with a respective virtual driver VCOM . VCOM may communicate with an Ethernet driver. A NAT Network Address Translation may be provided to couple the TE emulator to a local area network LAN . The TE emulator may also include a web browser IE as well as HTTP TCP and IP drivers.

A server may be coupled to the LAN via an Ethernet driver and a network interface card NIC . The server may include a web server as well as HTTP TCP and IP drivers.

A mobile terminal MT emulator and GGSN Gateway GPRS Support Node emulator may also be coupled to the LAN via an Ethernet driver and a network interface card NIC . The MT emulator may include an AT command manager that communicates with a virtual driver VCOM . A control channel may start from the connection manager and end at the AT command manager. Over this channel all the AT commands between TE and MT may be transmitted parsed and operated so that the TE may feel there exists a mobile network.

The data channel may consider two different scenarios. As shown in the dashed modules and lines are related to IP based services while the dotted modules and lines compose the data channel for PPP based transparent services. The PPP modules have to bind with a COM device so that there is a certain kind of virtual driver upon the Ethernet referred to herein as a VCOM driver providing a COM interface to the upper layer. In order to alternate the scenario there can be a switch module to control the data flow according to some environmental settings.

Generally the VCOM driver may have any or all of the following characteristics 1 the driver works like a COM port which can support COM events 2 TCP or UDP may be used to connect other VCOM drivers 3 one VCOM port connects to none or only one other port 4 no connection to real COM ports 5 there can be multiple instances of the driver in a machine each emulates one COM port.

In order to obtain more flexibility the VCOM driver may be designed as shown in . The general idea of this driver is to encapsulate the PPP frame into an IP packet. Each instance of this VCOM will have a unique port number thus they will be distinguished easily.

The VCOM driver may collect read write requests from a COM application which may be a PPP server for example. The communication manager may get the actual data from IP packets and transfer such data to the VCOM driver . It should be understood that two VCOM ports can be connected regardless of whether they are on the same machine.

The top interface of the VCOM driver may be a virtual single COM port. As an alternative solution of MUX there can be multiple VCOMs in a system. The bottom interface of the VCOM driver may be a general IP packet. That is an IP over PPP over IP communication may be applied. In addition the critical module of the VCOM driver is the Communication Manager. This is a system service and it maintains all the ports available for the VCOMs to use. Generally the VCOM will interact with this service by system events.

Another consideration is to integrate with WiNE. Actually because WiNE is able to process passing data by some filter such as the port number all the VCOMs can be setup over WiNE. However the data flow from different ports should be distinguished and then scrambled. Accordingly the implementation of emulator may have a simpler design as shown in .

In the design depicted in there is only one PPP server and WiNE should be carefully configured. When running the IP based services WiNE should add extra process onto the IP packets. When running the PPP based transparent services WiNE should scramble the packets sent from to the VCOM binding with the data channel flagged by the specified port number.

Thus there have been described systems for emulating a wireless connection between a GSM UMTS mobile phone and the corresponding network over the Ethernet in a local environment. It should be understood that the invention has been described herein with respect to certain example embodiments and that other embodiments of the invention may fall within the scope of the following claims.

