---

title: Just in time wiring information system
abstract: A just in time wiring information system, which includes an aircraft wiring information system module, a technical reference module, an interactive computer aided cable repair system module, and an e-suite. The e-suite communicates with the aircraft wiring information system module, the technical reference module, and the interactive computer aided cable repair system module such that via the e-suite a user may obtain information from each of the modules.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07548801&OS=07548801&RS=07548801
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07548801
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050929
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

This application contains an appendix consisting of a computer program listing over 300 lines. In accordance with 37 CFR 1.96 c a computer program listing having over 300 lines must be submitted on a compact disc conforming to the standards set forth in 37 CFR 1.52 e . Two identical compact discs have been filed with the Patent Trademark Office in accordance with Title 37 of the Code of Federal Regulations and each compact disc contains the following files 

The material on the compact discs and the computer program listing appendix is hereby incorporated by reference.

The present invention relates to an information system. More specifically but without limitation the present invention relates to a just in time wiring information system.

A United States Government study identified wiring maintenance actions as the leading cause of unscheduled maintenance man hours. Further evaluation of these maintenance actions has proven that unscheduled wiring system maintenance actions on aircraft wiring systems account for almost 1.5 million maintenance man hours within Naval Aviation alone. Much of the maintenance time is spent researching required technical information relevant to the components and tooling required to maintain the wiring system. The technical information relative to the wiring system components currently resides in system or aircraft technical manuals military and commercial specifications as well as wiring component vendor catalogs. As this information is located in many different and sometimes inaccessible areas this creates a significant increased impact on overall maintenance man hours.

The predominant resource used by U.S. Navy Fleet maintainers engineering and commercial manufacturers and repair activities are the system or aircraft Technical Manuals. These manuals are generally provided in paper format. Several problems of these resources include the requirement of several hundred manuals to describe the operation maintenance and repair processes required information for a specific maintenance action is dispersed among multiple manuals discontinuity of information pages of paper technical manuals can be damaged and unreadable when used in inclement environments.

Thus there is a need in the art to provide an information system without the limitations inherent in present methods.

It is a feature of the invention to provide a just in time wiring information system that includes an aircraft wiring information system module a technical reference module an interactive computer aided cable repair system module and an e suite. The e suite communicates with the aircraft wiring information system module the technical reference module and the interactive computer aided cable repair system module such that via the e suite a user may obtain information from each of the modules.

It is a feature of the invention to provide a just in time wiring information system that decreases unscheduled maintenance man hours on aircraft. It is another feature of the invention to provide a just in time wiring information system that reduces maintenance cycle times.

It is a feature of the invention to provide a just in time wiring information system that increases operational readiness and improved mission availability decreases technical manual reproduction and distribution costs and reduces engineering logistics and maintenance planning costs.

It is a feature of the invention to provide a just in time wiring information system that operates as an umbrella program that can provide multiple resources in a central location.

The preferred embodiment of the present invention is illustrated by way of example below and in . As seen in the just in time wiring information system JITWIS includes an aircraft wiring information system module a technical reference module an interactive computer aided cable repair system module and an e suite . The e suite communicates with the aircraft wiring information system module the technical reference module and the interactive computer aided cable repair system module such that via the e suite a user may obtain information from each of the modules.

In the discussion of the present invention the system will be discussed in an aircraft wiring environment specifically a tactical aircraft wiring environment however the system can also be utilized with other types of vehicles apparatuses or machinery.

The aircraft wiring information system module may be defined but without limitation as a database containing cross referenced information on wiring system components and associated maintenance and repair tooling. The database may be electronic and web based. In the preferred embodiment as seen in the aircraft wiring information system module may include but without limitations a component searcher a report generator and a technical feedback communicator . The component searcher is a searcher that gives the user the ability to search the aircraft wiring information system module for tooling for a specific tooling requirement based on the type of component and part number. The report generator generates a report based on various criteria. For example the user may request a report of connector components only for the F A 18 EF platform. To obtain this report the user will choose the connector report and the F A 18 EF platform. There are several types of reports that may be generated for example but without limitation a connector report a reference designator and harness report and a tool set report. All these reports can be executed against a specific platform i.e. F A 18 EF EA 6B MH 60R etc. The technical feedback communicator allows two way communication between a researcher and the user. The user may request information about a specific component wiring that is not described or included in the system . In this case the user may fill out a form and request that research be completed on a specific component or part number. When the form is completed a notification is emailed to an administrator of the system with the request attached. This information is received and the applicable part number is researched by a researcher to identify the repair tools required to fix the component. The information can then be sent back to the user. The aircraft wiring information system module may also include features that allow technical notes i.e. unique information relating to a specific component and tooling requirements identifies specific tooling based on a component .

The technical reference module provides a centralized repository for wiring system maintenance information. The technical reference module functions as a repository of documents that can be integrated into the just in time wiring information system and provide specific technical information to users. In the preferred embodiment as seen in the technical reference module includes a subject searcher a task and procedure linker and a key word searcher . The subject searcher may permit searching of information disposed within the technical reference module by linking an index with individual elements. The task and procedure linker may permit searching task elements to required procedures disposed within the technical reference module . The key word searcher may provide general search capability through the technical reference module . The technical reference module may also include authorized repair procedures provides authority for reparability and quality assurance identifies all authorized repair procedures with inspection criteria .

The interactive computer aided cable repair system module provides military specification Mil Spec information and accessory identification for Mil Spec families. As seen in the interactive computer aided cable repair system module may include the following features a unique build capability builder a part number verifier a graphical representer tutorials and a users guide . The unique build capability builder allows the user to build a part number for a component based solely on the physical characteristics of that component. The physical characteristics of the part number may be obtained from military specifications disposed within the interactive computer aided cable repair system module . The part number verifier allows the user to verify the accuracy of a part number. The graphical representer contains representative line drawings of connectors based on the military specification characteristics. In one of the embodiments there are twenty one military specifications contained in the interactive computer aided cable repair system module . These specifications contain information about the parts or components. For example MIL C 38999 contains specific information on the circular connectors in the 38999 families. The information includes but is not limited to the pin out of the connector contacts which are applicable to the connector etc. The tutorials include various training modules for initial and refresher training. The users guide is the operational description of the interactive computer aided cable repair system program.

In operation in one of the embodiments of the invention when a user initiates the just in time wiring information system as seen in the system begins with an initial username and log on . Upon successful log on the system enters the just in time wiring information system or JITWIS home page . This log on as well as any operational commands or procedures or communications between modules are executed by the e suite . The user may then choose to enter the aircraft wiring information system module the technical reference module or the interactive computer aided cable repair system module or a user help guide . Each module may be entered through a module home page as shown in .

As shown in in one of the embodiments of the invention when the user enters the aircraft wiring information system module and performs a search via a user search the part number is passed from the aircraft wiring information system module to the interactive computer aided cable repair system module via the e suite . The interactive computer aided cable repair system module then evaluates this part number by performing a interactive computer aided cable repair graphic identification process and a specific component graphic display is passed via the e suite to display in a frame within the aircraft wiring information system module search results screen.

In an embodiment of the invention within the aircraft wiring information system module is the tooling information required to repair a component. The tooling information contains the tool part number as well as a tool type that is assigned based on the function of the tool. The e suite provides a link to the military standard or technical data which identifies how to properly use the tool. An example of this functionality is shown in .

In an embodiment of the invention within the interactive computer aided cable repair system module once a part number is identified the tooling information is also provided via the e suite . The part number is evaluated and the tooling data request is evaluated by the aircraft wiring information system module and then specific data is forwarded back to the interactive computer aided cable repair system module for display. The tooling data includes the tool part number as well as the tool type. Once the tool type is provided the e suite also provides a link to the military standard or technical data which identifies how to properly use the tool. An example of this functionality is shown in .

The just in time wiring information system may reside within a computer. This system and its related algorithm is executable on any computer with access to the input data required. The preferred embodiment of the algorithm is listed in the computer program listing appendix.

When introducing elements of the present invention or the preferred embodiment s thereof the articles a an the and said are intended to mean there are one or more of the elements. The terms comprising including and having are intended to be inclusive and mean that there may be additional elements other than the listed elements.

Although the present invention has been described in considerable detail with reference to certain preferred embodiments thereof other embodiments are possible. Therefore the spirit and scope of the appended claims should not be limited to the description of the preferred embodiment contained herein.

