---

title: Film-forming compositions for protecting skin from body fluids and articles made therefrom
abstract: The present invention relates to a film-forming barrier composition useful for protecting the skin from body fluids, such as urine, feces, menses. The composition comprises a skin conditioning agent, a viscosity enhancing agent and an oleophilic film-forming agent. Optionally, the lotion may comprise skin care ingredients for treating or maintaining skin health. The composition may be applied to the skin by suitable delivery vehicles, such as absorbent articles or components thereof, sheet materials, pads, bandages, sponges, foam pads, pumps, sprays, depending on the viscosity of the composition.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07449613&OS=07449613&RS=07449613
owner: The Procter & Gamble Company
number: 07449613
owner_city: Cincinnati
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051114
---
This application is a divisional of U.S. application Ser. No. 09 898 880 filed Jul. 3 2001 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 005 557.

The present invention relates to film forming compositions that provide a protective barrier against fluids body exudates and other irritants and minimize abrasions between skin and articles worn adjacent to the skin. The present composition form a thin film coating over the skin which is resistant to wash off by water or body fluids and resistant to rub off by abrasions. Thus the persistent coating formed by the present composition provides an efficient delivery of skin care ingredients to skin and long lasting skin condition and skin health benefits. The present invention also relates to articles having the film forming compositions disposed thereon.

The major function of disposable absorbent products such as diapers training pants incontinence articles sanitary napkins panty liners and the like is to absorb and contain body exudates. Although these absorbent articles may be highly efficient for the absorption of liquids they may also create a humid micro environment adjacent to the body regions where they are worn. This humid micro environment often results in overhydration of the skin. It is known that overhydrated skin is more susceptible to skin disorders including erythema i.e. redness diaper rash or diaper dermatitis heat rash and skin barrier break down and skin damages relating to abrasions and pressure marks.

It is well recognized that compositions for treating diapered skin should desirably have barrier protective qualities. Additionally the compositions should desirably have good affinity to the skin and are resistant to rub off or wash off such that they provide long lasting barrier protection to the skin. Many compositions contain an emulsion type carrier that has a water phase and an oil phase. The relative high water content of the emulsion type compositions tends to exacerbate the overhydration problem of the diapered skin. Other compositions contain high contents of volatile carriers such as low molecular weight silicones alcohols or other solvents which evaporate and leave a substantive residue on the skin. However vapors from these volatile carriers may irritate the skin of certain individuals. Other compositions contain an anhydrous substantive carrier such as petrolatum or organic waxes. These compositions have a greasy and tacky feel when applied to the skin and tend to transfer onto and stain clothing or other surfaces which contact the area of application.

Therefore it is desirable to provide a composition that has good affinity to the skin such that it resists rub off by abrasion with clothing or other contacting surfaces and wash off by water or body liquids such as urine menses sweat and runny bowl movement BM .

It is further desirable to provide a composition that forms a film which adheres to the skin and contains beneficial skin care ingredients that are held in intimate contact with the skin by the film forming nature of the composition.

It is also desirable to provide a composition that is substantive and forms a protective barrier on the skin. Such barrier protects the skin from direct contact with moisture body exudates or other irritants. Such barrier also minimizes abrasions between the skin and clothing or other contacting surfaces.

It is further desirable that this novel composition may be administered to the target skin area via multiple delivery vehicles such as pads bandages patches sticks aerosol dispensers pump sprays trigger sprays canisters and disposable absorbent articles. In this respect it is desirable that the composition may be administered to the target skin without leaving a messy aesthetically unpleasing residue on the skin. It is further desirable that the composition may be administered without direct contact with the users or applicators hands thus no messy residue is left on the user s hands and no additional cleaning step is required after administering the composition.

Moreover it is desirable that this novel composition is solid or semi solid at ambient temperature so that it is immobilized on the surface of or within the cavity of the delivery vehicle. This is especially desirable when the delivery vehicle is an absorbent article. The immobilization of the composition minimizes the migration of the composition into the absorbent article which interferes with the absorbency of the article and renders less composition available for delivery to the skin. The composition should preferably soften plasticize or become flowable at or near skin temperature or when a slight pressure or shear force is applied so that it is readily transferable to the skin.

The present invention relates to a substantially anhydrous film forming composition that forms a protective barrier on the skin. Specifically the composition of the present invention comprises 

The composition may be applied to the skin by suitable delivery vehicles such as absorbent articles or components thereof sheet materials wipes pads bandages sponges foam pads pumps sprays and combinations thereof.

As used herein the term comprising means that the various components ingredients or steps can be conjointly employed in practicing the present invention. Accordingly the term comprising encompasses the more restrictive terms consisting of and consisting essentially of .

As used herein the term absorbent article refers to a device which absorbs and retains body fluids. Examples of disposable absorbent articles include diapers training pants pull on diapers feminine hygiene garments such as sanitary napkins panti liners interlabial devices and tampons incontinence articles and the like.

As used herein the term disposable refers to absorbent articles which generally are not intended to be laundered or otherwise restored or reused as absorbent articles i.e. they are intended to be discarded after a single use .

As used herein the term skin care ingredient means a substance or a mixture of substances when applied to the skin either alone or incorporated into a composition provides barrier protections skin healing benefits and or skin conditioning benefits such as actual or perceived changes in appearance skin feel e.g. softness smoothness cleanliness and attractiveness. The term is also directed to substances that soothe calm or promote feelings of relief when applied to the skin. These soothing calming ingredients may include herbal botanical vitamin mineral or aromatic ingredients. The term further includes substances that protect skin against moisture or irritants and heals skin disorders or damages.

All percentages ratios and proportions used herein are defined by weight of the composition unless otherwise specified.

The composition of the present invention comprises a skin conditioning agent a viscosity enhancing agent and an oleophilic film forming agent. Optionally the composition may comprise skin care ingredients for treating or maintaining skin health. When the composition is applied to the skin a relatively uniform film is formed on the skin surface. The barrier nature of the present composition protects the skin from direct contact with body exudates including liquids or irritants therein. The film forming nature of the present composition provides good affinity to the skin such that the composition is resistant to wash off or rub off. Additionally the film formed on the skin surface holds the skin care ingredients in intimate contact. Thus the present composition provides an efficient and extended delivery of the relatively expensive skin care ingredients to the skin.

Further the compositions used in the present invention are preferably substantially anhydrous especially if the delivery vehicle is an absorbent article. As used herein the term substantially anhydrous means the composition typically has a water content of less than about 10 preferably less than about 5 more preferably less than about 1 and most preferably less than about 0.5 by weight. The substantially anhydrous nature of the compositions avoid the overhydration problem of the already susceptible skin that has been or is exposed to a high relative humidity micro environment. Furthermore such compositions minimize the potential wicking effect of the highly absorbent core which preferentially draws compositions containing ample water towards the core thus reduces the amount of compositions available for transfer to the skin. If drawn into the core the oleaginous composition of the present invention may interfere with the absorbency of the core.

In a preferred embodiment the composition is applied to the skin using an absorbent article as the delivery vehicle. Suitable compositions for such delivery vehicles should have a melting rheological profile that meets certain requirements. The compositions should preferably be solid or semi solid at room temperature i.e. about 20 C. so that migration on the substrate surface and the adverse effects to the absorbency of the article are minimized. The compositions should also be at least partially transferable to the skin by contact normal wear motions and or body heat therefore the compositions are preferably plastic or fluid at skin temperature i.e. about 34 36 C. to facilitate the transfer to the skin. Further the compositions should have storage stability under stressful storage conditions such as storage temperatures of at least about 45 C. Since the compositions are substantially immobilized and stable in storage special barrier or wrapping materials may be unnecessary in packaging the treated absorbent articles useful in the present invention.

The term semisolid as used herein means that the composition has a rheology typical of pseudoplastic or plastic liquids. When no shear is applied the compositions can have the appearance of a semi solid but can be made to flow as the shear rate is increased. Without intending to be bound by theory it is believed that while such compositions contain primarily solid components they also include some liquid components.

To enhance the immobility of the preferred compositions the viscosity of the formulated compositions should be as high as necessary to prevent substantial flow within the article to undesired locations. Specifically the compositions of the present invention have a zero shear viscosity at room temperature between about 1.0 10centipoise and about 1.0 10centipoise. More preferably the zero shear viscosity is between about 5.0 10centipoise and about 5.0 10centipoise.

On the other hand too high a viscosity may inhibit transfer of the composition to the skin. Therefore a balance should be achieved so the viscosities are high enough to keep the compositions localized on the surface of the article but not so high as to impede transfer to the skin. In addition the compositions preferably have a final melting point above skin temperature more preferably above potential stressful storage conditions that can be greater than 45 C. e.g. warehouse in Arizona car trunk in Florida etc. . Therefore the preferred compositions will have the following melt profile 

As used herein the term skin conditioning agent means a material that protects against wetness or irritation softens soothes supples coats lubricates reduces flaking moisturizes protects and or cleanses the skin. Skin conditioning agents may maintain the normal healthy skin condition. One type of skin conditioning agents generally referred to as emollients are particularly useful in improving the dry skin condition by restoring its moisture level as well as its softness smoothness pliability and flexibility. Another type of skin conditioning agents generally referred to as moisturizers or humectants attract moisture from the surrounding atmosphere and enhance the water absorption of the stratum corneum i.e. the outer corny layer of the skin . Another type of skin conditioning agents generally referred to as barrier protectants which form an occlusive i.e. non water permeable layer on the skin surface that prevents or retards moisture losses from the deeper layers of the skin to the atmosphere. The occlusive agents also provide barrier protection to the skin against larger molecules such as fecal matter urine enzymes and other irritants.

The amount of skin conditioning agent included in the composition will depend on a variety of factors including the particular skin conditioning agent involved the skin benefits desired the other components in the composition and like factors. The skin conditioning agents will generally comprise from about 1 to about 90 wt of the composition. Preferably the skin conditioning agents comprise from about 10 to about 85 wt more preferably from about 20 to about 80 wt and most preferably from about 30 to about 75 wt of the composition.

Exemplary skin conditioning agents useful in the present invention include but are not limited to petroleum based emollients fatty acid esters polysiloxanes polyol polyesters esters or ethers of polyhydroxy alcohols fatty alcohol esters of polyprotonic acids animal oils fats and their derivatives vegetable oils hydrogenated vegetable oils and their derivatives branched hydrocarbons fatty alcohol ethers free sterols sterol esters and their derivatives sphingolipids phospholipids and mixtures thereof.

Suitable petroleum based emollient include petrolatums i.e. hydrocarbons or mixtures of hydrocarbons particularly preferred are hydrocarbons having chain lengths of from C10 to C100. Petroleum based emollients within this chain length range include mineral oil and petrolatum. Mineral oil usually refers to less viscous mixtures of hydrocarbons having from 10 to 30 carbon atoms though the hydrocarbon molecular weight distribution may vary. Since the lower molecular weight hydrocarbons can cause irritation in some individuals mineral oils having a small percentage of lower molecular weight hydrocarbons are preferred. Petrolatum usually refers to more viscous mixtures of hydrocarbons of higher molecular weight hydrocarbons. Petrolatum and mineral oil are preferred skin conditioning agents for compositions of the present invention due to their ability to protect the skin from harmful or irritating stimuli. Petrolatum is particularly preferred because of its good barrier properties. When employed petrolatum comprises at least about 15 wt preferably at least about 25 wt more preferably at least about 50 wt of the composition.

Suitable fatty acid ester type skin conditioning agents include those derived from C Cfatty acids preferably C Csaturated fatty acids and short chain C C preferably C C monohydric alcohols. Representative examples of such esters include methyl palmitate methyl stearate isopropyl laurate isopropyl myristate isopropyl palmitate ethylhexyl palmitate and mixtures thereof. Suitable fatty acid ester skin conditioning agents can also be derived from esters of long chain fatty alcohols C C preferably C C and short chain acids e.g. lactic acid such as lauryl lactate and cetyl lactate. Also suitable for use herein are fatty acid esters having branched and or unsaturated alkyl chains in their acid or alcohol moieties. Nonlimiting examples include diisopropyl adipate available as CERAPHYL 230 from International Specialty Products Wayne N.J. octyldodecyl stearoyl stearate isononyl isononanoate available as SALACOS 99 from Ikeda Corp. Island Park N.Y. isostearyl isononanoate octyl palmitate octyl hydroxystearate stearyl heptanoate ceterayl octanoate butyl octanol 2 ethylhexyl 12 hydroxy stearate decyl oleate dioctyl adipate dioctyl succinate isocetyl stearate octyl cocoate octyl palmitate and mixtures thereof. Other suitable fatty acid esters include laurel laureate stearyl palmitate and stearyl behenate available as PURESTER 24 34 and 40 from Strahl Pitsch West Babylon N.Y. . Suitable fatty acid esters also include certain branched esters such as cetearyl octanoate CRODAMOL CAP lignoceryl erucate CRODAMOL LGE and pentaerythrityl tetracaprylate tetracaprate CRODAMOL PTC all are available from Croda Inc. Parsippany N.J.

Other suitable skin conditioning agents are polyol polyesters including the liquid polyol polyesters which have a complete melting temperature at or below body temperature i.e. about 37 C. and the solid polyol polyesters which are solid or semi solid at or above body temperature. As used herein the term polyol means a polyhydric alcohol containing at least 2 preferably from 4 to 12 and most preferably from 6 to 8 hydroxy groups. Polyols include mono di and tri saccharides sugars sugar alcohols other sugar derivatives e.g. alkyl glucosides pentacrythritol and polyvinyl alcohol. Exemplary polyols include but are not limited to polyhydric alcohols such as pentaerythritol sugars such as raffinose maltodextrose galactose sucrose glucose xylose fructose maltose lactose mannose and erythrose and sugar alcohols such as erythritol xylitol malitol mannitol and sorbitol. Such polyols are esterified with fatty acids and or other organic radicals having at least 2 carbon atoms and up to 30 carbon atoms. While it is not necessary that all of the hydroxyl groups of the polyol be esterified the preferred polyol polyesters have substantially all e.g. at least about 85 of the hydroxyl groups esterified. Particularly preferred are sucrose polyol polyesters such as sucrose polycottonate sucrose polysoyate and sucrose polybehenate. Mixtures of such polyol polyesters are also suitable skin conditioning agents for the present invention. Other suitable polyol polyesters and mixtures thereof are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 609 587 issued to Roe on Mar. 11 1997 and in U.S. Pat. No. 5 607 760 issued to Roe on Mar. 4 1997 the disclosure of each is incorporated herein by reference. Other ester materials are further described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 2 831 854 4 005 196 to Jandacek issued Jan. 25 1977 U.S. Pat. No. 4 005 195 to Jandacek issued Jan. 25 1977 U.S. Pat. No. 5 306 516 to Letton et al. issued Apr. 26 1994 U.S. Pat. No. 5 306 515 to Letton et al. issued Apr. 26 1994 U.S. Pat. No. 5 305 514 to Letton et al. issued Apr. 26 1994 U.S. Pat. No. 4 797 300 to Jandacek et al. issued Jan. 10 1989 U.S. Pat. No. 3 963 699 to Rizzi et al issued Jun. 15 1976 U.S. Pat. No. 4 518 772 to Volpenhein issued May 21 1985 and U.S. Pat. No. 4 517 360 to Volpenhein issued May 21 1985 all of which are incorporated by reference herein.

Also useful herein are esters of polyhydroxy alcohols which are generally used as the humectant type skin conditioning agents. This type of esters may include glyceryl esters including glycerides and derivatized glycerides polyglyceryl esters and glycolic esters. Glyceryl esters are derived from glycerin its derivatives and one or more carboxylic acid moieties. Non limiting examples include various C1 C30 mono di or tri esters of glycerin and derivatives thereof such as mono di tri glycerides acetoglycerides and ethoxylated glycerides. Exemplary glyceryl esters include glyceryl behenate glyceryl oleate glyceryl stearate glyceryl palmitate glyceryl distearate glyceryl dipalmitate and the like. Polyglyceryl esters having C12 C22 acid moieties are also suitable for use herein. Non limiting examples include polyglyceryl 4 isostearate polyglyceryl 3 oleate diglyceryl monooleate tetraglyceryl monooleate and the like. Glycolic esters are derived from C2 C6 glycols including ethylene glycol propylene glycol butylene glycol hexylene glycol and derivatives thereof and one or more carboxylic acid moieties having C1 C30 chains. Specific examples of glycolic esters include polyethylene glycols PEGs such as PEG 2 PEG 3 PEG 30 and PEG 50 and polypropylene glycols PPGs such as PPG 9 PPG 12 PPG 15 PPG 17 PPG 20 PPG 26 PPG 30 and PPG 34.

Also useful herein are fatty alcohol esters of polyprotonic acids including mon di or tri esters derived from C8 C30 fatty alcohols and citric acid malic acid adipic acid sebacic acid and the like.

Ethers of polyhydroxy alcohols such as dialkyl ethers having C12 C30 alkyl chains or alkyl ethers having one C12 C30 alkyl chain and a lower C1 C8 alkyl chain are also suitable skin conditioning agents for the present invention. Glycolic ethers such as C4 C20 alkyether of PEG or PPG di C8 C30 alkyl ethers of PEG or PPG are also suitable for use herein.

Also useful herein as skin conditioning agents are sphingolipids such as ceramides sphingosines phytosphingosines and the like and phospholipids such as lecithin cephalin phosphatidylserine phosphatidylinositol phosphatidic acid sphingomyelin and the like and mixtures thereof.

Another effective skin conditioning agent having superior barrier properties is a mixture of components which simulate the skin s water barrier forming lipid complex particularly vernix i.e. the substance covering the bodies of fetuses or newborns of human or other mammals . A preferred skin conditioning agent is a simulated vernix which comprises a mixture of sterols sterol esters and triglycerides. Other substances occurring naturally in the stratum corneum are also preferred such as sodium pyrrolidone carboxylic acid sodium lactate lactic acid L proline guanidine pyrrolidone ceramide and urea. Other skin conditioning agents derived from natural sources are also suitable for use herein such as hydrolyzed protein and other collagen derived proteins keratin and derivatives acetamide MEA and the like.

Vegetable oils and hydrogenated vegetable oils are also useful herein. Non limiting examples include safflower oil castor oil coconut oil cottonseed oil menhaden oil palm kernel oil palm oil peanut oil soybean oil rapeseed oil linseed oil rice bran oil pine oil sesame oil sunflower seed oil jojoba oil tea tree oil avocado oil olive oil canola oil their hydrogenated products such as cocoa butter shea butter and mixtures thereof. Some of the fully or partially hydrogenated vegetable oils may be solid or semi solid i.e. having a waxy consistency at ambient temperature such that they are also suitable for use herein as viscosity enhancing agents.

Also useful herein are animal fats and oils such as shark liver oil cod liver oil lanolin their derivatives and mixtures thereof. In some embodiments the skin conditioning agent comprises petrolatum and a mixture of lanolin and lanolin derivatives in a ratio ranging from about 1 2 to about 1 5.

Nonlimiting examples of sterols suitable for use herein include cholesterol ergosterol sitosterol cholecalciferol and other sterols found in phytosterols soy sterols or tall oil sterols lanosterols and other sterols found in lanolin and hydrogenated lanolin and derivatives thereof such as acetylated lanolin e.g. ACYLAN from Croda Inc. Parsippany N.J. .

Nonlimiting examples of sterol esters suitable for use herein include stearate palmitate acetate lanolate macadamiate nonanoate oleate butyrate hydroxystearate isostearate sulfate isostearate carbonate of cholesterol and other sterols. A particularly preferred sterol esters is a mixture of C10 C30 carboxylic acid esters of sterols which is predominantly a cholesterol lanosterol mixture e.g. Super Sterol Ester from Croda Inc. Parsippany N.J. . Super Sterol Ester is derived from wool wax by a process disclosed in part in U.S. Pat. No. 4 138 416 issued to Koresawa et al. which is incorporated herein by reference. Other nonlimiting examples of sterol esters suitable for use herein include stearate palmitate acetate lanolate macadamiate nonanoate oleate butyrate hydroxystearate isostearate sulfate isostearate carbonate of cholesterol and other sterols.

Also useful herein as skin conditioning agents are C7 C40 branched hydrocarbons such as ISOPAR isoparaffins available from Exxon Chemical Company Houston Tex. and PERMETHYL available from Presperse Inc. Piscataway N.J. . Squalane squalene and the like are also suitable skin conditioning agents. Squalene being the partially unsaturated form of squalane is oxidatively unstable and may require incorporation of anti oxidants.

Suitable skin conditioning agents also include polysiloxanes having monomeric siloxane units of the following structure 

Exemplary alkyl radicals are typically C1 C10 alkyls including methyl ethyl propyl isopropyl butyl isobutyl pentyl hexyl octyl decyl and the like. Exemplary alkenyl radicals are vinyl allyl and the like. Exemplary aryl radicals are phenyl diphenyl naphthyl and the like. Exemplary alkaryl radicals are tolyl xylyl ethylphenyl and the like. Exemplary aryl radicals are benzyl phenylethyl phenylethyl phenylbutyl and the like. Exemplary cycloalkyl radicals are cyclobutyl cyclopentyl cyclohexyl and the like. Exemplary halogenated hydrocarbon radicals are chloromethyl bromoethyl tetrafluoroethyl fluoroethyl trifluoroethyl trifluorotloyl hexafluoroxylyl and the like.

In some embodiments the skin conditioning agent may be a substituted polymethylsiloxane wherein at lease one substituent is a functional group selected form the group consisting of methyl phenyl amino other alkyl carboxyl hydroxyl ether polyether aldehyde ketone amide ester thiol and mixtures thereof. Particularly preferred for use herein is polydimethylsiloxane.

Viscosity of polysiloxanes useful for the present invention may vary as widely as the viscosity of polysiloxanes in general vary so long as the polysiloxane is flowable or can be made to be flowable for application to the absorbent article. This includes but is not limited to viscosity as low as 5 centistokes at 37 C. as measured by a glass viscometer to about 20 000 000 centistokes. Preferably the polysiloxanes have a viscosity at 37 C. ranging from about 5 to about 5 000 centistokes more preferably from about 5 to about 2 000 centistokes most preferably from about 100 to about 1000 centistokes. High viscosity polysiloxanes which themselves are resistant to flowing can be effectively deposited upon the absorbent articles by such methods as for example emulsifying the polysiloxane in surfactant or providing the polysiloxane in solution with the aid of a solvent such as hexane listed for exemplary purposes only.

Particularly suitable for use herein are polysiloxane compounds having long C12 C60 preferably C30 C50 linear alkyl groups or phenyl groups including phenyl functional polymethylsiloxane compounds e.g. polyphenylmethyl siloxane available as Dow Corning 556 Fluid and cetyl or stearyl functionalized dimethicones such as Dow 2502 and Dow 2503 polysiloxanes respectively. In addition to such substitution with phenyl functional or alkyl groups effective substitution may be made with amino carboxyl hydroxyl ether polyether aldehyde ketone amide ester and thiol groups. Of these effective substituent groups the family of groups comprising phenyl amino alkyl carboxyl and hydroxyl groups are more preferred than the others and phenyl functional groups are most preferred.

Other alkyl polysiloxanes include SF 1318 SF 1642 and SF 1632 available from General Electric Corp. Waterford N.Y. trimethyl siloxysilicates such as WACKER BELSIL TSM 803 MQ available from Wacker Silicones Adrian Mich. and MIRASIL DPDM available from Rhone Poulenc Cranbury N.J. are used in some embodiments. Other preferred polysiloxane compounds for use in the present invention are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 059 282 Ampulski et al issued Oct. 22 1991 which is incorporated herein by reference.

The compositions of the present invention contain viscosity enhancing agents that thickens gels or hardens the composition such that the composition is immobilized or locked at the location e.g. on the surface or inside the cavity of the delivery vehicle it is applied. When an absorbent article is used as the delivery vehicle the viscosity enhancing agent is especially useful in minimizing the migration and loss of the film forming compositions which without the viscosity enhancing agents would have a plastic or fluid consistency at ambient temperature.

The amount of the viscosity enhancing agent in the composition will depend on a variety of factors including the skin conditioning agents used especially their viscosity at room temperature and at skin temperature and their melting points characteristics of other components in the composition e.g. skin care ingredients and like factors. When present the composition typically comprises from about 15 to about 50 wt of the viscosity enhancing agent. Preferably the composition comprises from about 20 to about 45 wt most preferably from about 25 to about 40 wt of the viscosity enhancing agent.

Exemplary viscosity enhancing agents include organic materials such as natural or synthetic waxes C12 C60 alcohols C12 C60 acids alpha hydroxy fatty acids polyhydroxy fatty acid esters polyhydroxy fatty acid amides and inorganic organic materials such as metal ester complexes containing zinc calcium aluminum or magnesium fumed silicas and organoclays. Other suitable viscosity enhancing agents are disclosed in co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 563 638 filed by Gatto et al. on May 2 2000 the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference. Some skin conditioning agents particularly polyol polyesters glyceryl esters polyglyceryl esters and polysiloxanes may have a solid or semi solid at ambient temperature and are also suitable for use herein as viscosity enhancing agents.

The organic viscosity enhancing agents are preferably miscible with or solubilized in the skin conditioning agent. The organic viscosity enhancing agents preferably have a melting point of at least about 35 C. preferably at least about 40 C. so that the viscosity enhancing agents do not have a tendency to migrate or flow at ambient temperature. Their high melting points and miscibility with the skin conditioning agents help thickening and solidifying the composition and immobilize the composition in or on the desired location of the delivery vehicle. Typically the organic viscosity enhancing agents have a melting point in the range of from about 50 C. to about 150 C.

Suitable viscosity enhancing agents include C12 C60 alcohols preferably C16 C22 fatty alcohols most preferably crystalline high melting materials selected from the group consisting of cetyl alcohol stearyl alcohol behenyl alcohol and mixtures thereof. Behenyl alcohol is particularly preferred. When employed the C16 C22 fatty alcohols comprise from about 1 to about 90 wt preferably from about 5 to about 50 wt more preferably from about 10 to about 30 wt of the total weight percent of the viscosity enhancing agents.

Other suitable viscosity enhancing agents include C12 C60 acids preferably C16 C22 fatty acids most preferably selected from the group consisting of palmitic acid stearic acid behenic acid oleic acid linoleic acid myristic acid ricinoleic acid eurcic acid lauric acid isostearic acid and mixtures thereof. Mixtures of palmitic acid and stearic acid are particularly preferred. The substantially linear structure and high melting point of these viscosity enhancing agents speed up the solidification of the composition and lock it to the location on the delivery vehicle where it is deposited. Other suitable viscosity enhancing agents that may be used herein are alpha hydroxy fatty acids including 12 hydroxystearic acid 12 hydroxylauric acid 16 hydroxyhexadecanoic acid and mixtures thereof. Nonlimiting examples of suitable fatty acids are further described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 429 816 issued to Hofrichter et al. on Jul. 4 1995 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 552 136 issued to Motley on Sep. 3 1996 disclosure of each is incorporated by reference herein.

Waxes are also suitable for use herein as viscosity enhancing agents. Natural waxes may include but are not limited to carnauba ozokerite beeswax candelilla paraffin ceresin esparto ouricuri rezowax and other known mined and mineral waxes. Synthetic waxes may include but are not limited to paraffin waxes and microcrystalline waxes. It is particularly advantageous to use these waxes that form microcrystalline structures upon cooling and or solidifying. Without being bound by theory it is believed that the formation of microcrystallites may overcome the tendency of the components especially the immiscible or low molecular weight mobile components to separate and lock or freeze the composition into a substantially homogeneous mixture. Exemplary paraffin waxes are available as SHELLWAX 100 120 200 300 and 400 from Shell Chemical Company Houston Tex. and as PARAFFIN S.P. 434 from Strahl and Pitsch Inc. West Babylon N.Y. Exemplary microcrystalline waxes include SHELLWAX 405 from Shell Chemical Company 180 M W 445 and W 835 from CK Witco Greenwich Conn. ULTRAFLEX BE SQUARE 175 and FORTEX from Petrolite Piscataway N.J.

Also suitable for use herein as viscosity enhancing agents are block copolymers made from styrene and olefinin monomers. Particularly preferred block copolymers for use herein are polystyrene ethylene butylene polystyrene block copolymers. Such linear block copolymers of styrene ethylene butylene styrene S EB S are commercially available under the trade designation KRATON G1600 series particularly KRATON G 1652 from Kraton Polymers Houston Tex. Also preferred for use herein are polystyrene ethylene ethylene propylene styrene S E EP S block copolymers wherein the ethylene propylene block is derived from selective hydrogenation of the unsaturation sites within the polystyrene isoprene butadiene styrene block copolymers. Hydrogenated polystyrene isoprene butadiene styrene S IB S block copolymers are commercially available under the trade designation SEPTON 4000 series from Kuraray America Inc. New York N.Y.

Other suitable viscosity enhancing agents that may be used herein include polyhydroxy fatty acid esters polyhydroxy fatty acid amides and mixtures thereof. Preferred esters and amides will have three or more free hydroxy groups on the polyhydroxy moiety and are typically nonionic in character. Because of the possible skin sensitivity of those using articles to which the composition is applied these esters and amides should also be relatively mild and non irritating to the skin. Suitable polyhydroxy fatty acid esters polyhydroxy fatty acid amides are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 643 588 issued to Roe et al. on Jul. 1 1997 the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference.

The inorganic organic viscosity enhancing agents generally are particulates in the present composition. In addition to thickening solidifying and immobilizing the composition these particulate materials are also useful in suspending immiscible components such as skin care ingredients or other additives in the composition. For example hydrophilic or water soluble skin care ingredients may be substantially uniformly dispersed in the oleaginous compositions. The resulting uniform dispersion improves the processability of the composition and provides a more uniform application of the skin care ingredients in or on the delivery vehicle.

Suitable viscosity enhancing agents include treated and untreated fumed silicas. Fumed silicas are particles that do not dissolve in the oleaginous compositions. Rather the viscosity of the oleaginous composition is raised by a hydrogen bonded network of fumed silica particles. Exemplary untreated fumed silicas are available from Cabot Corp. Tuscola Ill. under the trade designations M5 and MS 55. Exemplary surface treated fumed silicas are also available from Cabot Corp. Tuscola Ill. under the trade designations TS 720 and TS 610.

Suitable viscosity enhancing agents also include organoclays such as modified hectorite and smectite clays These hectorite and smectite clays are modified with quaternary ammonium compounds to make the surface of the clay particles hydrophobic while maintaining hydrophility on the edges of the clay particle due to exposed hydroxyl groups. These organoclays are insoluble particles dispersed in the oleaginous composition and form a hydrogen bonded network which increases the viscosity of the composition. Exemplary hectorite clays are available under the trade designations BENTONE 27 38 and SD 3 and exemplary bentonite clays are available under the trade designations BENTONE 34 52 and SD 1 all are available from Rheox Hightstown N.J. .

Other viscosity enhancing agents useful in the present invention include metal ester complexes of aluminum magnesium or zinc with stearates benehates palmitates or laureates.

The compositions of the present invention also include film forming agents. By incorporating the film forming agents the compositions are more easily spread over the skin to form a protective barrier coating. The film forming agents enhance the adherence of the composition to the skin and render the composition resistance to wash off or rub off. Consequently the skin care ingredients in the composition stay on the skin longer. Film forming agents are preferably soluble or miscible with oleogenous components in the composition to provide a substantially homogeneous mixture. Thus suitable film forming agents are preferably oleophilic and water resistant. The composition of the present invention typically comprises from about 1 to about 20 wt preferably from about 2 to about 15 wt more preferably from about 5 to about 12 wt of the film forming agent.

Also useful herein as film forming agents are polyalkenes include polyethylenes having a molecular weight ranging from about 300 to about 3000 available as PERFORMALENE from New Phase Technologies Piscataway N.J. polyisobutylenes available as VISTANEX from Exxon Chemical Company Houston Tex. polyisobutenes available as PRESPERSE from Amoco Chicago Ill. polydecenes SILKFLO TM 366NF and TM 364NF available from Amoco and hydrogenated polyisobutenes PANALANE L 14E and H 300E available from Lipo Chemicals Inc. Paterson N.J. .

Another suitable oleophilic film forming agents are copolymers of vinylpyrrolidone PVP and long chain alpha olefins including but are not limited to PVP eicosene copolymers GANEX V 220 and V 220F and tricontanyl PVP copolymers GANEX WP 660 . All are available from International Specialty Products Wayne N.J.

Also suitable for use herein as film forming agents are GLOSSAMER L6600 available from International Lubricants Inc. Seattle Wash. This material is a liquid at room temperature. It is synthesized by the copolymerization of purified vegetable oils from Brassica Campestris and Aleurities Fordi sources.

Also suitable for use herein as film forming agents are acrylic copolymers having long C8 C30 alkyl chains to enhance their oleophilicity such as acrylate octylacrylamide copolymers available as DERMACRYL 79 and LT from National Starch and Chemical Bridgewater N.J. . Other suitable film forming agents include but are not limited to polyethylene glycol derivatives of Beeswax ESTOL E04BW 3752 E06BW 3753 and E03BW 3751 available from Unichema Wilmington Del. and fatty acid ester fatty acid anhydride grafted polyolefins wherein the esters and anhydrides are derived from C12 C22 fatty acid moieties for example C30 C38 olefin isopropyl maleate maleic anhydride copolymer PERFORMA V1608 available from New Phase Technologies Piscataway N.J. .

The film forming compositions of the present invention may comprise other components including but are not limited to water surfactants skin care ingredients anti oxidants pH buffering systems disinfectants antibacterial agents antiviral agents pharmaceutical actives perfumes pigments deodorants opacifiers astringents solvents preservatives and the like. Most of these materials are well known in the art as additives for such formulations and can be employed in appropriate amounts in the compositions for use herein. Particular preferred surfactants and skin care ingredients are disclosed in more details below.

Surfactants may be incorporated in the film forming composition of the present invention to solubilize or compatiblize certain film forming agents or viscosity enhancing agents in the skin conditioning agents. Suitable surfactants typically have hydrophilic lipophilic balance HLB values no more than about 7. Particularly suitable surfactants are alkyl ethoxylates such as C Cfatty alcohol ethoxylates having an average degree of ethoxylation of from about 2 to about 30. These and other suitable surfactants are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 643 588 issued to Roe et al. on Jul. 1 1997 the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference.

Safe and effective skin care ingredients may be incorporated in the present composition in the amount ranging from about 0.01 to about 15 wt preferably from about 0.1 to about 10 wt and more preferably from about 1 to about 7 wt . Such materials include Category I and Category III actives. Category I and Category III actives are known to provide multiple skin benefits such as skin protection itch prevention irritation prevention via various mechanisms. It will be recognized that several of the Category I and Category III actives listed below are skin conditioning agents as defined herein. Category I actives include allantoin aluminum hydroxide gel calamine cocoa butter dimethicone cod liver oil in combination glycerine kaolin petrolatum lanolin mineral oil shark liver oil white petrolatum talc topical starch zinc acetate zinc carbonate zinc oxide and the like. Category III actives include live yeast cell derivatives aldioxa aluminum acetate microporous cellulose cholecalciferol colloidal oatmeal cysteine hydrochloride dexpanthenol Peruvean balsam oil protein hydrolysates racemic methionine sodium bicarbonate Vitamin A and the like.

Other skin care ingredients suitable for the film forming compositions of the present invention may include but are not limited to vitamins pH control agents or proton donating agents protease inhibitors enzyme inhibitors chelating agents anti microbials skin soothing agents and the like.

Suitable vitamins include A B B niacinamide panthenol C and derivatives D E and derivatives such as E acetate. Suitable skin soothing agents include those materials derived from botanical extracts marine sources mineral sources and the like such as aloe vera chamomile calendula comfrey yarrow witch hazel sea weed and oat extracts. Other nonlimiting examples of the skin care ingredients are described in co pending U.S. application Ser. No. 09 041 509 by McOsker et al. filed on Mar. 12 1998 U.S. application Ser. No. 09 041 232 by Rourke et al filed on Mar. 12 1998 U.S. application Ser. No. 09 041 266 by Roe et al. and U.S. application Ser. No. 09 041 196 by Underiner et al. both filed on Mar. 12 1998 Patent Application EP 97 120 699 and EP 97 120 700 both by Palumbo et al. and filed on Nov. 26 1997 U.S. Pat. No. 5 091 193 issued to Enjolras et al on Feb. 25 1992 U.S. Pat. No. 4 556 560 issued to Buckingham on Dec. 3 1985 U.S. Pat. No. 5 376 655 issued to Imaki et al. on Dec. 27 1994 U.S. Pat. No. 5 091 193 issued to Enjolras et al. on Feb. 25 1992 U.S. Pat. No. 3 935 862 issued to Kraskin on Feb. 3 1976 U.S. Pat. No. 5 409 903 issued to Polak et al. on Apr. 25 1995 U.S. Pat. No. 4 556 560 issued to Buckingham on Dec. 3 1985 all are incorporated by reference herein.

Particularly preferred skin care ingredients herein include zinc oxide talc starch allantoin aloe vera chamomile vitamins hexamidine and its salts and derivatives hexamidine diisethionate and its salts triacetin phytic acid ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid EDTA phenylsulfonyl fluorides such as 4 2 aminoethyl benzenesulfonylfluoride hydrochloride chitosan and mixtures thereof.

These skin care ingredients may comprise from 0.01 to 10 wt preferably from about 0.1 to about 6 wt more preferably from about 0.1 to about 4 wt of the composition.

Oxidation of unsaturations in substances such as unsaturated hydrocarbons proteins lecithin and their derivatives may lead to rancidity of the composition. Anti oxidants can be added to minimize or prevent the oxidation process and enhance the shelf life of the composition. Anti oxidants useful herein should preferably be mild and non irritating. Anti oxidants from natural sources are preferred such as Vitamin E and derivatives including tocopherol tocopherol acetate mixed tocopherols available as COVI OX T 50 or T 70 from Henkel Corp Ambler Pa. and the like. These anti oxidants are also useful as skin anti oxidants which minimizes the wrinkles and dullness of the skin and provides a more youthful looking and firmer textured skin.

A preservative will also be needed to prevent bacterial growth and odors thereof particularly in compositions having a relatively high water content. Suitable preservatives include propyl paraben methyl paraben benzyl alcohol benzalkonium chloride tribasic calcium phosphate BHT or acids such as citric tartaric maleic lactic malic benzoic salicylic and the like.

Suitable solvents include propylene glycol glycerine cyclomethicone C2 C6 glycols particularly ethylene glycol propylene glycol and hexylene glycol diol and multi hydroxy based solvents.

The composition of the present invention may be applied to the skin by hand or by delivery vehicles. Exemplary delivery vehicles include web materials or substrates such as tissues wipes sponges cotton balls pads non woven webs patches bandages paper fabrics and the like. The delivery vehicles may also be canisters sticks or stick casings aerosol dispensers roller dispensers pump sprays trigger sprays and the like. Any combination of the above is also suitable for use herein as a delivery vehicle. Nonlimiting examples of some delivery vehicles are described in co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 326 149 filed by McOsker et al. on Jun. 4 1999 U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 370 396 filed by McOsker et al. on Aug. 6 1999 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 000 356 issued to Johnson et al. on Mar. 19 1991 all are incorporated herein by reference.

In one embodiment the delivery vehicle is a disposable absorbent article having the composition of the present invention disposed on at least a component thereof. The suitable component of an absorbent article preferably has a skin contacting surface such that when the article is worn the composition disposed on the absorbent article is placed adjacent to the skin. Suitable components of an absorbent article may also be a secondary layer which does not have a surface in direct contact with the skin that will transfer the composition to the skin indirectly. Thus the component of an absorbent article suitable for such use may be a topsheet a backsheet any secondary layer a leg cuff a side panel a waist region an insertable element inserted into the absorbent article for use during wear of the article a specialized structure such as a bowel movement pockets and the combinations thereof.

In a preferred embodiment the delivery vehicle is a diaper having the general structure as shown in . is a plan view of a diaper in a flat out state with portions of the structure being cut away to more clearly show the construction of the diaper . The portion of the diaper that faces the wearer is oriented towards the viewer. As shown in the diaper comprises a liquid pervious topsheet a liquid impervious backsheet an absorbent core positioned between at least a portion of the topsheet and the backsheet side panels elasticized leg cuffs an elastic waist feature and a fastening system generally designated . The diaper is shown in to have a first waist region a second waist region opposed to the first waist region and a crotch region located between the first waist region and the second waist region . The periphery of the diaper is defined by the outer edges of the diaper in which longitudinal edges run generally parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the diaper and end edges run between the longitudinal edges generally parallel to the lateral centerline of the diaper .

Exemplary absorbent articles such as diapers are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 3 860 003 issued to Buell on Jan. 14 1975 U.S. Pat. No. 5 151 092 issued to Buell et al. on Sep. 29 1992 U.S. Pat. No. 5 221 274 issued to Buell et al. on Jun. 22 1993 U.S. Pat. No. 5 554 145 issued to Roe et al. on Sep. 10 1996 U.S. Pat. No. 5 569 234 issued to Buell et al. on Oct. 29 1996 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 580 411 issued to Nease et al. on Dec. 3 1996 the disclosure of each of which is incorporated herein by reference.

Exemplary training pants are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 246 433 issued to Hasse et al. on Sep. 21 1993 U.S. Pat. No. 5 569 234 issued to Buell et al. on Oct. 29 1996 U.S. Pat. No. 6 120 487 issued to Ashton on Sep. 19 2000 U.S. Pat. No. 6 120 489 issued to Johnson et al. On Sep. 19 2000 U.S. Pat. No. 4 940 464 issued to Van Gompel et al. on Jul. 10 1990 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 092 861 issued to Nomura et al. on Mar. 3 1992 the disclosure of each of these references is incorporated herein by reference.

Exemplary feminine hygiene articles are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 4 556 146 issued to Swanson et al. on Dec. 3 1985 U.S. Pat. No. 4 589 876 issued to Van Tilberg on Apr. 27 1993 U.S. Pat. No. 4 687 478 issued to Van Tilburg on Aug. 18 1997 U.S. Pat. No. 4 950 264 issued to Osborn III on Aug. 21 1990 U.S. Pat. No. 5 009 653 issued to Osborn III on Apr. 23 1991 U.S. Pat. No. 5 267 992 issued to Van Tilburg on Dec. 7 1993 U.S. Pat. No. 5 389 094 issued to Lavash et al. on Feb. 14 1995 U.S. Pat. No. 5 413 568 issued to Roach et al. on May 9 1995 U.S. Pat. No. 5 460 623 issued to Emenaker et al. on Oct. 24 1995 U.S. Pat. No. 5 489 283 issued Van Tilburg on Feb. 6 1996 U.S. Pat. No. 5 569 231 issued to Emenaker et al. on Oct. 29 1996 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 620 430 issued to Bamber on Apr. 15 1997 the disclosure of each of these references is incorporated by reference herein.

Exemplary incontinence articles are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 4 253 461 issued to Strickland et al. on Mar. 3 1981 U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 597 760 and 4 597 761 issued to Buell the above mentioned U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 704 115 4 909 802 issued to Ahr et al. U.S. Pat. No. 4 964 860 issued to Gipson et al. on Oct. 23 1990 and in U.S. Pat. No. 5 304 161 issued Apr. 19 1994 to Noel et al. the disclosure of each of these references is incorporated herein.

The following examples further describe embodiments within the scope of the present invention. Each film forming composition is formed by combining and mixing the ingredients at a temperature in the range from about 77 C. to about 120 C. and using technologies known in the art. The examples are given solely for the purpose of illustration and are not to be construed as limitations of the present invention as many variations thereof are possible without departing form the spirit and scope of the invention.

A film forming composition as described above in Example 1 is prepared by combining and mixing the ingredients at about 77 C. i.e. about 170 F. and using technology known in the art. Then the composition is deposited on the topsheet of an absorbent article via a contact slot coater such as a hot melt adhesive applicator head having multiple slots Meltex EP 11 available from Nordson Corp. Atlanta Ga. . The composition is placed into a heated tank operating at a temperature of about 77 C. i.e. about 170 F. . The composition is subsequently applied with a contact applicator onto the topsheet and or cuffs of a desired article in a striped pattern where the stripes run in the article s longitudinal direction. Specifically 5 stripes are applied each stripe measuring about 0.25 inch in width i.e. the substrate s lateral direction about 11.7 inches in the longitudinal direction of the substrate and at an add on level of about 15.5 mg in 2.4 mg cm . The distance between the stripes is about 0.31 inch.

The disclosures of all patents patent applications and any patents which issue thereon as well as any corresponding published foreign patent applications and publications mentioned throughout this description are hereby incorporated by reference herein. It is expressly not admitted however that any of the documents incorporated by reference herein teach or disclose the present invention.

While particular embodiments of the present invention have been illustrated and described it would be obvious to those skilled in the art that various other changes and modifications can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. It is therefore intended to cover in the appended claims all such changes and modifications that are within the scope of this invention.

