---

title: Wireless communication system utilizing a persistence value for group communication requests to reduce latency
abstract: A system and method for minimizing latency for direct group communications, such as push-to-talk (PTT) calls, among a group of wireless telecommunication devices on a wireless telecommunication network. The wireless telecommunication device selectively requests and then receives an open dedicated broadcast channel for an outgoing communication, which can include a group communication stream to a communication server that receives and creates a group communication to all wireless telecommunication devices of the designated group. The wireless telecommunication device selectively receives a broadcast channel based upon a predetermined probability, and assigns a greater probability of receiving an open broadcast channel for requests to transmit group communication streams than for requests to open a broadcast channel that are not for a group communication.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07664517&OS=07664517&RS=07664517
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 07664517
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050616
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 581 734 filed on Jun. 21 2004 and U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 686 141 filed on May 31 2005. The contents of these documents are incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention generally relates to wireless telecommunication networks. More specifically the present invention relates to a system and method for providing an open broadcast channel to a group communication such as Push to Talk group communications in a wireless telecommunication network by increasing the probability that the request to send a group communication will initially receive an open dedicated traffic channel.

In a wireless network the users of wireless communication devices communicate over an air interface to a central computer. This may be done directly as in the case of a wireless LAN in an office environment or it may be done through cellular infrastructure equipment as in the case of a wireless telephone application. One type of personal communication system is a push to talk PTT system between mobile wireless communication devices. A PTT communication connection is typically initiated by a single button push on the wireless device that activates a half duplex link between the speaker and each member device of the group and once the button is released the device can receive incoming PTT transmissions once the button is released. In some arrangements the PTT speaker will have the floor where no other group member can speak while the speaker is speaking. Once the speaker releases the PTT button any other individual member of the group can engage their PTT button and they will have the floor. A specific PTT group of recipient devices for the communicating wireless device is commonly set up by the carrier and the wireless devices themselves do not allow the modification of the group i.e. to include or drop individuals from the group or to purposely direct a communication to be received by any fewer members than the entire group.

The typical PTT call involves two users who are rarely located within the same telecommunication sector such that communication and replication of the communication is propagated easily over the existing telecommunication infrastructure. However a small but very important fraction of push to talk calls involve a larger number of call participants many of whom may also be located within the same sector public safety disaster scenarios are one example. In such scenario the maintenance of the PTT communications within the group all located on the same telecommunication resource is difficult and inefficient. These systems will use trunks of the telephone network and standard channel allocation that devote individual circuits for each call participant thus limiting system scalability.

One problem arises in that a wireless telecommunication device may have a predetermined probability to seize a dedicated communication channel upon request of the user. This delay can minimize the probability of a request collision at the base station. Moreover in a PTT system if a large number of receiving wireless devices are in the same sector there is a high probability that there will be immediate response requests from the group devices and thus and increased likelihood of collision. Thus some internal delay mechanism is desirable to avoid collision but yet not delay a priority PTT communication. It is thus to such a system and method of reducing latency for the setup of a PTT or direct group communication that the present invention is primarily directed.

A system and method for minimizing latency for group communications such as push to talk PTT calls from wireless telecommunication devices on a wireless telecommunication network. The wireless telecommunication device selectively requests and then receives typically through a control or signaling channel an open dedicated broadcast channel for an outgoing communication which can include a group communication stream to a communication server that receives and creates a group communication to all wireless telecommunication devices of the designated group. The wireless telecommunication devices selectively receive a broadcast channel based upon a predetermined probability preferably set at the wireless communication device and assigns a greater probability of receiving an open broadcast channel for requests to transmit direct group communication streams than for requests open a broadcast channel that are not for a direct group communication.

In one embodiment the system for minimizing latency for direct group communications among a group of wireless telecommunication devices on a wireless network includes a plurality of wireless telecommunication devices wherein each wireless telecommunication device is able to direct a single group communication stream to a designated group of the plurality of wireless telecommunication devices with each wireless telecommunication device selectively requesting and then receiving an open dedicated broadcast channel for an outgoing communication from the wireless telecommunication device to include a direct communication stream from that wireless telecommunication device. The system includes a communication server that receives the single communication stream from a communicating wireless device and creates a group communication to all wireless telecommunication devices of the designated group. At least a set of one or more of the plurality wireless telecommunication devices selectively receives a broadcast channel based upon a predetermined probability and one or more of the set of wireless telecommunications devices assigns a greater probability of receiving an open broadcast channel for requests to transmit direct group communication streams than for requests to open a broadcast channel that are not for a direct group communication.

In one embodiment the method for minimizing latency for group communications from a first wireless telecommunication device to a predetermined group of wireless telecommunication devices on a wireless network includes the steps of requesting at a wireless telecommunication device that is able to direct a single group communication stream to a designated group of a plurality of wireless telecommunication devices on wireless telecommunication network the opening of a dedicated broadcast channel to the wireless telecommunication network for an outgoing communication from the wireless telecommunication device then assigning a first probability of opening a communication stream assigning a second probability for opening a communication stream for a group communication stream where the second probability is greater than the first probability. If the request for a dedicated broadcast channel is not for a group communication stream the method includes the step of selectively opening a dedicated broadcast channel based upon the first probability. Otherwise if the request for a dedicated broadcast channel is for a group communication stream the method includes the step of selectively opening a dedicated broadcast channel based upon the second probability.

The system and method can therefore allow a predetermined probability to seize a dedicated communication channel upon request of the user to minimize collisions yet still give priority to direct group communications. Moreover the present invention is advantageous in a system where a large number of receiving wireless devices are in the same sector in order to provide a channel grant probability to lessen the likelihood that immediate response requests from the group devices will cause collisions yet still give a priority to responsive group communications. The system and method can accordingly be implemented on existing infrastructure as the wireless device can ultimately set the probability of receiving an open channel.

Other objects advantages and features of the present invention will become apparent after review of the hereinafter set forth Brief Description of the Drawings Detailed Description of the Invention and the claims.

With reference to the figures in which like numerals represent like elements throughout illustrates one embodiment of a wireless telecommunication system between a group of wireless telecommunication devices target set on a wireless network . Here the one or more wireless telecommunication devices are in a PTT group such as the wireless telephone smart pager and personal digital assistant PDA with other wireless telecommunication devices across a wireless network . In the system each wireless telecommunication device is capable of selectively directly communicating across the wireless communication network with a target set of one or more other wireless telecommunication devices with the plurality. For example the target set for cellular telephone can be all devices in the target set or a subset thereof such as pager and PDA .

In particular the system can deliver media such as voice data multimedia or other applicants to very large push to talk or other similar services calls defined in ad hoc fashion. These PTT calls can involve a very large number of call participants several hundred who can be scattered across an operator s wireless network or who may all be located in a small number of sectors on the same network resources.

In one embodiment a group communication server selectively receives requests to bridge direct communications between the communicating wireless telecommunication devices and the one or more other wireless telecommunication devices in the target set designated for the communicating wireless telecommunication device. The communication server then selectively bridges the requested direct communication such as a PTT voice communication. The identity of the target set is selectively available to the group communication server such as being resident on the group communication server or in a connected database or possibly on another computer device such as a packet flow control server as is common in network infrastructure .

The system minimizes latency for direct group communications among a group of wireless telecommunication devices set on a wireless network . Each wireless telecommunication device is able to direct a single group communication stream to a designated group such as all devices of set of the plurality of wireless telecommunication devices and as further described herein each wireless telecommunication device selectively requests and then receiving an open dedicated broadcast channel for an outgoing communication from the wireless telecommunication device which can include a direct communication stream. The communication server that receives the single communication stream from a communicating wireless device and creates a group communication to all wireless telecommunication devices of the designated group. A set of one or more of the plurality wireless telecommunication devices selectively receives an open broadcast channel based upon a predetermined probability and assigns a greater probability of receiving an open broadcast channel for requests to transmit direct group communication streams than for requests to open a broadcast channel that are not for a direct group communication.

There are typically one or more intermittent communication devices that bridge communication streams between the communication server and the group of wireless telecommunication devices as is shown in and the communication server can further determine which member wireless telecommunication devices are able to determine the best mode of communication with the wireless devices . The communication server will then direct the one or more intermittent communication devices to send data packets to those wireless telecommunication devices of the set .

The group communication server s are connected to a wireless service providers packet data service node PDSN such as PDSN shown here resident on a carrier network . Each PDSN can interface with a base station controller of a base station through a packet control function PCF . The PCF is typically located in the base station . The carrier network controls messages generally in the form of data packets sent to a messaging service controller MSC . The carrier network communicates with the MSC by a network the Internet and or POTS plain ordinary telephone system . Typically the network or Internet connection between the carrier network and the MSC transfers data and the POTS transfers voice information. The MSC can be connected to one or more base stations . In a similar manner to the carrier network the MSC is typically connected to the branch to source BTS by both the network and or Internet for data transfer and POTS for voice information. The BTS ultimately broadcasts and receives messages wirelessly to and from the wireless devices such as cellular telephones by short messaging service SMS or other over the air methods known in the art.

In wireless devices that have designated a set of group members the wireless device can directly connect with the other member of the set and engage in voice and data communication. However all such direct communications will occur through or at the control of the group communication server . All data packets of the devices do not necessarily have to travel through the group communication server itself but the server must be able to ultimately control the communication because it will typically be the only server side LAN component that is aware of and or can retrieve the identity of the members of the set or direct the identity of the members of the set to another computer device.

In a PTT embodiment the wireless system allows a dispatch voice service that operates over standard commercial wireless infrastructure CDMA FDMA GSM etc. . In a dispatch model communication between endpoints wireless devices occurs within virtual groups wherein the voice of one talker is broadcast to one or more listeners . A single instance of this type of communication is commonly referred to as a dispatch call. A call is an instantiation of a group which defines the characteristics of a call. A group in essence is defined by a member list and associated information such as group name or group ID. In the absence of a wireless multicast channel each group is formed by the combination of separate point to point connections between each endpoint and group communication server s assigned to manage the call.

Each region of the PTT infrastructure is deployed over a specific portion of the carrier packet data network. The group communication server s within the region may be routing traffic between one or more PDSNs in the carrier network . A direct call is a call in which there are only two members a call originator and a call target that still uses the PTT system. For this call type the most challenging scenario for meeting performance requirements is the case when the direct call is placed with both the originator and target handset have dormant packet data connections i.e. the wireless devices do not have an open dedicated channel. Conversely the originator s and or the target s packet data connection can be in the active state and dedicated traffic channels are available at the time the direct call is placed. The dormant to dormant scenario is the one that provides the greatest challenge in meeting performance requirements and preventing significant latency in call set up as it is more fully described herein.

As shown here the wireless device can be a cellular telephone with a graphics display but can also be any wireless device with a computer platform as known in the art such as a personal digital assistant PDA a pager with a graphics display or even a separate computer platform that has a wireless communication portal and may otherwise have a wired connection to a network or the Internet. Further the memory can be comprised of read only or random access memory RAM and ROM EPROM EEPROM flash cards or any memory common to computer platforms. The computer platform can also include a local database for storage of software applications not actively used in memory . The local database is typically comprised of one or more flash memory cells but can be any secondary or tertiary storage device as known in the art such as magnetic media EPROM EEPROM optical media tape or soft or hard disk. The wireless telephone typically will open a full duplex channel for telecommunication and in some instances will communicate via a half duplex channel only being able to talk or receive a voice stream.

In this embodiment of the wireless device the computer platform also includes a communication interface that includes a direct communication interface that can open the direct communication channel from the wireless device. The direct communication interface can also be part of the standard communication interface for the wireless device which ordinarily carries the voice and data transmitted to and from the wireless device. The direct communication interface typically is comprised of hardware as is known in the art.

The application layer signaling shown in for establishing a direct call illustrates the application layer messaging that is exchanged to establish a direct PTT call. The diagram of does not identify any physical layer signaling mechanisms as this system can be implemented on a variety of different physical systems.

A persistence value preferably allows the AT to transmit on the first attempt such that the initial access probe transmission is successful. The start of traffic channel setup is measured when the AT begins local access procedures to transmit a probe on the access channel. These procedures include waiting for the start of the access channel cycle performing the persistence test probability that a dedicated channel will be opened and transmitting. The end of the traffic channel setup procedure is measured when the AT receives an acknowledgement RTCAck message.

Again with reference to an AT originated data approach is illustrated for which the AN must provide support. Time sensitive data is sent by the AT as a DataOverSignaling DOS message over the Access Channel. When sending the initial data the AT may at the same time request to establish a traffic channel TCH . If a traffic channel is required the AT sends an access probe supplying the DOS message along with a ConnectionRequest and RouteUpdate message. Once the AN acquires the relevant data DRC and Pilot for the TCH communication the full TCH is setup.

Otherwise if a request is made for a dedicated channel for a PTT or group communication call at decision then the open channel is attempted to be bridged with the second probability of the channel grant as shown at step . A determination is then made as to whether the dedicated channel has been connected as shown at decision . If the open channel has been made the dedicated channel is bridged and handed off to the communication interface and the process returns to decision to await another call request. Otherwise if an open channel has not been granted at decision then a determination is made as to whether a certain number of default attempts to bridge the open channel has been done for the PTT call as shown at decision . This default condition for connection applies if there is a probabilistic limitation to the opening of the channel for the PTT call and can be set higher than for non PTT attempts due to the higher priority of the call i.e. connect after two attempts versus five. Of course in some embodiments there will be no delay for opening a channel for a PTT call and thus there will not be a second probability and these steps unnecessary. If the default number has not been reached at decision then the process iterates to attempt to bridge the connection with the second probability at step . If the default number of attempts has been reached at decision then the open channel is bridged and handed off as shown at step and the process reiterated to a wait state for a request for a dedicated open channel.

Returning again to decision in which a determination is made as to whether a dedicated connection has been made for the non PTT call if the dedicated open channel has not been made then a determination is made as to whether a default number of attempts has been made for a first probability of connection as shown at decision . If the open channel has been made at decision then the process bridges and hands off the dedicated channel at step and iterates to the wait state for another dedicated open channel request. Otherwise if the default number of attempts has not been made at decision then the process returns to step to attempt to bridge a connection with the first probability.

It can thus be seen that the system provides a method for minimizing latency for direct group communications from a first wireless telecommunication device such as wireless device to a predetermined group of wireless telecommunication devices on a wireless network such as set . The method includes the steps of requesting at a wireless telecommunication device such as wireless telephone that is able to direct a single group communication stream to a designated group of a plurality of wireless telecommunication devices set on wireless telecommunication network the opening of a dedicated broadcast channel to the wireless telecommunication network for an outgoing communication from the wireless telecommunication device such as a traffic channel TCH . The method then includes the step of assigning a first probability of opening a direct communication stream such as shown at step and assigning a second probability for opening a direct communication stream for a direct group communication stream such as shown at step . The second probability is greater than the first probability and alternately the second probability can be set to 100 i.e. the channel will always be open. If the request for a dedicated broadcast channel is not for a direct group communication stream selectively opening a dedicated broadcast channel based upon the first probability as shown at step and if the request for a dedicated broadcast channel is for a direct group communication stream selectively opening dedicated broadcast channel based upon the second probability as shown at step .

The method can further include the step of setting a first default duration for the maximum delay between the request for opening a dedicated communication channel and the opening of the dedicated communication channel which is shown by decision . Then the method can further include the step of setting a second default duration for the maximum delay between the request for opening a dedicated communication channel for a direct group communication stream and the opening of the dedicated communication channel the second default duration shorter than the first default duration as shown in decisions and . The step of assigning a second probability can be assigning the wireless telecommunications device to automatically open a broadcast channel to transmit direct group communication streams. In one embodiment the step of assigning a first probability is assigning a probability of 50 and the step of assigning a second probability is assigning a probability greater than 50 .

The system also includes an inventive wireless telecommunication device such as wireless telephone shown in . The wireless telecommunication device is able to direct a single group communication stream to a designated group of a plurality of wireless telecommunication devices such as set and selectively open dedicated broadcast channels to the wireless telecommunication network for an outgoing communication from the wireless telecommunication device for any direct communication stream. The wireless telecommunication device implements the inventive method to open dedicated channels for communications.

Another embodiment includes a program resident in a computer readable medium where the program directs a wireless device having a computer platform to perform the inventive steps of the method. The computer readable medium can be the memory of the computer platform of the wireless telephone or other wireless device or can be in a local database such as local database of the wireless telephone . Further the computer readable medium can be in a secondary storage media that is loadable onto a wireless device computer platform such as a magnetic disk or tape optical disk hard disk flash memory or other storage media as is known in the art.

In the context of the method may be implemented for example by operating portion s of the wireless network to execute a sequence of machine readable instructions such as wireless platform and the communication server . The instructions can reside in various types of signal bearing or data storage primary secondary or tertiary media. The media may comprise for example RAM not shown accessible by or residing within the components of the wireless network . Whether contained in RAM a diskette or other secondary storage media the instructions may be stored on a variety of machine readable data storage media such as DASD storage e.g. a conventional hard drive or a RAID array magnetic tape electronic read only memory e.g. ROM EPROM or EEPROM flash memory cards an optical storage device e.g. CD ROM WORM DVD digital optical tape paper punch cards or other suitable data storage media including digital and analog transmission media.

While the foregoing disclosure shows illustrative embodiments of the invention it should be noted that various changes and modifications could be made herein without departing from the scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims. Furthermore although elements of the invention may be described or claimed in the singular the plural is contemplated unless limitation to the singular is explicitly stated

