---

title: System and method for vote-based, interest specific collaboration regarding location of objects
abstract: Systems, devices, and methods of generating location information for an object of interest are disclosed. The location information is based on dynamic input from one or more members of an interest group associated with the object. The input from the one or more members can be provided by users of a collaboration device. The collaboration device includes a GPS receiver, and a target input mechanism in communication with the GPS receiver. The target input mechanism is configured to receive a user indication of the presence of an object of interest to generate location data from the GPS receiver for the object of interest. The collaboration device further includes a radio configured for transmitting the location data to at least one other member of the interest group.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08099466&OS=08099466&RS=08099466
owner: Reach Unlimited Corp.
number: 08099466
owner_city: Cardiff by the Sea
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051005
---
The present application claims priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 to U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 616 020 filed Oct. 5 2004 entitled A SYSTEM FOR VOTE BASED INTEREST SPECIFIC COLLABORATION REGARDING LOCATION OF OBJECTS the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference.

Today s society is highly mobile. Many people including a vast majority in the United States operate some kind of motor vehicle with which to get around such as a car or a motorcycle. Interest groups within our mobile society have a strong desire to know the location of specific objects. For example people in the sport bike and or sports car crowd often wish to know the location of speed traps i.e. hidden or semi hidden mechanism by which law enforcement authorities target offenders of local speed ordinances. As another example garage sale enthusiasts often want to know the location of garage sales within their area so as to arrive early at a sale to purchase items for the purpose of reselling the same items at another garage sale venue.

There are many existing location based services but none tailored to be useful and safe for motor vehicle operators. Cell phone based services such as Telstra AUS or speed trap SMS service which was shut down in 2001 create driving hazards because cell phones are too difficult to use in a motor vehicle particularly a motorcycle. Cell phone menus are too cumbersome to navigate and voice recognition is still yet too unreliable.

This document discloses systems devices and methods of generating location information for an object of interest based on dynamic input from one or more members of an interest group associated with the object. In one aspect the input from the one or more members can be provided by users of a collaboration device. The collaboration device includes a GPS receiver and a target input mechanism in communication with the GPS receiver. The target input mechanism is configured to receive a user indication of the presence of an object of interest to generate location data from the GPS receiver for the object of interest. The collaboration device further includes a radio configured for transmitting the location data to at least one other member of the interest group.

In another aspect a system for vote based interest specific collaboration to dynamically determine a location of a target object of interest is described. The system includes one or more members of an interest group each of which utilizes the collaboration device summarized above. The system further includes a server in communication with the one or more members of the interest group. The one or more members of the interest group being associated by at least one object of interest. The radio transmitter and receiver is configured for sending and receiving the location data to and from the server. The collaboration device is configured for being coupled to a mobile vehicle of each of the one or more members of the interest group.

In yet another aspect a method is described for collaborating among members of an interest group about the location of objects of interest associated with the interest group. The method includes the step of receiving a user indication of the presence of an object of interest from at least one of the members of the interest group. The method further includes the steps of accessing a GPS receiver based on the user indication generating location data with the GPS receiver for the object of interest and transmitting the location data to a central repository that is accessible to all members of the interest group.

The details of one or more embodiments are set forth in the accompanying drawings and the description below. Other features and advantages will be apparent from the description and drawings and from the claims.

This document describes a collaborative system and collaboration device for a user of a motor vehicle. The collaborative system provides location based information of objects of interest for users who are part of an interest group. The collaborative system is easy to use and safe especially for motor vehicle users who are mobile.

The collaborative system employs a collaboration device . The collaboration device can be integrated and housed in an enclosure having the approximate dimensions of a conventional radar detector. The collaboration device includes external input and output connections for connecting to various devices such as a communication antenna power supply etc. The enclosure can be mountable to a portion of a motor vehicle or connected as a standalone unit for being positioned anywhere in the motor vehicle.

The collaboration device includes a global positioning system GPS receiver for receiving geographical location and coordinate data and a radio transmitter receiver radio for communicating to and from a wireless communication network not shown such as a cellular telephone network. The GPS receiver and radio are under control of a computer processor . The computer processor receives data and or information signals from the GPS receiver and radio which can be stored in a memory along with computer processor instructions. The computer processor processes the data and information signals either based on inputs from a user of the collaboration device or to output results of the processing to a user interface . Results of processing by the computer processor can also be output to a server not shown via the wireless communication network.

The user interface includes a number of user input and output mechanisms. Outputs of the user interface include an audio output such as a speaker positioned behind a speaker grille not shown . The audio output can be controlled and adjusted by a user activatable volume control. The audio output provides alerts e.g. audible tones from the speaker.

The user interface also can include a visual output such as a graphical display screen or an array of light emitting diodes LEDs . The user interface includes a target input button that is activated by a user whenever an object of interest or target is sighted by the motorist or user. For example a motorist that sees a speed trap will activate target input button so that the GPS receiver determines and stores the location of the collaboration device at the time of sighting and thus the location of the target object of interest. The target input button can also be a switch a knob or even a remotely controlled user activatable control mechanism i.e. for motorcycle applications for example .

In some embodiments the target input button is activated by the user simply pushing a button for a short period of time i.e. under 2 seconds. The target input button can also recognize more than one type of input signal depending on the length of time the button is depressed. For instance if the button is pushed and held in a depressed position by a user for greater than 2 seconds the computer processor will register a false input. Accordingly the target input button can receive two or more logical inputs and where one input can override or vote against a previous input.

An input selector such as a dial or a switch allows a user to select a list of up to N objects of interest i.e. the interest list from which to choose when activating the target input button . Accordingly the interest list will be associated with the target input button and vice versa so that irrelevant information is not recorded.

A specialized visual output is a power indicator such as a single LED that indicates whether the collaboration device is adequately being powered with electricity. The power to the collaboration device is controlled by power switch which provides on and off switching of power to the collaboration device . The user interface may also include one or more other input buttons for receiving alternative inputs such as a radar or laser detector or any other external input that can help identify an object of interest from the interest list. For example the other input button could be used by a particular interest group for receiving 802.11 network scanner signals.

The collaboration device may also include a back up radio . The back up radio may be a wireless communication device that can be used as an alternative to or in place of the radio transmitter receiver . In one embodiment the back up radio is a peer to peer wireless communication system such as a citizen s band CB radio a walkie talkie type communication device or the like. The collaboration device can also have other input output ports for scalability and flexibility. For instance the collaboration device can include a universal serial bus USB or Firewire connection for connecting to an external storage device or a power connection for connecting to an alternative external power supply. The other input output ports can be used for any purpose.

When a user presses or otherwise activates the target input button they cast a vote that a target as defined by the interest group associated with the select input dial was identified at the current GPS coordinates. As more votes are cast within a similar vicinity a confidence level in the location increases. False inputs are currently treated as an additional type of input but in alternative implementations could decrement the confidence level. Also for tracking of moving targets multipliers could be applied to confidence levels based on proximity. For example if a second input occurs within diameter X of a first input it could count as 2 votes but if the second input occurs within diameter Y of a first input where Y X it would count as only one vote. The initial implementation will assume a fixed diameter as a same location and use a default value for example 100 meters and multiple votes that are not within the fixed diameter will appear and sound alerts as different targets.

The server also hosts a subscription website and location data repository. When a user orders a collaboration device that user must also register that collaboration device serial number with the subscription site. The subscription site is where the user activates the collaboration device and specifies their user profile. In the user profile the user chooses the interest list s they would like to subscribe to. For example the user may want to subscribe to the following interest lists police garage sales and available wireless networks. The types of interest lists are virtually unlimited however the number of such lists subscribed to by any particular user can be limited by subscription.

The user profile also associates interest lists with the enumerators on the input select dial on the collaboration device configures the desired alert tone i.e. default blap the desired alert diameter i.e. default 1 mile the desired false input diameter i.e. default 2 miles and the desired staleness settings. Staleness represents the age of a previous input as compared to a configured parameter. For example if an operator has a configured staleness time of 30 minutes and that operator approaches the location of a previous input that was entered 16 minutes ago that input is not considered stale. However if another operator approaches the same location but has a configured staleness time of 15 minutes that input is considered stale. In an example the staleness alert time can be set to a default of 15 minutes after which period of time a different tone emits. Further the staleness no alert time can be set to a default of 30 minutes after which period of time no tone emits. The desired false alert tone can also be set i.e. default bleep .

The server and its associated subscription web site also allows users to participate in web logging blogging . Because the collaborative system is a voting based system the quality of inputs can be greatly improved by coaching agreement and understanding within the interest group. The blogging is secure and is limited to subscribers to specific interest groups.

The following specific examples illustrate various general collaborative methods that can be performed on the collaborative system using the collaboration devices . With reference to driver A sights a target object of interest i.e. police car speed trap and presses the target input button on his collaboration device. Driver A s collaboration device uploads the GPS coordinates and the event. The system has received no previous inputs for this location therefore the confidence level is now 1. Driver B now visually sights the target object of interest and presses the target input button of his collaboration device. Driver B s collaboration device uploads the GPS coordinates and the event. If the GPS coordinates are within a confidence zone a parameter set at the discretion of the service it is assumed to be the same target. The confidence level is now 2. If the coordinates are not the same but are close tracking algorithms are used to develop a model of the target object of interest of a moving police car for example .

In accordance with another example and carrying on the speed trap example driver A sights a target object of interest and presses the target input button. Driver A s collaboration device uploads the GPS coordinates and the event. The system has received no previous inputs for this location therefore the confidence level is now 1. Driver B has configured a mile radius alert zone and comes within mile of driver A s alert location but does so after his configured staleness alert setting of 15 minutes which is the default . Driver B has configured bleep as his desired stale alert setting therefore driver B hears a single bleep. 

Driver B scans the area and does not see the target object of interest . Driver B then presses the target input button and holds it for 2 seconds thereby registering a false input vote. Driver C has configured a mile radius alert zone and comes within mile of driver As input location. Thus driver C hears two tones blap bleep representing driver A s input and driver B s false input. All members of the interest group utilize voting based interest specific systems and methods to determine the location of target objects of interest or the logical converse the non presence of a target object of interest at a particular location.

The collaborative system can integrate a web based map generator such as MapQuest or Google Earth to provide real time color coded symbols or blips based on user inputs. The collaborative system can also generate color coded confidence levels or confidence level zones on maps provided by such map generators. The collaboration device can be integrated with Original Equipment Manufacturer OEM navigational systems in automobiles or as an aftermarket option.

The collaborative system can also be integrated with one or more marketing systems i.e. systems in which subscribers submit their names or other personal information for targeted advertising. For example if a member of an interest group is a mother and her profile states that she has two children then as she passes a furniture store or clothing sale as determined by the GPS receiver she may be alerted of the location of the store or sale through her collaboration device and offered a special member service or discount. In some embodiments such member may be required to submit a response signal via the target input button.

Embodiments of the collaborative system and all of the functional operations described in this specification can be implemented in digital electronic circuitry or in computer software firmware or hardware including the structures disclosed in this specification and their structural equivalents or in combinations of them. Embodiments of the collaborative system can be implemented as one or more computer program products i.e. one or more modules of computer program instructions encoded on a computer readable medium e.g. a machine readable storage device a machine readable storage medium a memory device or a machine readable propagated signal for execution by or to control the operation of data processing apparatus.

The term data processing apparatus encompasses all apparatus devices and machines for processing data including by way of example a programmable processor a computer or multiple processors or computers. The apparatus can include in addition to hardware code that creates an execution environment for the computer program in question e.g. code that constitutes processor firmware a protocol stack a database management system an operating system or a combination of them. A propagated signal is an artificially generated signal e.g. a machine generated electrical optical or electromagnetic signal that is generated to encode information for transmission to suitable receiver apparatus.

A computer program also referred to as a program software an application a software application a script or code can be written in any form of programming language including compiled or interpreted languages and it can be deployed in any form including as a stand alone program or as a module component subroutine or other unit suitable for use in a computing environment. A computer program does not necessarily correspond to a file in a file system. A program can be stored in a portion of a file that holds other programs or data e.g. one or more scripts stored in a markup language document in a single file dedicated to the program in question or in multiple coordinated files e.g. files that store one or more modules sub programs or portions of code . A computer program can be deployed to be executed on one computer or on multiple computers that are located at one site or distributed across multiple sites and interconnected by a communication network.

The processes and logic flows described in this specification can be performed by one or more programmable processors executing one or more computer programs to perform functions by operating on input data and generating output. The processes and logic flows can also be performed by and apparatus can also be implemented as special purpose logic circuitry e.g. an FPGA field programmable gate array or an ASIC application specific integrated circuit .

Processors suitable for the execution of a computer program include by way of example both general and special purpose microprocessors and any one or more processors of any kind of digital computer. Generally a processor will receive instructions and data from a read only memory or a random access memory or both. The essential elements of a computer are a processor for executing instructions and one or more memory devices for storing instructions and data.

Generally a computer will also include or be operatively coupled to receive data from or transfer data to or both one or more mass storage devices for storing data e.g. magnetic magneto optical disks or optical disks. However a computer need not have such devices. Moreover a computer can be embedded in another device e.g. the radio transmitter receiver a personal digital assistant PDA a mobile audio player the GPS receiver to name just a few. Information carriers suitable for embodying computer program instructions and data include all forms of non volatile memory including by way of example semiconductor memory devices e.g. EPROM EEPROM and flash memory devices magnetic disks e.g. internal hard disks or removable disks magneto optical disks and CD ROM and DVD ROM.

Although a few embodiments have been described in detail above other modifications are possible. Other embodiments may be within the scope of the following claims.

