---

title: Apparatus and methods for providing and presenting customized channel information
abstract: Apparatus and methods for providing and presenting customized channel information include receiving service attribute information corresponding to a base service, where the base service is operable to provide at least a portion of a presentation to a device. The apparatus and methods further include customizing the service attribute information, and providing channel information to the device. The channel information comprising the customized service attribute information, thereby providing a custom view of a channel.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08893179&OS=08893179&RS=08893179
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 08893179
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051108
---
The present Application for patent claims priority to Provisional Application No. 60 716 408 entitled CUSTOMIZATION OF COMMON CHANNEL INFORMATION PER CONTENT RETAILER IN A PROGRAM GUIDE AND FOR THE CONTENT PROVIDED FOR THE CHANNEL filed Sep. 12 2005 and assigned to the assignee hereof and hereby expressly incorporated by reference herein.

U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 270 199 entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR DISTRIBUTING CONTENT TO SUPPORT MULTIPLE CUSTOMER SERVICE ENTITIES AND CONTENT PACKAGERS filed concurrently herewith assigned to the assignee hereof and expressly incorporated by reference herein U.S. Pat. No. 8 528 029 entitled APPARATUS AND METHODS OF OPEN AND CLOSED PACKAGE SUBSCRIPTION filed concurrently herewith assigned to the assignee hereof and expressly incorporated by reference herein U.S. Pat. No. 7 565 506 entitled METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR DELIVERING CONTENT BASED ON RECEIVERS CHARACTERISTICS filed concurrently herewith assigned to the assignee hereof and expressly incorporated by reference herein U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 270 370 entitled APPARATUS AND METHODS FOR DELIVERING AND PRESENTING AUXILIARY SERVICES FOR CUSTOMIZING A CHANNEL filed concurrently herewith assigned to the assignee hereof and expressly incorporated by reference herein U.S. Pat. No. 8 571 570 entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR DELIVERING REGIONAL PARAMETERS filed concurrently herewith assigned to the assignee hereof and expressly incorporated by reference herein U.S. Pat. No. 8 533 358 entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR FRAGMENTING SYSTEM INFORMATION MESSAGES IN WIRELESS NETWORKS filed concurrently herewith assigned to the assignee hereof and expressly incorporated by reference herein U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 270 165 entitled FLEXIBLE SYSTEM FOR DISTRIBUTING CONTENT TO A DEVICE filed concurrently herewith assigned to the assignee hereof and expressly incorporated by reference herein U.S. Pat. No. 8 600 836 entitled SYSTEM FOR DISTRIBUTING PACKAGES AND CHANNELS TO A DEVICE filed concurrently herewith assigned to the assignee hereof and expressly incorporated by reference herein and U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 735 044 entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR PROVIDING SYSTEM INFORMATION TO A WIRELESS DEVICE filed concurrently herewith assigned to the assignee hereof and expressly incorporated by reference herein.

The disclosed embodiments relate generally to the operation of content distribution systems and more particularly to methods and apparatus for providing and presenting a customized view of a channel in a media distribution system.

In media distribution systems a media program guide MPG which describes a delivery schedule of available content or services on a given set of channels may be provided by content retailers CRs in a distribution network. For example a content provider CP that operates on the distribution network may provide the content or services to one or more CRs in communication with the network. The CRs provide the MPG which includes information relating to the content or services to device users who then may select content or services to be received by a device. For example a device user may select and or subscribe to receive content or services that include multimedia content clips programs scripts data customer services or any other type of content or service.

Currently channels that represent the content or services are delivered to multiple content distributors and consumers with identical content and descriptions. In order to provide for retailer specific marketing and branding opportunities and in order to provide product differentiation it is desirable to be able to customize the presentation of the channel and associated supplemental data based on the specific content retailer.

The described embodiments provide systems apparatus devices computer readable media processors and methods for providing and generating customized content information.

In one embodiment a method for providing content information comprises receiving a definition of service attribute information corresponding to a base service for each of a plurality of base services wherein each base service is operable to provide at least a portion of a presentation to a device and receiving a customized definition to apply to at least one of the plurality of service attribute information. The method further comprises providing a plurality of channel information to the device at least one of the plurality of channel information comprising the customized definition. In a related embodiment at least one processor is configured to perform the above described actions. In another related embodiment a computer program resident in a computer readable medium that when executed directs a computer device to perform the actions noted above.

In another embodiment an apparatus for providing content information comprises a means for receiving a definition of service attribute information corresponding to a base service for each of a plurality of base services wherein each base service is operable to provide at least a portion of a presentation to a device. The apparatus further comprises a means for receiving a customized definition of at least one of the plurality of service attribute information. Additionally the apparatus comprises a means for providing a plurality of channel information to the device at least one of the plurality of channel information comprising the customized definition.

In yet another embodiment an apparatus for providing content information comprises a content server having a first definition of service attribute information and a second definition of custom attribute information wherein the service attribute information corresponds to a base service operable to provide at least a portion of a presentation to a device. Additionally the apparatus comprises a generator module operable to generate and transmit a system information message having at least one customized channel definition for transmission to the device wherein the customized channel definition comprises a predetermined combination of at least a portion of the first definition of the service attribute information and a corresponding portion of the second definition of the custom attribute information.

In still another embodiment a method for presenting content information comprises receiving a definition of service attribute information corresponding to a base service wherein the base service is operable to provide at least a portion of a presentation to a device. The method further comprises receiving a definition of custom attribute information. Additionally the method comprises generating a view of custom channel information based on a predetermined combination of the defined custom attribute information with the defined service attribute information. In a related embodiment at least one processor is configured to perform the above described actions. In another related embodiment a computer program resident in a computer readable medium that when executed directs a computer device to perform the actions noted above.

In a further embodiment a wireless device comprises a means for receiving a definition of service attribute information corresponding to a base service wherein the base service is operable to provide at least a portion of a presentation to a device. The wireless device further comprises a means for receiving a definition of custom attribute information. Additionally the wireless device comprises a means for generating a view of custom channel information based on a predetermined combination of the defined custom attribute information with the defined service attribute information.

In another embodiment a wireless device comprises a computer platform having a data repository comprising a first definition and a second definition. The first definition defining service attribute information corresponding to a base service operable to provide at least a portion of a presentation and the second definition defining custom attribute information. Additionally the wireless device comprises a media manager module on the computer platform and operable to initiate generation of a view of custom channel information based on a predetermined combination of the defined custom attribute information with the defined service attribute information.

The following detailed description describes one or more embodiments of a content delivery system. The system is especially well suited for use in wireless network environments but may be used in any type of network environment including but not limited to communication networks public networks such as the Internet private networks such as virtual private networks VPN local area networks wide area networks long haul networks or any other type of data or communication network.

Referring to one embodiment of a system for providing customized content and channel information includes a media distribution system MDS that operates to receive media segments which form a plurality of base services or common channels from a plurality of content providers . Further for each of the plurality of base services MDS includes service attribute information or common channel information which defines and describes the corresponding base service. Additionally MDS receives custom attribute information from each of a plurality of content retailers . Custom attribute information includes content retailer specific definitions and descriptions for each of the plurality of base services which in one embodiment supplement or replace the corresponding service attribute information . MDS is operable to generate a customized view of each base service for each content retailer by replacing service attribute information with custom attribute information . These customized views of each base service are defined as channels customized channels or purchase items which are content retailer specific due to the customizations and which are available to users for subscription purchase. The combination of service attribute information and custom attribute information thereby define customized channel attribute information for each of the plurality of channels . Each content retailer or billing and customer service provider BCS may then group various combinations of channels into tiers and various combinations of tiers into packages to offer such as on a subscription basis to devices associated with the given content retailer and or BCS such as wireless device .

In one embodiment for example each content retailer and or BCS can provide a customized display of channels on a user interface of a subscribed wireless device in the form of a media presentation guide MPG . MPG comprises a schedule of presentations on each of the plurality of channels where each presentation comprises a form of media that includes one or more media segments . As will be discussed below in more detail MPG is constructed based on media presentation guide title records and channel customization records associated with each presentation base service auxiliary service and or channel . For example MPG title records and channel customization records may be part of a system information SI message sent within a flow from MDS to wireless device via a wireless access network . Flow is a logical stream within a multiplex which is a set of flows for a given area. Each flow is typically used to deliver a single media component of a real time presentation or a file containing a non real time presentation or SI messages . Thus each MPG is customized on each device according to the associated content retailer and or BCS .

In another embodiment the customized view includes presentation from base service in combination with an auxiliary presentation from an auxiliary service displayed on user interface . Auxiliary presentation and auxiliary service which are provided to customize and enhance a base service will be discussed in more detail below.

In one embodiment service attribute information and custom attribute information comprise essentially the fields or records but with different values. Custom attribute information for example may be retailer specific information utilized to give the presentation of the service by the given retailer a unique look and feel. For example the fields or records associated with either information and or may include at least one of a name and a description associated with a given language an additional description providing more details than the previously mentioned description an associated universal resource identifier URI or universal resource locator URL that references a source of more information relating to the service a type of device recommended to receive the service an icon associated with the type of device an icon to identify or represent the service a start time a duration a genre a parental rating an intro an outro an advertisement a barker an Internet Protocol datacast and any other attribute or descriptor associated with a service. In particular the combination of a given base service with one or more retailer defined auxiliary presentations and or auxiliary services provides a unique view of a channel related information for each retailer.

Thus system comprises one embodiment of a transport system that operates to create and transport multimedia content flows across data networks. For example the transport system is suitable for use in transporting media from a content provider to a media distribution system for broadcast distribution. Advantageously system enables content retailers and or BCS providers to customize base services to provide customized channels customized media presentation guides and customized presentations and to subscribed devices.

Any number of devices may be operable with system to receive and play display content and content information. Wireless device is one such device and includes devices such as a cellular telephone a personal digital assistant a laptop computer and any other wireless device operable to receive and play display media. It should be noted however that in one or more embodiments of system virtually any number or type of wired or wireless device capable of playing displaying media may be utilized.

In the components of system may each have a number of defined roles that allow certain functions to be separated from other functions. It should be noted however that in any given implementation of system any given component or organization may perform multiple roles.

In one embodiment for example BCS provider comprises a business entity that provides the user billing and customer support services on behalf of one or more content retailers . Each device in system such as wireless device is associated with one BCS provider such as through a subscription agreement . As such BCS provider may supply subscription data to MDS .

Content retailer comprises a business entity that defines packages and offers them for subscription through one or more associated BCS providers . Accordingly each content retailer provides packages and the associated packaged data to MDS . Further for example each content retailer may be associated with one or more BCS providers through a content retail agreement .

Although content retailer and BCS provider are represented as separate entities it is contemplated that they may be combined into a single entity.

Content provider may comprise a business entity that supplies content delivered to the user such as device through base services . For example each content provider supplies media segments and the associated media data to MDS . Each media segment may comprise one or more of video audio multimedia content clips real time and non real time content a combined and or simultaneous real time and non real time content scripts programs or any other type of suitable content. Further for example each content provider may be associated with one or more content retailers through a content retail agreement .

MDS comprises any combination of wired and wireless networks and associated computer devices and servers which operates to distribute content for delivery to users. MDS may comprise an optimized broadcast network designed and optimized to deliver high quality content to selected devices over plurality of optimized communication channels. Further for example MDS may comprise one or more content servers that store the previously mentioned media data and records along with the logic and executable instructions to enable the functionality of MDS . In one embodiment for example content server and or MDS includes a system information SI message generator having hardware and or software including memory executable instructions and a processor operable to generate SI message based on the data within content server . For example SI message generator includes generator logic for compiling SI message from the data within MDS and transceiver logic for receiving all SI message related data and sending SI message out of MDS for distribution to devices. Additionally for example MDS may include wireless access network having a broadcast base station BBS that provides a transport interface to allow MDS to deliver SI message and content in the form of content flows to wireless access network for broadcast multicast to devices such as wireless device .

Referring to SI message comprises a set of information that enables a device to locate services or subscribe to packages on behalf of the user and to describe marketplace information service information and MPG information to the user. Marketplace information includes information describing each BCS provider content retailer package tier and channel . Service information includes information about each base service and auxiliary service available in system . MPG information includes information about the contents of channels .

In one embodiment referring to MPG information includes an MPG block message that defines the available content in a fixed period of time referred to as an MPG block duration . MPG Block duration is a configurable parameter which may be signaled in a transport flow and which defines a size of the window of time covered by MPG Block message . Information about content which spans the boundary between two consecutive MPG blocks is present in each MPG block . Each MPG block message defines a start time which is the earliest time covered by the MPG block and corresponds to the end of the interval covered by the previous MPG block and a version of the MPG block which the identifies a particular set of attributes and element values which allows for the identification of an MPG Block MPG title records for all MPG titles i.e. presentations and their associated media presentation guide information shown during the MPG block duration where each MPG title record completely describes all applicable attributes of an MPG title contact window information for all non real time presentations downloaded during the MPG block duration channel customization records defining customized adaptations for each MPG title for respective ones of the various channels through which the services may be accessed and blackout information defining the region or regions in which the MPG title is to be blacked out. Each of these components of the MPG block message will be described in more detail below.

Each MPG is constructed from a predetermined number of MPG Blocks which are relatively ordered based on their respective start times . Further the order of channels listed within each MPG is dictated based upon a channel weight associated with each channel where the channel weight comprises one of the custom channel attributes . MPG displays a name and or icon for each channel and a name and or icon for each presentation and or . For example names and or icons may be associated with base service or may be customized based on custom attributes associated with each content retailer . Additionally icons respectively associated with each channel and presentation and or may indicate a presentation type such as real time non real time data or some combination thereof. Further MPG displays start times associated with presentations and or and may further include a current date as well as one or more functional keys . For example functional keys may include a Watch key to initiate watching a highlighted presentation and an Options key to allow a user to access additional information such as information about the respective service channel presentation or a subscription to a service presentation channel or package.

Referring to in one embodiment MPG title record includes an MPG title start time and an MPG title duration . MPG title start time is the time at which presentation of the content covered by the MPG title can begin. If the service is a real time service or an IP datacast service then MPG title start time is the time at which the live display of the content shall commence exclusive of any intros or introductory presentations or media segments associated with the MPG title. If the service is a non real time service MPG title start time is the earliest time at which display of the content may commence which could be as early as when the non real time service is stored to device memory exclusive of any intros associated with the MPG title. If the service is a combined real time and non real time service known as a per MPG title service then the significance of MPG title start time is dependent on the nature of the content associated with the MPG title as defined in the preceding two sentences.

Similarly MPG title duration depends on the type of service. If the service is a real time service or an IP datacast service then MPG title duration added to MPG title start time is the time at which display of the content shall end inclusive of any outros which is an additional presentation that follows the main presentation associated with the MPG title. If the service is a non real time service then MPG title duration added to MPG title start time is the latest time at which display of the content may commence exclusive of any intros associated with the MPG title. If the service is a per MPG title service then the significance of MPG title duration is dependent on the nature of the content associated with the MPG title as defined in the proceeding to sentences. As such MPG title duration relates to actual viewing time for real time content and the available to commence viewing time for non real time content and comprises the window of time across which the MPG title name is displayed on MPG .

In this embodiment MPG title record may further include a service reference and a genre . Service reference includes a service identification which identifies the base service associated with the MPG title. Genre is an attribute that describes the semantic class of content provided by the MPG title such as comedy documentary drama mystery etc.

Referring to MPG title record may further include one or more ratings for the MPG title. Rating defines a parental advisory rating value for the MPG title which may be provided along with the content by content provider . In one embodiment for example rating may include a rating region and corresponding additional rating information such as a rating dimension and a rating value . Rating region specifies the geographical region in which rating applies. There may be a separate rating for each rating region in which the associated base service is offered. Rating dimension identifies an aspect of the rating system that applies to the associated rating it region . For example in the United States Region rating scheme rating dimension may be a description such as violence language etc. In other regions rating dimension may represent different descriptions. Rating value specifies a value associated with the corresponding rating dimension and thereby helps to quantify and compare relative ratings.

Referring to MPG title record may further include one or more MPG title language specific data records . Each MPG title language specific data record specifies a title name and a title description of the MPG title associated with a specific language . Title name is an attribute that specifies a name for the MPG title that may be displayed to the user. Similarly title description is an attribute that specifies a description for the MPG title that may be displayed to the user. Further each MPG title language specific data record may provide additional description and define one or more universal resource locator URL records where a subscribed user can obtain further information about the MPG title. Additional description is an attribute that specifies an additional description relating to the MPG title that may be displayed to the user including more details about the title and additional URLs where further information may be found.

There may be one more MPG title URL records per language and each URL record may specify a subscribed URL which may include a URL link and a URL description associated with the URL link. Further each URL record may include one or more device class records that indicate the particular type of device required to access the associated URL. Each device class record may include a software class record that specifies the type of operating system environment appropriate for the URL such as the Palm OS operating system for handheld computers. Similarly each device class record may include a hardware class record that specifies the type of device appropriate for the URLs such as a personal digital assistant PDA device. Further each device class record may include a device class icon which may include a graphic file or an icon URL reference that provides access to a graphic file that may be used as an icon. Icon URL reference identifies a resource which provides an icon image for the corresponding channel which is appropriate for the given device class . The URL may point to an external reference such as an HTML link or to an internal file. Further device class icon may include an x location reference and a y location reference which are unsigned integers respectively specifying the horizontal and vertical location of the icon on the device class .

Referring back to MPG title record may further include a description of the presentation associated with the MPG title such as a real time presentation a non real time presentation and one or more datacast presentations

Referring to real time presentation may define a presentation reference and optional presentation identification information for media tracking such as one or more of an International Standard Audiovisual Number ISAN reference and a Content Reference IDentifier CRID reference . Presentation reference defines a presentation identifier that uniquely distinguishes the presentation from all other presentations on system . ISAN reference is the International Standard Audiovisual Number ISAN which may include a root and or a version as specified in the joint International Organization for Standardization International Electrotechnical Commission ISO IEC standard number 15706 Information and documentation International Standard Audiovisual Number ISAN 2002 hereby incorporated by reference. Similarly CRID reference is the Content Reference IDentifier CRID as specified in Request For Comment RFC number 4078 Earnshow Nigel Aoki Shigeru Ashley Alex Kameyama Wateru The TV Anytime Content Reference Identifier 2005 hereby incorporated by reference.

Referring to non real time presentation may include a presentation reference which identifies the given presentation and presentation duration which specifies the amount of time needed to view the non real time presentation. Non real time presentations are files which have been downloaded to the device such as wireless device before presentation to the user. The times at which the files are downloaded are advertised in advance through MPG in one or more contact windows. Each contact window represents a timeframe within which at any time the device can initiate acquisition of the file.

In one embodiment for example content retailer and or BCS provider may limit viewing of the presentation to a specified presentation window which is specified in MPG as a start time i.e. MPG title start time and a duration i.e. MPG title duration exactly as for a real time presentation. However in this case the start and end times indicate the earliest and latest times that the user may begin to view the presentation. Unlike a real time presentation viewing can commence at any time within the presentation window. If the duration of the presentation is shorter than the presentation window then the user may elect to view the presentation multiple times within the presentation window.

As a result of these characteristics activity related to the distribution and viewing of the presentation may continue after the respective ends of the contact windows and the presentation windows. A device that initiates acquisition at the end of the contact window can still complete acquisition of the file. In order to allow the device to determine when an acquisition attempt has failed in this case the definition of the contact window in MPG also includes the contact duration attribute. For this reason the end of the contact window may be separated from the start time of the presentation by at least the length of the contact duration.

Similarly if a user elects to view a presentation at the end of the presentation window the presentation can be viewed to its end as determined by the duration of the presentation.

Referring to datacast presentation defines an Internet Protocol IP address an IP port and one or more Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions MIME types for the IP datacast presentation. For example IP address may be an IPv4 or an IPv6 multicast address and IP port may be an IPv4 or an IPv6 port. MIME type defines the type of media offered over the IP multicast address in the presentation.

Referring to contact window represents an interval of time during which a non real time presentation or an auxiliary presentation with non real time content is being transmitted. Each such presentation may be preceded by at least one contact window for the presentation. In one embodiment for example contact window includes presentation reference that identifies the presentation associated with a contact window start time a contact window end time and a contact duration . Contact window start time is a time at which transmission of the presentation commences. Contact window end time is the latest time which a device can begin to acquire the presentation. Contact window duration may be used by the device to determine whether a download is successful.

Referring to channel customization record defines one or more MPG title customization records for a particular channel as defined by a channel reference and as offered by a content retailer which are associated with a base service represented by the MPG title. Channel reference comprises a channel identifier for a channel that is customized by channel customization record . In other words channel reference identifies a channel record stored within content server which identifies attributes for the given channel including a unique channel identifier a validity time that determines when the channel record is valid a channel weight that determines an order of the channel versus other channels in a list i.e. where a channel with a lower weight is listed prior to a channel with a higher weight channel language specific data which provides a channel name description and associated URL for one or more given languages associated with the channel a base service reference that identifies a base service record stored in content server which provides the attributes of the given base service being customized and presented as the given channel channel specific auxiliary service references that identify auxiliary services associated with the channel and a channel icon which may be a resident file or a reference to a file having a graphic content for display on MPG . Further if the service is an auxiliary service channel customization record may also specify the available content such as an auxiliary presentation record for the auxiliary service associated with the MPG title for a particular channel .

Referring to in one embodiment each MPG title customization record may specify a list of MPG customization elements. Each MPG customization element causes one or more of the elements of MPG title language specific data to be overridden when the MPG title is accessed by the user through the respective channel associated with the respective content retailer . In one embodiment each MPG title customization record includes a start time which is a time having a value equal to the corresponding MPG title start time associated with the MPG title customized by the respective MPG title customization record . Further each MPG title customization record may include a show intro indicator and a show outro indicator which respectively indicate if the device shall introduce and or follow the presentation with an intro and or an outro described in detail below obtained from the respective auxiliary service associated with the respective channel .

Additionally each MPG title customization record may include one or more MPG language specific data records and one or more datacast presentation records . Each MPG language specific data record may specify an MPG title name and an MPG title description associated with a given language and may further provide customized additional description and define customized URL records where a user can obtain further information about the MPG title superseding the corresponding name description additional description and URL records associated with the corresponding MPG title language specific data for the same language . As such customized additional description may comprise a customized additional description and a customized URL description and customized URL records may include one or more subscribed URLs suitable for presentation to a user who is subscribed to the respective channel . Subscribed URLs may include a URL that points to an internal file or external reference as well as a corresponding URL description that describes the resource accessed by URL . Further MPG language specific data record may further include a customized data class record which has customized components that supersedes the components of data class record .

Referring to each datacast presentation record may specify one or more datacast presentation elements which replace the elements of the IP datacast presentation record associated with the respective base service when the base service is accessed through the respective channel . Each datacast presentation record may define an IP address an IP port and a MIME type each being a customized version that replaces the corresponding base versions previously discussed in .

Referring to if the service is an auxiliary service then the channel customization record may specify one or more auxiliary presentation records . Each auxiliary presentation record defines an auxiliary presentation such as by referencing a presentation identification and may further define a presentation duration which is currently valid for the respective auxiliary service . Further each auxiliary presentation record may include at least one of an intro an outro an advertisement a barker a URL and one or more IP datacasts .

In one embodiment intro includes content provided by auxiliary presentation that is presented to the user ahead of content associated with the MPG title. Outro includes content provided by auxiliary presentation that is presented to the user behind content associated with the MPG title. Advertisement includes content provided by auxiliary presentation that is presented to the user during the presentation of content associated with the MPG title. Barker includes content provided by auxiliary presentation that may be presented to users who attempt to access the MPG title of a given channel when they are not subscribed to that channel. URL includes content such as URL information provided by auxiliary presentation that is processed and presented to the user concurrently with a presentation of content associated with the MPG title. Further each IP datacast includes content provided by auxiliary presentation that is processed and presented to the user concurrently with presentation of the content associated with the MPG title. Further each IP datacast may identify an IP address a port and one or more MIME types each as previously described associated with auxiliary presentation .

Referring to MPG block may further include one or more blackout records for any or all MPG title records associated with real time presentations in MPG Block . Each blackout record identifies the respective base service that is to be blacked out such as by including a service identification corresponding to the service. Further each blackout record identifies a start time which corresponds with MPG title start time of the respective MPG title record that is blacked out through the given blackout record . Additionally each blackout record include a blackout location which is a geographic location in which the associated MPG title record is blacked out. In one embodiment for example blackout location includes one or more local area grouping of infrastructure LOI identifiers and or one or more wide area grouping of infrastructure WOI identifiers . Each LOI identifier identifies a logical grouping of the infrastructure deployed to provide MDS with network coverage in a specific local area. Each WOI identifier identifies a logical grouping of the infrastructure deployed to provide MDS with network coverage in a specific wide area. A multiplex defines the set of flows available in a given LOI or WOI.

Referring to the previously mentioned one or more content servers therefore store the above defined MPG block message records as MPG information along with marketplace content retailer information and associated records service information and associated records and content which includes media segments and or presentations .

In one embodiment each marketplace content retailer record includes a unique marketplace content retailer identification basic information about the marketplace content retailer such as a name one or more package records that identify the packages associated with the marketplace content retailer including the package name description and language the package pricing a reference to one or more tiers associated with each package a package characteristic for example identifying the package as a parent package an autosubscribe package a closed package or an excluded package an identifier of an associated BCS provider an identification of one or more associated auxiliary services associated with the package and an identification of available areas associated with the package such as one or more LOI and or WOI identifiers one or more tier records associated with the marketplace content retailer including tier identifiers and one or more channel references and or auxiliary service references associated with the tier one or more channel records associated with the marketplace content retailer including channel identifiers channel weights channel language specific data channel base service references that identify the base service associated with the channel channel auxiliary service references that identify one or more auxiliary services associated with the channel and a channel icon one or more auxiliary service references that identify an auxiliary service associated with the marketplace content retailer and an end user license agreement EULA reference that defines terms for accessing the EULA associated with the content retailer.

Further in one embodiment each service record includes information about one or more base services and or auxiliary services associated with each marketplace content retailer record . For example in one embodiment each base service record may include one or more of a service identifier a validity time which defines when the record becomes active a corporate affiliation of the service an abbreviated name for the service a genre associated with the service a default language associated with the service an identification of a service type e.g. real time non real time per MPG title datacast one or more service language specific data records that define language specific attributes associated with the service i.e. this is the service level equivalent to MPG title language specific data FIG. capability requirements associated with the service e.g. memory storage requirements a rating associated with the service an available area associated with the service such as one or more LOI and or WOI areas one or more flow records associated with the service which defines the attributes of the given flow used to transport a component of the service and one or more service icons associated with the service.

Thus referring to marketplace content retailer records comprise the data and information associated with the respective packages tiers and channels of each content retailer and or BCS provider of system . Service records comprise the data and information associated with the respective base services and auxiliary services of system . Further MPG block message records comprise the data and information associated with the specific presentations and services associated with each channel associated with each content retailer and or BCS provider .

Referring to in one embodiment wireless device has input mechanism for generating inputs into wireless device and output mechanism for generating information for consumption by the user of the wireless device. For example input mechanism may include a mechanism such as a key or keyboard a mouse a touch screen display voice recognition module etc. Further for example output mechanism may include user interface which may be a display an audio speaker a haptic feedback mechanism etc.

Further wireless device has computer platform that can transmit data across wireless network and that can receive and execute software applications and display data transmitted from MDS or another computer device connected to wireless network . Computer platform includes a data repository which may comprise volatile and nonvolatile memory such as read only and or random access memory RAM and ROM EPROM EEPROM flash cards or any memory common to computer platforms. Further data repository may include one or more flash memory cells or may be any secondary or tertiary storage device such as magnetic media optical media tape or soft or hard disk.

Further computer platform also includes a processing engine which may be an application specific integrated circuit ASIC or other chipset processor logic circuit or other data processing device. Processing engine or other processor such as ASIC may execute an application programming interface API layer that interfaces with any resident programs such as a media manager module in data repository of the wireless device. API is a runtime environment executing on the respective wireless device. One such runtime environment is Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW software developed by Qualcomm Inc. of San Diego Calif. Other runtime environments may be utilized that for example operate to control the execution of applications on wireless computing devices.

Processing engine includes various processing subsystems embodied in hardware firmware software and combinations thereof that enable the functionality of wireless device and the operability of the wireless device on wireless access network . For example processing subsystems allow for initiating and maintaining communications exchanging data and executing multimedia presentations. In one embodiment such as in a cellular telephone processing engine may include one or a combination of processing subsystems such as sound non volatile memory file system transmit receive searcher layer 1 layer 2 layer 3 main control remote procedure handset power management diagnostic digital signal processor vocoder messaging call manager Bluetooth system Bluetooth LPOS position determination position engine user interface sleep data services security authentication USIM SIM voice services graphics USB multimedia such as MPEG GPRS etc. For the disclosed embodiments processing subsystems of processing engine may include any subsystem components that interact with applications executing on computer platform . For example processing subsystems may include any subsystem components which receive data reads and data writes from API on behalf of media manager module .

Computer platform may further include a communications module embodied in hardware firmware software and combinations thereof that enables communications among the various components of the wireless device as well as between wireless device and wireless access network . For example communications module may include a transceiver module for wireless communications with MDS and or wireless access network .

Media manager module operates to manage media subscription media receipts and media playing viewing activities on wireless device . Media manager module may include any hardware software firmware and or other set of executable instructions operable to manage the media related activities on wireless device . Further media manager module and or data repository store SI message and its associated content information and the content for viewing playing on user interface . In one embodiment media manager module includes media management logic that provides the capability to receive store provide access to and play display media related information on wireless device . For example media management logic operates to parse SI message and display MPG on user interface and or provide a view of a channel including presenting real time and non real time content. Similarly media management logic operates to manage subscriptions to packages with content retailers and or BCS providers and store the associated subscription information . For example subscription information may be any information such as a content retailer identification a package identification keys etc. stored on device relating to subscriptions to or activations on wireless networks and or subscriptions to multimedia packages . Further media management logic operates to manage the acquisition and storage including memory management functions associated with a non real time presentation based on the respective contact window as well as managing the playing displaying of the content. Additionally media management logic operates with communications module to receive and play real time presentations and datacast presentations.

For example in one embodiment device may subscribe to or be activated on wireless access network . Typically an activation of device onto network limits the device to receiving communications and or multimedia service from one content retailer and or BCS provider . Further this activation allows device to receive a broadcast including SI message even if the device is not subscribed to any packages . Because of being broadcast in one embodiment SI message includes all of the MPG block records defined by all of the content retailers. Further in this case SI message and or its corresponding flow may include all of the content for a given schedule of programming i.e. all of the base services and base service presentations and all of the auxiliary services and auxiliary presentations. In this example upon receiving SI message media manager module is operable to filter out all records and or content not relevant to the device based on the content retailer associated with the device and further based on the packages subscribed to by the device. In this manner media manager module constructs retailer specific customized versions of MPG and or a subscription menu and or custom generation of combined presentations and on device and optimizes review of SI message and or content in flow by only addressing records and or content relevant to the device.

Referring to in one embodiment MDS may comprise at least one of any type of hardware software firmware server personal computer mini computer mainframe computer or any computing device either special purpose or general computing device. Further there can be separate servers or computer devices and or networks associated with MDS that work in concert to receive manipulate and provide data in usable formats to parties and or to provide a separate layer of control in the data flow between devices and networks and MDS .

MDS has input mechanism for generating inputs into MDS and output mechanism for generating information for consumption by an operator of MDS . For example input mechanism may include a mechanism such as a key or keyboard a mouse a touch screen display voice recognition module etc. Further for example output mechanism may be a display an audio speaker a haptic feedback mechanism etc. Additionally input mechanism may be a remote device such as a remote computer or workstation which has access to MDS . In one embodiment for example input mechanism may be utilized by an operator to enter service attributes custom attributes or custom channel attributes and for establishing and or manipulating information associated with presentations channels tiers and packages .

Further MDS has one or a plurality of resident or distributed computer platforms that can receive and transmit data and that can receive and execute software applications and display data. Computer platform includes a data repository which may comprise volatile and nonvolatile memory such as read only and or random access memory RAM and ROM EPROM EEPROM flash cards or any memory common to computer platforms. Further data repository may include one or more flash memory cells or may be any secondary or tertiary storage device such as magnetic media optical media tape or soft or hard disk. In one embodiment for example data repository includes the one or more content servers .

Further computer platform also includes a processing engine which may be an application specific integrated circuit ASIC or other chipset processor logic circuit or other data processing device for carrying out executable instructions.

Computer platform may further include a communications module embodied in hardware firmware software and combinations thereof that enables communications among the various components of MDS as well as between MDS and wireless device . For example communications module includes wireless access network .

Further a subscription distribution manager module resides on computer platform which operates to manage all of the media distribution functions described herein performed by MDS . Subscription distribution manager module may include any hardware software firmware and or other set of executable instructions operable to manage the media related activities on MDS . Further in one embodiment subscription distribution manager module includes subscription distribution management logic that provides MDS with the capability to receive store manipulate provide access to and distribute content and content related information. For example subscription distribution management logic operates to receive content and content related information as well as content retailer specific information such as customization information auxiliary services auxiliary presentations channel information tier information and package information. Further subscription distribution management logic is operable to receive process and transmit subscription related information such as subscription requests the corresponding approvals or denials and the management of digital rights based on an approved subscription request. Additionally subscription distribution manager module may include SI generator discussed above.

In operation referring to one embodiment of a method of providing content information comprises receiving a definition of service attribute information corresponding to a base service Block . For example in one embodiment MDS may receive service attribute information such as from a content provider a content retailer and or a BCS provider . Additionally for example service attribute information may be defined within service information of SI message and as identified for each MPG title record by service reference . Further for example the base service may comprise base service including one or more presentations formed from one or more media segments which is operable to provide at least a portion of a presentation to a device.

Further the method includes receiving a customized definition to apply to the service attribute information Block . For example in one embodiment each content retailer provides custom attributes that supersede corresponding ones of the service attributes on a service by service basis thereby defining channels that are specifically customized for each content retailer . Further for example custom attributes may include presentations such as intros outros advertisements barkers URLs and datacasts from an auxiliary service that may be combined with a base service to define a content retailer specific channel . Additionally for example custom attributes may replace service attributes on a per presentation basis as well as on a per channel basis. In one embodiment for example the customized definitions may be provided by channel customization record MPG title customization record and auxiliary presentation record .

Additionally the method includes providing a plurality of channel information to a device where at least one of the plurality of channel information comprises the customized definition Block . For example in one embodiment the channel information comprises the customized service attribute information. Further for example MDS may send SI message through wireless access network and to wireless device . SI message includes marketplace content retailer information service information and MPG information that may be utilized by wireless device to generate a MPG displaying a customized list of channels and or to view customized content such as presentation and or on a respective customized channel . In other words in this embodiment SI message includes the retailer specific customized definitions that are filtered by the device based on an associated retailer thereby allowing the device to present the retailer specific customized information.

Referring to in another embodiment a method for displaying content information comprises receiving a definition of service attribute information corresponding to a base service Block . In one embodiment for example wireless device receives SI message from MDS via wireless access network . SI message includes service information which includes service attributes . Further for example the service attributes are related to a base service which includes one or more presentations formed from one or more media segments which is operable to provide at least a portion of a presentation to a device. Additionally for example service attribute information may be defined within service information of SI message and as identified for each MPG title record by service reference .

Further the method includes receiving a definition of custom attribute information Block . For example in one embodiment wireless device receives SI message from MDS via wireless access network . SI message includes marketplace content retailer information and MPG information either or both of which include custom attributes . In this case custom attributes reflect specific information corresponding each content retailer and or BCS provider designed to customize a respective channel . Further for example the customized definitions may be provided by channel customization record MPG title customization record and auxiliary presentation record .

Additionally the method further includes generating a view of custom channel information based on a predetermined combination of the custom attribute information and the service attribute information Block . For example in one embodiment media manager module of wireless device operates on SI message to construct custom channel information based on replacing at least a portion of service attributes with a corresponding portion of custom attributes . In particular media manager module replaces service information with marketplace content retailer information and or MPG information . As a result media manager module generates a user interface that includes at least one of a MPG providing an ordered list of customized channels specific for each content retailer and a presentation provided by a base service where the presentation may be supplemented with an auxiliary presentation from an auxiliary service based on content retailer specific custom attributes .

Thus the described embodiments allow each of a plurality of content retailers and or BCS providers to provide a customized view of a base service including a customized media presentation guide and customized presentations to devices such as wireless device subscribed to packages provided by the corresponding content retailer and or BCS provider .

Additionally it should be noted that the information contained in MPG block may also be utilized to construct a custom subscription menu from which a user may review package information and subscribe to packages. For example the information relating to the packages being offered for subscription may be based on service references associated with MPG title records of the given content retailer .

In summary in the present system all of the channel attributes are customizable per content retailer. Channels may have associated weights that can be used to order the presentation of the services in the guide. Further the weights can also be used to determine the priority of memory management on the device for each service. As such the described channels allow re definitions of service information such as the name and description of the service in multiple languages. Additionally URLs can also be associated with each language to allow the user to get additional information about the service. Each channel defines a base service which is the service it is customizing and may include an indicator as to whether that channel may be excluded from the guide by the subscriber. Channels also can have associated auxiliary services that can deliver content specific to the content retailer such as advertisements URLs barkers supplementary content etc. The device can use the data from the auxiliary services to complement the base service information. An example would be providing statistics for a baseball game being shown along with the presentation from the base service. Auxiliary services can also provide content that is played at the beginning or end of a presentation provided by the base service content that is played as a promotion for an unsubscribed channel and or an advertisement for merchandise or upcoming programs.

While the foregoing disclosure shows illustrative embodiments it should be noted that various changes and modifications could be made herein without departing from the scope of the described embodiments as defined by the appended claims. Furthermore although elements of the described embodiments may be described or claimed in the singular the plural is contemplated unless limitation to the singular is explicitly stated.

