---

title: Methods and systems for rapid prototyping of high density circuits
abstract: A preferred embodiment provides, for example, a system and method of integrating fluid media dispensing technology such as direct-write (DW) technologies with rapid prototyping (RP) technologies such as stereolithography (SL) to provide increased micro-fabrication and micro-stereolithography. A preferred embodiment of the present invention also provides, for example, a system and method for Rapid Prototyping High Density Circuit (RPHDC) manufacturing of solderless connectors and pilot devices with terminal geometries that are compatible with DW mechanisms and reduce contact resistance where the electrical system is encapsulated within structural members and manual electrical connections are eliminated in favor of automated DW traces. A preferred embodiment further provides, for example, a method of rapid prototyping comprising: fabricating a part layer using stereolithography and depositing thermally curable media onto the part layer using a fluid dispensing apparatus.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07419630&OS=07419630&RS=07419630
owner: Sandia Corporation
number: 07419630
owner_city: Albuquerque
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050422
---
This invention was developed under Contract DE AC04 94AL85000 between Sandia Corporation and the U.S. Department of Energy. The U.S. Department of Energy has certain rights to this invention.

The present invention relates to the general field of rapid prototyping RP and methods and systems of dispensing fluid media such as direct write DW technologies.

RP technologies also known as Solid Freeform Fabrication SFF layered manufacturing and other similar technologies enable the manufacture of complex three dimensional 3D parts. RP technologies in particular generally construct parts by building one layer at a time for use in for example the toy automotive aircraft and medical industries. Oftentimes prototypes made by RP technologies aid in research and development and provide a low cost alternative to traditional prototyping.

Stereolithography SL is one of the most widely used RP technologies known in the art. The resolution of SL machines and the ability of SL to manufacture highly complex 3D objects make SL ideal for building both functional and non functional prototypes. In particular SL techniques provide economical physical models of objects quickly prior to making more expensive finished parts. The models are readily customizable and changes may be easily implemented.

SL generally involves a multi stage process. For example the first stage involves designing and inputting a precise mathematical and geometric description of the desired structure s shape into one of many computer aided design CAD programs and saving the description in the standard transform language STL file format. In the second stage the STL file is imported into SL machine specific software RP software . The RP software slices the design into layers and determines the placement of support structures to hold each cross section in place while building the structure layer by layer. By computing build parameters the RP software controls the part s fabrication. In the layer preparation stage the build parameters for the desired part are translated into machine language. Finally the machine language controls the SL machine to build a desired part and its support structures layer by layer. SL machines typically focus an ultraviolet UV laser onto a cross section of a liquid photopolymer resin. The laser in turn selectively cures a resin to form a structure layer by layer. Ultimately the part is cleaned the support structure is removed and the part is post cured typically exposed to UV prior to completion. Complex shaped parts are thus manufactured by repeating the layering process.

Although RP technologies for complex functional parts and prototypes have greatly improved in recent years there is still a need to improve RP technologies for building functional electromechanical parts. There is a further need for achieving significant reductions in size mass and manufacturing cycle times of low voltage electrical systems. Most RP systems allow building cycle sequences to be interrupted thus opening the possibility of encapsulating electromechanical components within the model structure. For example some have demonstrated the feasibility of encapsulating sensors and actuators in metal and polymer structures using Shape Deposition Manufacturing SDM . Others have demonstrated systems for automatic dispensing of conductive thermally curable media such as direct write DW inks for maskless patterning of electronics. Limitations in speed and feature size however have prevented the integration of RP and DW technologies and consequently its acceptance in for example the microelectronics industry. Recently however there have been several breakthroughs in DW ink dispensing for military applications which dispense advanced metallic inks through a hollow tip precisely controlling the ink s flow and stopping points. These breakthroughs may lead to writing capabilities as small as 50 micrometers on curved substrates of various materials. Although there have been improvements in writing capabilities many SL resins have been found to be incompatible with for example the high temperatures required to anneal DW inks.

What is desired is a system and method for automated deposition of fluid media during any RP processing automated curing of the media if necessary encapsulation of the media and continued building without contamination or intermediate washing and or curing. What is also desired are improvements in part building technology and in particular improvements in the integration of fluid media such as DW inks with RP technologies. Specifically there is a need for low cost efficient and easy to use RP processes that accommodate 3D DW ink dispensing technology to fabricate for example complex 3D high density circuits that are rapidly manufactured integrated and fully functional electromechanical systems. Such electromechanical systems should be compact less expensive and more reliable than their conventional predecessors. Additionally by removing heavy cables redundancy can easily be designed into a structure where previously it could not be thus allowing significant size and weight savings for sensitive applications such as those for aerospace and space applications.

What is further desired is a system and method for Rapid Prototyping High Density Circuit RPHDC manufacturing of solderless connectors and pilot devices with terminal geometries that are compatible with DW mechanisms and reduce contact resistance where the electrical system is encapsulated within structural members and manual electrical connections are eliminated in favor of automated DW traces.

The present invention overcomes the aforementioned limitations in an effective and efficient manner and provides for expanded use of rapid prototyping RP in various applications and integrating fluid dispensing technologies such as direct write DW technologies on subject parts built by RP.

A preferred embodiment provides for example systems and methods of combining DW technologies with stereolithography SL . Accordingly existing SL systems that fabricate a subject part layer by layer are combined with DW technologies that deposit whatever material required for a particular application. SL fabricated parts may now have for example complex three dimensional 3D embedded circuitry within the fabricated part by DW technology. Thus the systems and methods disclosed herein provide for increased micro fabrication and micro stereolithography.

Another preferred embodiment provides for example rapid development of circuitry to manufacture more compact components that provide advantages such as weight savings self assembly components rapid manufacturing micro fabrication micro stereolithography and micro circuitry for aerospace space homeland security national defense and a variety of other applications.

Still another preferred embodiment provides for example a system and method of integrating thermally curable media with SL without the need for intermediate washing curing and or drying. Thus the systems and methods disclosed herein could easily be converted to make complex 3D embedded circuitry for example without the addition of costly equipment.

Yet another preferred embodiment provides a system and method for Rapid Prototyping High Density Circuit RPHDC manufacturing of solderless connectors and pilot devices with terminal geometries that are compatible with DW mechanisms and reduce contact resistance where the electrical system is encapsulated within structural members and manual electrical connections are eliminated in favor of automated DW traces.

While the making and using of various embodiments of the present invention are discussed in detail below it should be appreciated that the present invention provides many applicable inventive concepts that can be embodied in a wide variety of specific contexts. The specific embodiments discussed herein are merely illustrative of specific ways to make and use the invention and do not delimit the scope of the invention.

Existing rapid prototyping RP systems are typically used for non functional prototypes. A preferred embodiment of the present invention provides for example a system and method of integrating fluid media dispensing technology such as RP technologies with direct write DW technologies. Accordingly a preferred embodiment combines for example RP systems such as those which use stereolithography SL which are capable of fabricating a part layer by layer and DW technologies which are capable of depositing whatever material required for a particular application or circuit.

In accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention single and multi material RP fabricated parts may have for example complex three dimensional 3D embedded circuitry within the part deposited by DW technology. In accordance with a preferred embodiment the fluid media is optionally cured. There are a variety of curing methods available to cure the fluid media and or the RP building resin including for example a ultraviolet light source a particle bombarder a chemical sprayer a radiation impinger an ink jet an oven a fan a pump a curing device a drying device that incorporates convection conduction and or radiation heat transfer and any combination thereof. The part may then be re registered on the RP machine without contamination and the building processes can continue as desired.

One preferred embodiment of the present invention thus provides a system and method for Rapid Prototyping High Density Circuit RPHDC manufacturing of solderless connectors and pilot devices with terminal geometries that are compatible with DW mechanisms and reduce contact resistance where the electrical system is encapsulated within structural members. Additionally manual electrical connections are eliminated in favor of automated DW traces. RPHDC enables for example paperless design processes accelerated design to manufacturing processing times the production of component interconnects by directly embedding conductive paths into the structure and the protection external wiring harnesses and cable circuitry. The conductive paths may be designed of varying path width and depth but may be traced in 3D.

In a preferred embodiment RPHDC may begin by fabricating a subject part layer using RP. The subject part layer may be re cured to ensure that is free from resin residue on the surface. To create encapsulated electrical paths on a subject part layer the subject part may be placed on another apparatus equipped for DW technology. After the DW apparatus is initialized and calibrated the DW apparatus deposits the desired interconnects and circuitry or whatever other materials that are required for a particular application . After deposition the subject part is taken out of the DW apparatus and thermally cured. The subject part may then be optionally allowed to cool either actively or passively sufficient enough to allow re immersing the subject part into the RP resin to build the next layer. The subject part is placed back on to the RP system. The RP system is reregistered based on the original CAD model used to produce the subject part and continues to build the subject part s layers as desired. It should be understood by those skilled in the art that the subject part is typically registered on automated equipment. This process may be repeated as desired. The present invention thus facilitates multi layer circuits by dispensing fluid media in such a manner as to provide a continuous conductive path between the subject part s layers. A simple example of systems and methods of a preferred embodiment is provided below.

Modern low voltage distribution networks for example contain an enclosure comprising junction boxes or load centers where bundles of conductors are routed to exposed terminals as depicted for example in and pilot devices not shown . Such enclosures must be designed to prevent unnecessary compression of the wiring which can lead to for example insulation failures and short circuits. Enclosures known in the art are typically made from sheet metal and are relatively bulky in size. For example the network of load centers and conductors depicted in may have signals typically ranging from 6 to 28 volts. The depicted network has load centers and conductors routed and switched to connectors on three sides of the enclosure . For a network of this size and complexity it is typical to utilize an enclosure with dimensions of for example 12.7 cm. 15.2 cm. 10.2 cm.

The prior art enclosure depicted in was recreated using the RPHDC approach in accordance with the systems and methods of the present invention as seen in . In order to recreate the sample enclosure as accurately as possible the dimensions or arrangement of the dead front user interface or component cluster of the prior art enclosure were not altered and the input output connectors were not relocated from the sides. The connectors joined by DW traces later depicted were encapsulated within the walls of a SL resin enclosure . Additionally current carrying conductors later depicted were insulated by resin encapsulation. To aid in component encapsulation the enclosure was designed with openings not shown to permit the laser not shown access to the back end of the connectors in any preferred plane. Additional holes not shown may be included to aid in resin drainage and later capped before operation. Fillets and chamfers not shown may be added to the interior edges of the enclosure to facilitate the DW process.

The material used to make the enclosure is not fully cured prior to encapsulation. The process continues with encapsulation and connectors are installed in the enclosure as depicted in . The height of the polygon bounding each component cluster corresponds to the height of the connectors as also depicted in . SL fixtures are registered into the enclosure in one of the three required orientations as depicted in . The polygons of component clusters are subsequently topped with a thin SL layer for example of 500 micrometers thickness to encapsulate the terminals and provide a continuous surface for DW as depicted in . The process is repeated for the remaining orientations.

The resulting RPHDC prototype junction box with DW circuitry is depicted in . An enlarged view of the DW circuitry is depicted in . Thus the methods and systems of a preferred embodiment integrates for example DW deposited conductive media with SL advantageously reduces manufacturing labor and cycle time maximizes space constraints and reduces the size and weight of comparable products. Other examples of RPHDC redesigns which would miniaturize present day products are numerous but include for example the capability of manufacturing wallet sized personal computers or multi chip modules MCMs with 3D interconnects.

Several tests demonstrate the feasibility of RPHDC including addressing whether DW and SL are compatible. Initial material compatibility tests indicate favorable resin solidification and leeching effects for uncured materials. Even after depositing conductive inks into paths of varying width and depth conductive signal strengths were strong. Thus in accordance with a preferred embodiment RP processes such as SL will support interrupted build processing and DW integration without raising material compatibility issues. Accordingly a preferred embodiment enables RPHDC using a variety of fluid media or DW materials including for example inks conductive inks curable inks curable media conductive fluids electronic inks conductors insulators semi conductive materials magnetic materials spin materials piezoelectric materials opto electronic thermoelectric materials radio frequency materials ultraviolet curable resins controlled reaction materials precursor fluids metal organic liquids solutions suspensions sol gels nanoparticles colloidal fluids thermoplastics extrudable materials thermosets 2 part epoxy materials and any combination thereof.

Other tests have focused on for example the software controls to register the parts and fixtures in the present inventions building process including repeatability and displacement tolerances. A preferred embodiment has demonstrated for example the build stop remove and re register cure and continue interrupted build processes described herein. The repeatability and displacement tests yielded tolerances within 0.0015 inches.

Still other tests have focused on structure integrity of fabricated parts and various mechanical properties of parts built with interrupted build processes. Using a control part made from an uninterrupted building process parts built from variations of the interrupted build processes were tested specifically for any variances in tensile strength. All test results were within testing error. Thus RP processes integrated with DW technologies demonstrate acceptable material compatibility issues and feasibility for interrupted build processing.

Although a preferred system and method for integrating thermally curable media during stereolithography is discussed in detail herein it will be appreciated that the present invention provides many applicable inventive concepts that can be embodied in a wide variety of specific contexts. For example while the description has principally referenced a prototype junction box enclosure it is to be understood that the preferred embodiments disclosed herein may also be utilized for other applications such as electronic devices and embedded circuitry applications where such circuitry is hidden from view. It should also be understood that although the description has primarily focuses on SL any RP process may be used. Similarly although the description primarily focuses on DW technologies other fluid dispensing technologies may also be used. The specific embodiments discussed herein are merely illustrative of specific ways to make and use the invention and do not delimit the scope of the invention. Those skilled in the art will recognize that various substitutions and modifications may be made to the invention without departing from the scope and spirit of the appended claims.

