---

title: Real-time media captioning subscription framework for mobile devices
abstract: A subscription-based system for providing caption information for one or more mobile devices includes a communication network. Some techniques employed feature a system for providing subscription services for near-real time caption information for one or more mobile devices. The system includes a communication network for communicating to the one or more mobile devices, a transcriber connected with the communication network and configured for transcribing an event to generate caption data. The caption data includes transcribed data and control code data. The system includes a subscription gateway configured for near real time transfer of the transcribed data over the communication network to the one or more mobile devices. The subscription gateway is configured to provide access for the transcribed data to the one or more mobile devices.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07421477&OS=07421477&RS=07421477
owner: Media Captioning Services
number: 07421477
owner_city: Carlsbad
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050321
---
This application claims the benefit of priority from U.S. Provisional Application entitled A Real Time Captioning Framework for Mobile Devices Application No. 60 554 896 filed Mar. 19 2004 by Richard F. Pettinato et al. the disclosure of which is incorporated by reference. This application is cross related to U.S. application Ser. No. 11 043 229 filed on Jan. 25 2005.

The present disclosure relates to media content in particular media content that is captioned for mobile applications and devices.

Traditional captioning devices such as televisions and display monitors combine text with a video broadcast in which the text represents a transcribed audio portion of the video. The captions can be either closed captions or open captions. For closed captions the caption data is embedded in a video signal and the captions are not displayed unless they are decoded. The text or caption data is embedded in line 21 of the vertical blanking interval VBI in analog television. The VBI is an interval in a television signal that temporarily suspends transmission of the signal for an electron gun to move to the first line of a television screen for the next screen field. The VBI can be used to carry data such as a test signal or the closed captioning data.

Closed captioned data created for analog television may use protocols described by the EIA Electronics Industry Association 608 Standard. Closed captioned protocols for digital television may be described in the ELA 708 Standard. In a digital transmission such as with high definition television the EIA 708 captioning data can be encoded in user data packets in an MPEG compressed video stream.

When captions are decoded the captions can be displayed on the screen. Typically captions can be decoded at the display device. Open captions may be already decoded in the video signal and may be displayed on screen such as subtitles in foreign films. In broadcast transmission systems caption data may be transmitted to an encoder that may include text and control codes.

Caption data may also be provided to the internet using transcribed data from broadcast sources such as broadcast radio or television signals. For instance a caption writer for a radio station may transcribe a broadcast program from the radio station to post on the radio station s web page. In another example a caption writer may caption the audio portion of a television signal and send the caption data to an encoder device at a broadcast facility for inclusion in the video transmission.

The present disclosure describes methods systems and techniques for subscription based services for captioned media content. Information f created in real time and accessible to mobile devices. The information may include special reports emergency news alerts news updates on a variety of topics and reports on sports and or financial news. Some information may be accessible to mobile devices on a fee basis via an authentication mechanism utilizing user names and password protection. Alternatively some information may be freely provided as long as the mobile device user remains a subscriber. The content sent to the user may be individually customized based on the subscriber s preferences.

In one general aspect the techniques feature a system for providing subscription services for near real time caption information for one or more mobile devices. The system includes a communication network for communicating to the one or more mobile devices a transcriber connected with the communication network and configured for transcribing an event to generate caption data. The caption data includes transcribed data and control code data. The system includes a subscription gateway configured for near real time transfer of the transcribed data over the communication network to the one or more mobile devices. The subscription gateway is configured to provide access for the transcribed data to the one or more mobile devices.

Advantageous implementations can include one or more of the following features. The system can be configured to transfer transcribed data to at least two mobile devices simultaneously. The communication network may involve the Internet and the subscription gateway can be configured to send notices and alerts to subscribers using the one or more mobile devices based on subscriber preferences.

The system also includes an external subscription database to store information associated with subscribers of the near real time caption information. The use of subscriber preferences may involve sending transcribed event information to a mobile device of the subscriber based on any of an area code a country code and a zip code.

The system may also include a device with captioning functionality and a display to present caption data and a decoder to decode the caption data for presentation on the device comprising captioning functionality. The system may be further configured for near real time transfer of the caption data to the decoder.

The subscription gateway may include a transcription device interface to interact with the transcriber an encoder interface to interact with an external encoder that encodes the caption data and a subscriber database to store information associated with subscribers of the near real time caption information. The subscription gateway may also include a subscriber database interface to interact with an external subscriber database that is configured to store information associated with subscribers of the near real time caption information. The information associated with the subscribers may include subscriber preferences for caption information. The subscription gateway may have a communication network interface to interact with the communication network and transmit event data as well as a server interface to interact with an external server. The one or more mobile devices can be configured to interact with the external server and the communication network.

In another general aspect a subscription based method for sending near real time caption information to one or more mobile devices involves transcribing an event to generate device generated caption data having control codes removing the control codes from the caption data to produce text data searching a database of caption information subscribers to locate one or more subscribers subscribed to receive the text data for the event and sending the text data to one or more mobile devices over a communication network.

Advantageous implementations can include one or more of the following features. The method may also involve receiving information associated with zip codes telephone country codes telephone number area codes and city and state names from the one or more mobile devices. The method may involve comparing any of the received information with zip codes telephone country codes telephone number area codes and city and state names stored in the database and providing event data to the one or more mobile devices when information received from the one or more mobile devices corresponds with similar or the same information stored in the database.

The communication network may include any one of a satellite channel a telephony channel an optical channel a wireless channel a cable channel and an internet channel. The event data provided may be based on a geographic region relating to any of the zip codes and telephone codes in which the event data may include local news weather alerts traffic reports and emergency information. The method may involve presenting one or more real time captioning streams from one or more events to subscribers using one or more mobile devices based on subscriber preferences. The method may include authenticating subscribers based on a user name and a password stored in the database in which the transcribing involves using a transcription device to add control codes to the transcribed data. The method may involve encrypting the text data and or the subscriber data prior to sending the text data to the one or more mobile devices over the communication network. The text data and subscriber preferences can be displayed on the one or more mobile devices.

In another general aspect an article including a machine readable medium storing instructions operable to cause a machine to perform operations including receiving information from a mobile device for subscriber preferences for media content to be sent to the mobile device and searching a database that has information for subscribers of media content. The media content involves real time streaming data of transcribed data sent over a communication network. The operations include sending the transcribed data to the mobile device in which the subscriber preferences include a zip code an area code and or a country code.

Advantageous implementations can include one or more of the following features. The transcribed data may include control code data for a caption target. The caption target may have closed captioning functionality. The text data can be sent to the mobile device and the transcribed data can be sent to the caption target simultaneously. The text data can be sent to the mobile device and the transcribed data is sent to the caption target in near real time.

The operations may include selecting the media content based on any of a zip code an area code and a country code and sending an alert to the mobile device that media content is available to the sent to the mobile device. The media content can include news weather alerts traffic reports and emergency information that is specific to any of the zip codes area codes and or country codes.

In one general aspect the techniques feature a system for providing near real time caption information for one or more mobile devices. The system includes a communication network for communicating to the mobile devices and a transcriber connected with the communication network. The transcriber is configured to transcribing an event to generate caption data in which the caption data includes transcribed data and control code data. The system is further configured for near real time transfer of the transcribed data over the communication network to the one or more mobile devices.

In another general aspect the techniques feature a method for sending near real time caption information to one or more mobile devices. The method involves transcribing an event to generate caption data having control codes removing the control codes from the caption data to produce text data and sending the text data to one or more mobile devices over a communication network.

In another general aspect the techniques feature an article that includes a machine readable medium storing instructions operable to cause operations involve generating transcribed data from a transcription device sending text data from the transcribed data to a mobile device using a communication network and sending the transcribed data from the transcription device to a caption target. The text data is sent to the mobile device and the transcribed data is sent to the caption target simultaneously. The text data is sent to the mobile device and the transcribed data is sent to the caption target in near real time.

In another general aspect the techniques feature an article that includes a machine readable medium storing instructions operable to cause operations involve transcribing audio data from a radio broadcast and sending the transcribed audio data to at least one mobile device using a communication network. The operation of sending the data involves near real time transmission of the transcribed audio data. The communication network is coupled to at least one mobile device.

A transcription device may be used in the operation of transcribing the audio data. The operations may also include using a software program to remove closed captioning control codes from the transcribed audio data prior to sending the transcribed audio data to at least one mobile device. The transcribed audio data may involve audio data that is transcribed into text data. The audio data may be voice data.

In one exemplary implementation a system includes a communication network such as the Internet and one or more mobile devices coupled to the communication network. The system includes a transcription device to transcribe data in real time or near real time real time with a small time delay . The transcribed data includes text data and control code data. The control code data is used by one or more captioning devices to display caption data. The control code data is removed from transcribed data and the mobile devices receive text data via the communication network. The system can simultaneously send transcribed data to one or more captioning devices while sending the text data to one or more mobile devices. Subscribers of transcribed media content can receive real time news reports emergency information and alerts on their mobile devices.

Details of one or more implementations are set forth in the accompanying drawings and the description below. Other features and advantages will be apparent from the description and drawings and from the claims.

The following detailed description makes reference to the accompanying drawings. Other embodiments of the present invention are possible and modifications may be made to the embodiments without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. Therefore the following detailed description is not meant to limit the invention.

Moreover for convenience in the ensuing description some explanations of terms are provided herein. However the explanations contained herein are intended to be exemplary only. They are not intended to limit the terms as they are described or referred to throughout the specification. Rather these explanations are meant to include any additional aspects and or examples of the terms as described and claimed herein and or as used by one of skill in the art.

The following describes various tasks techniques and systems relating to fee and or subscription based services for closed captioned media content. The present disclosure describes methods and systems that involve a fee and or subscription based framework for sending real time caption data from a caption writer to one or more mobile devices through a communication network such as the internet while simultaneously having the ability to send caption data to traditional captioning devices such as a television or monitor that can display captioned information.

The caption writer refers to a person such as a stenographer who transcribes data from a source presentation or an event. The data may be from a live event such as a sporting event an academic presentation or a financial news report. The data can be audio and or video data that is transcribed into text data. The caption writer may also transcribe the data remotely in which the writer does not have to be physically present to perform the transcription. The writer may remotely listen to and or watch the event using a telephone and or a monitor or television set. The event may or may not be an event that is broadcasted such as an event using broadcast television or radio signals.

In some implementations a subscriber system can use a password to authenticate a subscriber for the service. User names and user preferences may be stored in one or more databases. The subscriber system can be used to alert mobile device users to captioned data that may be available from video and or radio programmers. In some implementations the real time data may be created using captioning stenographs that are based on voice recognition technologies. The caption data can be produced in a data stream that may have control codes or may not have control codes. The data stream can be transmitted by a server or server program as Transmission Control Protocol with Internet Protocol TCP IP packets to one or more mobile device users in real time.

In some implementations real time captioned data can be sent in a real time data stream to mobile devices. The real time captioned data can be accessed by mobile device users on a subscription basis. Each user may have a user name and password and the mobile device users may have the ability to select from among a group of content service providers. In some implementations the mobile device users can enter zip codes telephone country codes telephone number area codes city and state names by comparing zip code phone or country codes preferences to the content providers zip code phone and complete telephone numbers to enables subscribers to choose from among a range of real time captioning streams that may be available. Some of the captioning streams may be local and specific for a geographic region such as for local news weather alerts traffic reports and emergency information. Each mobile device user may set up individualized user preferences on the desired content. An alert can be sent to a subscriber if the user s preferences match the content provided by video and or audio listed providers in the database. The providers may have content that is specific for various zip codes country codes or area codes.

The caption information may be delivered from a provider of captioning services or from a content provider and a captioning service that transcribes the content provider s information. In some implementations the real time captioning transcription can be provided from a content provider to enable transmission of captioned information with caption codes to a captioning encoder or to the captioning encoder and one or more mobile devices simultaneously. Also the real time captioned data from caption service providers can be sent to a communications network from decoded output of one or more content provider stations. The real time captioned data can be verified in a database with subscriber preferences. The system can provide for user authentication by using user names and passwords and can issue alerts and notifications to subscribers of the availability of real time captioned data on video and or radio programs that have captioned data. In some implementations the notifications may include notifying subscribers of the availability of real time captioned data on video and radio programs that have captioned data that is outside the preferences of the subscribers but may be related to the preferences of the subscribers. For example an alert may be issued for a weather report of dangerous weather conditions in a local area and a subscriber may also be notified that captioned data is available for local traffic conditions in that weather.

As shown in the captioning system can simultaneously send caption information to traditional captioning devices targets and mobile devices . The captioning targets receive transcribed data which includes text data entered by the writer and control code data for the captioning device . The mobile devices are connected to a communication network and receive text data and not the control code data. The control code data can be removed from the transcribed data prior to sending data to the communication network .

The transcribed data from the writer is sent to the transcription device that sends the transcribed data to an encoder . The encoder uses the control codes to encapsulate the transcribed data for presentation on a caption target . The caption target can refer to a monitor or a television with closed captioning functionality.

Instead of or in addition to sending transcribed data to an encoder the transcription device may remove the control code data from the transcribed data and send text data to a communication network to enable for one or more users to access the text data. Examples of communication networks include various forms or mediums of data communications such as a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN a wireless local area network WLAN and a personal area network PAN . Other examples of communication networks include a mobile communication network using a multiple access technology such as a cellular phone network with Code Division Multiple Access CDMA a satellite network and the Internet.

In sending the text data to the communication network the transcription device may have software to remove the control codes from the transcribed data before sending the data to the communication network . In removing the control codes the data that is transmitted to components includes text data. The text data can be sent to the communication network and can be displayed on one or more mobile devices such as computers cell phones and personal digital assistants PDAs . The communication network interacts with a server to communicate with multiple devices. The server may refer to one or more hardware servers or software servers such as a server program. The text data may be displayed as scrolling text data in which the text is updated as the mobile device receives text. The devices may be internet compatible devices and may be connected through a cellular phone network. As used herein a mobile device may also refer to any general purpose mobile machine that processes data according to a set of instructions that is stored internally either temporarily or permanently including but not limited to general purpose mobile computers laptop computers internet compatible mobile phones wired or wireless laptop computers. Mobile devices also include satellite based transmission devices smart client devices that actively fetch data and store data locally wireless devices a cellular or mobile telephone an electronic handheld unit for the wireless receipt and or transmission of data a media content playable device such as an MP3 player or the like. Each device may have a specific or unique internet address in which the communication network may direct data to one or more devices based on the device s internet address.

To provide for interaction with a user each of the mobile devices uses a display such as a cathode ray tube CRT or liquid crystal display LCD monitor which displays information to the user and a keyboard and or a pointing device such as a mouse or a trackball to serve as input to the mobile device. The mobile device may provide feedback to the user with any form of sensory feedback such as visual feedback or tactile feedback.

The communication network may include a back end component such as a data server or a middleware component such as an application server or a front end component such as a client computer having a graphical user interface portal or a Web browser through which a user can interact with an implementation of the systems and techniques described here. The mobile device itself may have a front end component that includes a graphical user interface. In general the communication network and or the mobile device may use any combination of such back end middleware or front end components.

The software also known as programs software tools or code in the captioning system of may include machine instructions for a programmable processor and can be implemented in a high level procedural and or object oriented programming language and or in assembly machine language. The mobile device may have an Application Programming Interface API . For example the mobile device may also run on a Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW platform an open source on line application development platform for wireless CDMA devices from Qualcomm Inc. of San Diego Calif. The BREW platform can allow application developers to write programs and scripts in various software languages such as C C JAVA and XML. The mobile device may have a software media player such as a Windows media player that can show the text data and or a video presentation of the transcribed event.

As used herein the term machine readable medium refers to any computer program product apparatus and or device used to provide machine instructions and or data to a programmable processor including a machine readable medium that receives machine instructions as a machine readable signal. The machine readable medium refers to magnetic discs optical disks memory Programmable Logic Devices PLDs and the like. The term machine readable signal refers to any signal used to provide machine instructions and or data to a programmable processor.

In the described system the caption writer can be located remotely from the source of the transcribed event. Also the data can be sent to a mobile device using the communication network such as the internet. Internet compatible devices with displays can present captioned text in real time or near real time. The transcribed data can be presented on a traditional caption target and a mobile device simultaneously.

The captioning system can send the data to multiple devices as well as sending the data to multiple devices simultaneously. Moreover the writer can transcribe the information of the event and the transcription device can send the data to one or more targets and or devices in real time or near real time. In one implementation a device can allow a user to save and retrieve any part of a captioned message on their device. Alternatively a user can download a saved text captioned message from a web site for subsequent viewing. For example if a user wants to read what happened in the last two minutes of a basketball game the user can log on to a website to access all or only a selected portion of the captioned play by play information.

In a writer transcribes the event data that they hear or see into a device that sends the data to a computer . The transcription device includes a computer with software to add control code data to the text produced from the writer . The event data may or may not be broadcasted over conventional television or radio channels. The data is sent from the computer to a communication network and then to an encoder . As described above the communication network may include a modem an internet channel and or a telephony channel. The encoder encaptions the data at the caption target so that the data is put into a format for presentation on a television or a monitor such as utilizing line 21 of the VBI as described above. The caption target itself has a decoder to decode the encaptioned data from the encoder prior to presenting the text on the monitor.

Alternatively and or simultaneously software in the computer removes the control codes from the transcribed data and sends text data to a server . The server may be implemented in hardware or software. The server sends the text data to the mobile device . In one implementation the server may send the text data to the mobile device using a communication network such as the internet. The mobile device can receive the data from the communication network through a router such as a cable DSL Digital Subscriber Line router or a router in an enterprise or business environment.

The server can send the text data to the mobile device via an internet address. In one implementation the mobile device has a particular internet address. As the text data is routed through the internet the text data is routed to the internet address of a particular mobile device . In this aspect the mobile device is a client to the server .

Instead of being located in the computer the software or program to remove the control code data from the transcribed data can be distributed among one or more components of . In one implementation the control code data may be removed by software located in the device itself as described in . The transcribed data may then be sent to the caption target and or the text data may be sent to the mobile device without using the computer .

In another implementation both the caption target and the mobile device can receive the transcribed data with the control code data. The mobile device itself may have software to remove the control code data. The device can have control code removal abilities without having to require control code removing software in another component of the system.

In an alternative implementation shown in voice recognition software can be used to generate caption information. Voice recognition software can be used instead of the writer and the transcription device . The voice recognition software can convert speech audio input into transcribed data output. The transcribed data can include control codes to be sent to the caption target . At the same time the voice recognition software can output the text of the transcribed data to be sent to the mobile device .

In some exemplary implementations the system may include a communication network such as the Internet one or more mobile devices coupled to the communication network and a subscription gateway . The subscription gateway may be a communication network or a server program. The subscription gateway can receive transcribed data from a transcription device . The data may include captioning control codes or the control codes may be removed by a computer using control code removal software . In some implementations the subscription gateway can transmit data to a communication network which will distribute data to a caption encoder . The subscription gateway may distribute text data to a server device that may authenticate subscriber data by a user name and a password. The mobile device can display a menu of video radio and event programming that is currently transcribed for selection by the subscriber.

In another implementation the transcription device can transmit data to the subscription gateway The subscription gateway may be connected to a communication network which can transmit authentication data user name password data and other subscriber data information from mobile device users. The subscription gateway can provide data encryption and authentication of subscriber related data using the user names and password authentication.

In one exemplary implementation the server interface can compare user name and password authentication information and distribute real time transcribed information to the server . The server interface can process the authenticated subscriber information and according to user preferences transmit the transcribed data to the server which is connected to one or more mobile devices . In one exemplary implementation the mobile device user subscriber can enter a zip code or a country code to display a menu selection of event programming audio broadcasts and or video programming that are being transcribed in real time and are available for selection by a subscriber.

In another exemplary implementation the server interface can compare real time transcribed data streams from video and radio providers which can be inserted in the communication network to the communication interface of the subscription gateway . The communication interface may be implemented in hardware or software. In some implementations the communication interface can be used to transmit an alert message to subscribers of the availability of data streams of video and or radio programming in subscriber profiles by zip code and or country code. The system can allow the subscriber to select a video program provider for a particular zip code for emergency notifications as well as to enter user names and passwords in the mobile device. The mobile devices could transmit data via the communication network to the communication network interface . Alternatively the mobile devices could transmit data via the server to the server interface . In some implementations the communication network interface device can authenticate the user names and password information from the external subscriber database through the subscriber data interface . Alternatively the communication network interface device can authenticate the user names and password information from the internal subscriber database . The listing of transcribed real time data may be transmitted to the server interface and to the server . After authentication and selection of real time data stream from a content provider the mobile device can receive the selected data stream through the communication network . Mobile device users with subscriptions can be notified of available data streams of transcribed content from video and or radio programmers for user specified zip codes area codes or country codes. The notifications may be sent from communication interface with an e mail alert or an audible alert.

In another implementation the communication network may receive captioned data from the communication network interface . In some exemplary implementations the communication network interface may remove control codes if any and transmit real time text data received from a communication network to mobile devices using the server and the server interface . The communication network may receive captioned data from decoded output of an encoder device at a video and or radio program station. The communication network may also receive caption data transcribed using voice recognition technologies or through stenographic techniques of an audio broadcast. The received data may contain control codes or be in raw text form. Data passing through the subscription gateway may be encrypted by data security features in which the data security features may be implemented in hardware or software. The data whether encrypted or unencrypted can be sent to communication network interface . In some implementations subscriber authentication by user name and password can be performed by the subscriber data interface accessing an external subscriber database . Caption content subscribers on mobile devices can enter a user name and a password on a mobile device and access streaming data after authentication. The subscribers can access transcribed captioned video and or radio programming being transmitted in real time using real time transcription technologies such as voice recognition technology or stenographic based technology.

In other implementations video and or radio station programmers can send alerts and messages to the communication network . The communication network may include the apparatuses of an internet service provider that may have the capabilities of sending notifications of emergency and or special reports of captioned data being transmitted by the station providers. The communication network interface may receive the captioned data with or without control codes.

In some implementations the subscriber data interface may compare data provided by communication network with such data provided in the internal database or external database and match station call sign data provided by stations to a zip code and or a country code. In some implementations the user preference data can be matched to the call sign data of stations of content providers to automatically match the news messages and alerts of the stations to a local zip code or country code for the subscriber. In these implementations subscribers can automatically be able to receive captioned content from stations of content providers such as a local news television station or a radio station. In some implementations the content from the stations are not necessarily limited to the area code where the subscriber is located but a subscriber may want to receive alerts and messages from stations located in other jurisdictions. For example the subscriber may be in one location e.g. San Diego Calif. area code 619 with their mobile device and may have user preferences with an area code e.g. Charlotte N.C. area code 704 to receive alerts and notifications for a different location.

In some implementations the subscriber may have preferences for captioned real time data from video and or audio providers based on selected zip codes area codes or country codes of the video and audio providers. The subscriber data may be authenticated by the subscriber data interface . The subscriber database interface may compare subscriber preferences and profiles and can transmit alerts via the communication network to one or more mobile device subscribers. In some implementations the mobile device subscribers may be mobile phone subscribers. In other implementations the mobile device subscribers may be using WiMax the IEEE 802.16 Air Interface Standard. The mobile device subscribers can enter a user name and a password for authentication via the subscriber database interface .

In some implementations the captioned data stream for a selected captioned video and or radio program can be sent to the server interface which can remove control codes if any and transmit the data to the server . The server can transmit TCP IP data of real time captioned data with no control codes to the communication network which can multicast the captioned data to authenticated subscribers for receipt on one or more mobile devices.

In some implementations the subscribers may have a free subscription to one or more content providers. The content providers can interact with a caption service provider to provide caption and or transcription services to subscribers. In other implementations the subscribers may have a fee based subscription to the contents providers. Alternatively the subscribers may have a free subscription to some free content providers and a fee based subscription to fee based content providers. The subscribers may have free or fee based subscriptions to one or more caption service providers. The content providers and or the caption service providers may provide captioned and or transcribed data free for a limited time and for a fee at a later time. Subscription information accounts payments terms and related information on the subscribers may be maintained in the subscription gateway database and or the external subscriber database .

The subscription gateway may be implemented in software and or hardware. One or more components e.g. communication network interface subscriber database interface server interface of the subscription gateway may be implemented in software and or hardware. The subscriber preferences may be sent from a webpage over the Internet to be entered into the subscription gateway.

