---

title: Global electronic commerce system
abstract: A comprehensive system effectuates global electronic commerce on the Internet across frontiers of nations, cultures, and languages. Referral Websites serving various locales offer Buyers the opportunity to view products for purchase. A Buyer selects categories of products for viewing by using drop-down menus that organize products into a clear taxonomy that can be expressed across all languages. Having selected a category of products for viewing, a Buyer receives, from a multi-version relational database, a version of marketing information about each product. The version is one automatically sent from the database to match the Buyer's language, culture, and nationality, as deduced from the use of a particular Referral Website. A shopping cart allows Buyers to select a product for purchase in an interactive way that encourages completion of the purchase. Products can be offered with custom options and in wholesale quantities. Personalized Web pages allow comprehensive customer service after a sale.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08150736&OS=08150736&RS=08150736
owner: S.F. Properties 58 LLC
number: 08150736
owner_city: Wilmington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051222
---
This application is a Divisional Patent Application of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 788 853 entitled Global Electronic Commerce System filed on Feb. 21 2001 issued as U.S. Pat. No. 7 013 289 on Mar.14 2006.

This application claims the benefit of Invention Disclosure Document No. 473206 filed with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office on Apr. 27 2000 entitled Dynamic Interactive Personal Website Automatically Constructed as a Consequence of a Purchasing Action the Website Providing Timely and Comprehensive Customer Service to an Individual Buyer.

The field of this invention is global sale of products and services using electronic means of a communications b data storage and retrieval c taking of orders d fulfillment e transfers of payments and f providing customer service after the sale. Both business to business and business to consumer sales are effectuated.

The present invention is a system for use by even small manufacturers to meet a long felt need to sell their products to Buyers around the world. The term manufacturers is meant to include manufacturers or authorized distributors for manufacturers and the term Buyers is meant to include both individuals and organizations including other manufacturers.

A complete system termed a Global Store is disclosed a system that overcomes barriers to global trade of language culture and nationality. The Global Store integrates communications and database software technologies hardware infrastructure and operating methods to market and sell products from manufacturers around the globe to Buyers in a multitude of locales around the globe. Stated another way The Global Store assembles and operates various subsystems to provide the infrastructure for manufacturers to use a new channel of global commerce a Virtual Channel.

Typically manufacturers working on their own market their products effectively only to one specific population of Buyers defined by a country language and culture. There are obvious exceptions seen in giant international companies such as Coca Cola RTM or Adidas RTM but those exceptions represent a tiny fraction of what could be done and will be done as even small manufacturers surmount barriers to international trade.

For manufactures who do not have their own giant global marketing system a presently available Legacy Channel for global commerce is manned by an array of players e.g. exporters importers wholesalers and retailers who provide a multitude of necessary functions of marketing sales payment processing delivery and customer service. Manufacturers could conceivably market their products to Buyers around the world by performing all of the above necessary functions themselves but practical considerations usually cause the manufacturer to outsource many functions of global commerce to the Legacy Channel.

In the future however the Legacy Channel will be largely replaced by the new Virtual Channel. That revolutionary change will provide ready access to global markets for even small manufacturers. Furthermore those manufacturers will be able to maintain control like never before over the marketing of their products.

Revolutionary changes come about by a confluence of events. For example a revolutionary use of rocket ships for manned exploration of space in the mid Twentieth Century resulted from a confluence of political motivations and technological advances that included but were not restricted to international competition between superpowers and advances in rocketry. Improvements in space age materials rocket engines computers and other technologies also set the stage for the revolutionary change.

A similar situation now exists in the area of global trade. A confluence of recognized needs and new technologies now sets the stage for a revolutionary change in how manufacturers bring their products to markets around the world.

Advances in communications and information technology and their associated standards have made geography a much less salient factor in trade than in prior years. Electronic communications at the speed of light enables one to purchase a product on the other side of the world as quickly as across the street even more quickly should one decide to walk across that street to make the purchase. Furthermore increasing use of English as a de facto language of commerce and increasing access to good real time translation technology will inevitably lower language barriers.

The Global Store system described here is a method that integrates revolutionary and evolutionary developments into a new system of global trade in the Virtual Channel. Only in the very recent past have the following compelling trends and powerful developments conjoined to permit the construction and operation of a complete and integrated system of global trade to meet long felt needs 

Pent up pressures for globalization have produced numerous examples of conventional e commerce businesses attempting to expand globally. These businesses generally meet the challenge to provide information in multiple languages and across cultures by cloning Websites from one locale to another reproducing some of the design of the original Website and some of the content. This multi headed e commerce approach is a crude interim step that fails to meet the emerging needs of manufacturers who desire global sales. Loss of the efficiencies and economies of a truly global approach make the prices of their products less competitive than should be possible and there is the additional problem of entering and maintaining current and accurate information across multiple databases.

In conventional e commerce it is not uncommon for the unscrupulous to sell brand name goods through Websites when they are not authorized to do so. In response manufacturers desire to maintain better control of prices marketing information about their products sales fulfillment and customer service all in a global context and ideally from a single integrated site.

Buyers are reluctant to make international purchases when they fear that they will have no practical recourse if they pay for a product but either do not receive it or find the product is not acceptable. What is needed for a hesitant Buyer is an escrow service that will complete settlement only after the product has been successfully delivered and the Buyer is satisfied.

Many conventional e commerce Websites have sought to sell products globally but few if any have made a serious commitment to globalization by providing good translations in multiple languages. So far machine translations are so lacking in accuracy and idiomatic expression that they are likely to inspire mirth rather than confidence in a Buyer. Furthermore no site offers products of a multitude of manufacturers along with customer support across more than one language support that is needed for

Buyers to be well informed about international shipping duties warranties currency conversion repair centers and other issues important to Buyers.

Conventionally for both e commerce and brick and mortar businesses separate databases are established to support production marketing sales and accounting. Information changes in one business database often are not reflected in all of the other databases. Further information vital to a customer such as parcel tracking would require leaving the e commerce site to access such a service on yet another system. Customer support is critically lacking in brick and mortar businesses and also is missing in most e commerce businesses. What is missing is the ability to place in the hands of the customer the ability to go to a single location and interactively to obtain an answer to a question pertaining to a product or to an order.

Departing from conventional e commerce approaches the ideal e commerce model from the manufacturers viewpoint is to sell globally using a system allowing

Prior art in the area of electronic commerce has not yet provided a flexible system to use a single central database to support sales to Buyers around the world. Rather prior art is exemplified by the design of large international e commerce companies like Amazon and eBay that clone existing non global electronic systems of marketing e.g. Amazon.com into similar but separate systems that serve various locales e.g. Amazon.co.uk . Products are separately catalogued and inventoried in the separate cloned online businesses serving a particular language and locale. Efficiencies and economies of scale are largely lost when marketing becomes thus fragmented. Furthermore Buyers lose the benefit of an expanded selection of products coming from all locales.

In summary the Legacy Channel of global trade is not practical for most businesses. Furthermore as will be described below the promise of global e commerce in a Virtual Channel of global trade to supplant the Legacy Channel has not yet been realized efforts have thus far failed sufficiently to integrate existing art and new art to capitalize on new trends and developments. The invention disclosed here overcomes the shortcomings of prior art by making e commerce a viable method of global trade for even small manufacturers.

The Global Store system uses a multi version database to provide a new way of providing language locale specific marketing information and sales of products to Buyers around the globe. Prior art as seen in patents cited below provide opportunities for Buyers to a view a product and be referred to a seller or b view and purchase a product over the Internet with or without use of a referrer Website. However no prior art takes advantage of a multi version locale specific innovations in marketing b use of Referral Websites from a multitude of locales combined with c other Ancillary Resources to offer truly global sales over the Internet.

Prior art has not solved the problem of marketing globally from a single point. Major players in global e commerce e.g. AOL Yahoo and Amazon have adopted a country by country or a region by region strategy in order to adapt to Buyers languages and cultures.

In a statement quoted in a Wall Street Journal article 8 01 2000 a Yahoo executive declared that Yahoo would consider itself unsuccessful if Yahoo were considered an American company two years from then. Yahoo and other e commerce companies have discovered that their widely recognized brand names are in themselves not sufficient for attracting global e commerce business. Buyers have been found however to be attracted to e commerce sites that cater to local interests and culture. Stated another way Buyers are more comfortable and confident about buying from a business they do not perceive as foreign.

Needed is a system to provide culture sensitive and language adapted marketing sales and customer service content to Buyers doing so in a way that takes advantage of the efficiencies and economies of using a single point of operations. Prior art described as follows fails to meet that criterion 

The patent by Chelliah et al discloses a relatively comprehensive e commerce system operating from a single point but still it fails to meet a basic need of global commerce to provide alternative versions of marketing information for Buyers across linguistic and cultural groups it can only accommodate Buyers who speak a given language.

The same limitation is seen in the recent patent by Wong U.S. Pat. No. 6 515 690 Integrated business to business Web commerce and business automation system 2000 . Wong makes a strong case for the advantages in efficiency and speed of using a single integrated database for businesses and especially Web based businesses. However his patent makes no accommodation to differences in language or customs for users of the database. The Global Store system disclosed here overcomes that limitation. Also disclosed are other innovations not seen in the Wong patent the Chelliah et al patent or in other prior art 

Accommodating Buyers using a diversity of languages and additional needed innovations are discussed below in the context of related prior art.

Prior art has not provided a solution for global e commerce from a single point but several patents have described innovations in database technology that might be used to accommodate visitors to an e commerce Website when they speak a diversity of preferred languages 

The above two patents suggest the feasibility of providing from a single database information to users who speak different languages. However in neither of these patents is there disclosed a system that comprehensively accommodates to the needs of a Buyer to view purchase and receive products from around the world using the Buyer s own language in a manner that will not seem foreign to the Buyer. Needed is a method for multiple versions of marketing information to be automatically and transparently delivered from a single database. That database when incorporated into a complete system for global e commerce would thereby accommodate Buyers from around the world

In a recent patent U.S. Pat. No. 6 038 598 Method of Providing One of a Plurality of Web Pages Mapped to a Single Uniform Resource Locator URL Based on Evaluation of a Condition 2000 Danneels suggested that various language versions from a single source on the Web could be delivered selectively to viewers. The selection is based on information transferred from the viewers Browsers along with a request to view Web page content. Unfortunately that approach is not valid unless a viewers Browser is programmed to send preferred language and preferred character set information along with a request. Given that Browsers are not uniformly programmed to send that information the Danneels approach is not a strong contender as a general solution for automatically and transparently identifying a preferred language for a viewer.

Another approach is suggested in a patent by Levy U.S. Pat. No.5 944 790 Method and Apparatus for Providing a Web Site Having a Home Page that Automatically Adapts to User Language and Customs 1999 . Levy presents a system whereby a generic home page is delivered in various language versions based on the location code of the viewer s node address. Thereafter the viewer is given the opportunity to specify the language to be used for viewing other Web pages. There are several problems with this approach as follow 

The limitations seen in the patents by Danneels and Levy could be overcome when a preferred language is determined by a Buyer s use of a locale specific Referral Website.

Prior art described below has described use of referral Websites but none has used the locale of Referral Websites to determine a viewer s locale and preferred language.

Harrington U.S. Pat. No. 5 895 454 Integrated Interface for Vendor Product Oriented Internet Websites 1999 describes a referral Website that has access to a database of products services that are available from a multitude of vendors in remote locations. Buyers can access and purchase products in the database doing so via an interface provided by the referral Website to the vendors remote Websites. After the Buyer interactively connects with one or more of the remote vendor network sites the user selects products services from the information provided on the remote vendor network site. The selection of a particular product service triggers a transaction notification that records the Buyer s selection and associated financial transaction data which is transmitted to the database and associated database interface. Harrington s design does not allow for global sales because her referral Website only puts Buyers using a single language in contact with a vendor using the same language. Thus there is no attention paid to even the first step necessary for global sales.

Bezos et al U.S. Pat. No. 6 029 141 Internet based Customer Referral System 2000 describe an Internet based customer referral system that allows referral Websites to receive commissions on sales made to Buyers when they refer those Buyers to an e commerce Website. These referral Websites are not identified however by the language and locale with which they are associated. Therefore this design does not allow Buyers to get customized treatment that caters to their language or culture. All Buyers coming to the e commerce Website from referral Websites see a site that is oriented toward a single language and culture. Needed is a system whereby a Buyer s use of a Referral Website among many Referral Websites serving multiple locales is used to determine and accommodate to the Buyer s preferred language and to the customs of the Buyer s locale.

Buyers use shopping carts on e commerce Websites to store a list of products selected for later purchase. There is a significant problem however very often a Buyer places one or more items in a shopping cart but then abandons the cart without completing a purchase. In a study described in the Dallas Morning News page 4D Oct. 2 2000 Datamonitor a New York based market research firm found that 78 of all online shopping carts are abandoned before checkout.

Any improvement made in the percentage of shopping cart users who go on to complete a purchase would have tremendous positive influence on the success of an e commerce site. Unfortunately prior art has failed to incorporate good common sense sales techniques into the design of shopping cart functions.

The following patents are discussed in light of certain failures in support of the sales process limitations that are overcome in the present invention 

Levine et al U.S. Pat. No. 5 745 681 Stateless Shopping Cart for the Web 1998 disclosed a shopping cart system that allows a hidden shopping cart file to be placed in a page sent to a Buyer that displays products for purchase. The Buyer can toggle the hidden file into view. This elegant technological design allows use of a shopping cart without opening a new window. Though Levine et al show technical innovativeness the use of a hidden file is exactly the opposite of what is needed to stimulate payment for selected items. It is actually better to keep a shopping cart file displayed in an open frame to remind the Buyer about the products selected. Hidden from view the selected products are more easily forgotten and abandoned.

Yonezawa et al U.S. Pat. No. 5 905 973 Shopping Basket Presentation Method for an Online Shopping System 1999 provide a persisting open shopping cart window from the outset of a Buyer s viewing of products but there is a failure to provide total cost including shipping. This is a significant failure because not knowing total cost means that a Buyer does not have the information needed to make a buying decision. It would actually be an advantage to involve the Buyer in a purchasing process by asking the Buyer to provide a destination for a purchased product thereby allowing the calculation of shipping costs and total costs. That sort of interaction would help to cement in the mind of the Buyer the Buyer s interest in buying the product.

Relevant prior art to this invention would describe comprehensive customer service from a single point with one or more of the following features 

In totality the above features would serve to enable the Buyer with a personalized Web based Customer Information System a level of service and integration that exceeds prior art. The following patents touch on one or more of the above features. No one patent describes a comprehensive approach.

Providing Buyers access to a Web based business database system is a step demonstrated in a patent by Purcell U.S. Pat. No. 5 940 807 Automated and independently accessible inventory information exchange system 1999 . Purcell discloses a method for controlling the collection processing and dissemination of information by a host regarding product and service availability. The method includes the step of establishing a host operated information management system. Electronic communication connections to host approved sellers of products and services are granted limited electronic access to the information management system. Each approved seller has a self initiated exclusive capability to access that seller s inventory information that is maintained on the information management system for adding amending and deleting portions of the seller s inventory information. The seller s inventory information is analyzed and assimilated into a Buyer s listing of products and services available through the information management system to potential Buyers. Host approved Buyers of products and services are granted limited electronic access to the information management system so that each approved Buyer may access the Buyer s listing for reviewing products and services of interest to that Buyer.

Perkowski U.S. Pat. No. 6 064 979 Method of and System for Finding and Serving Consumer Product Related Information Over the Internet Using Manufacturer Identification Numbers 2000 discloses a Web based method for finding and displaying consumer product related information. A database serving subsystem stores manufacturer identification numbers assigned to manufacturers of consumer products home page specifying URLs symbolically linked to the identification numbers universal product numbers UPNs assigned to consumer products made by the manufacturers and product information specifying URLs symbolically linked to the UPNs. During operation a Client subsystem transmits to the database serving subsystem a request for information that includes the UPN assigned to the consumer product on which product related information is being sought. The database serving subsystem automatically compares the UPN against the stored manufacturer s identification numbers and automatically returns to the Client subsystem one or more of URLs symbolically linked to the UPN if URLs have been symbolically linked to the UPN within the database serving subsystem. However if no URLs have been symbolically linked to the UPN then the database serving subsystem automatically returns the home page specifying URL symbolically linked to the manufacturer s identification number contained within the UPN in the request. By virtue of this novel search mechanism based on manufacturers identification numbers Client subsystems are automatically provided with the home page of the manufacturer s World Wide Web WWW site in situations where product information specifying URLs have not yet been symbolically linked with the UPN on any one of the manufacturer s products. By this method consumers may gain product information or at least information about a manufacturer when the consumer has the UPN code for a product of interest and the UPN and linked information has been made part of the database accessed by the consumer. Though this system makes clever use of UPNs and the Web to find information about some products it does not enable a consumer with a guaranteed way of accessing product information for any given product that a consumer may have purchased. Furthermore there is no provision to make information available in a language understood by the consumer.

Wong U.S. Pat. No. 6 515 690 Integrated Business to Business Web Commerce and Business Automation System 2000 argues convincingly for the benefits of ready access to a single integrated database for all workers inside a Web centric business and he includes the customer in the list of beneficiaries. Furthermore a purchaser is allowed access to the database to check out important information Customers can retrieve previous quote records and view order and shipment status via the Web. . . . Parts tracking saves employee time that would otherwise be spent responding to customer inquiries and also contributes to customer satisfaction through the convenient availability of timely information. 

Though Wong describes an integrated business system in many respects neither he nor others have yet described a system that optimizes a customer s access to relevant information. That is especially true when customers may vary in the languages they understand. Still needed for either a business to business Buyer or an individual Buyer is ready access to pertinent information at a language compatible single point. Pertinent information would include order status shipment status histories of prior transactions warranties return policies and other information that could answer many questions for a Buyer without the Buyer ever needing to contact a customer service representative. That access would reduce both aggravation to the Buyer and costs to the seller. Furthermore that information should be offered in the Buyer s own language. When a Buyer does contact a representative any questions are likely to be resolved most quickly and with least misunderstanding when the Buyer and the representative are both able to review the same records on their respective computer screens.

Zellweger U.S. Pat. No. 5 630 125 Method and apparatus for information management using an open hierarchical data structure 1998 discloses a method for finding products for purchase using an open hierarchical data structure. The invention includes an Application Generator the Distribution files generated by the Application Generator and a Retrieval system that accesses the Distribution files. The Retrieval system uses data in the Distribution files to configure an Information System that runs stand alone on a desktop computer. The information management system of the invention uses an open hierarchical data structure for classifying information objects and providing a menu access to them. The open hierarchical data structure of Zellweger s invention includes multiple pathways to the same information object. Multiple paths can be used to support synonyms and to clarify word meanings within a context thereby overcoming retrieval problems associated with conventional word matching technologies. The Distribution files include data related to the menu system and the configuration of the Information System as well as data associated with the information objects. The Retrieval system guides an end user to information objects in the Distribution files by generating successive selection menus in accordance with the open hierarchical data structure. Also disclosed is an embodiment of the invention that can be used to manage and distribute product information to Buyers in the form of an electronic catalog. Buyers use the custom features of an Information System generated by the Application module to locate products generate orders for the products and transmit orders electronically to a vendor of the products.

Zellweger s patent provides suppliers of products with a lot of flexibility when authoring hierarchies to be used by Buyers to find products. However that same flexibility can cause confusion when applied across suppliers. When a plurality of suppliers could organize product information in a plurality of ways the resulting structure of a combined hierarchy would not lend itself to efficient finding of products. Furthermore should different suppliers present their products in a combined hierarchy but in different languages the Buyer would be truly confused and lost. Therefore Zellweger s patent cannot be readily applied to the problem of helping Buyers find products offered by a myriad of manufacturers and furthermore Zellweger does not attempt to deal with the problem of presenting menus in various languages to accommodate Buyers around the world.

Consentino et al U.S. Pat. No. 5 055 515 Enhanced tree control system for navigating lattices data structures and displaying configurable lattice node labels 1991 describe a display and navigation system. That system presents hierarchical data in an enhanced tree presentation control that blends the ease of use character of the familiar tree presentation control with a technique for navigating more complex lattice data structures. At the same time the system provides more node information by displaying configured lattice node labels along with the node s name. A primary objective of the invention is to facilitate building maintaining and using a multiple inheritance taxonomy such as a product catalog data base by means of a multi navigation path browsing system which is made possible through the capability of this system s multiple inheritance capability.

The patent by Consentino et al provides an efficient and clear method of displaying a very limited number of products for selection too limited a number to efficiently organize and display the thousands of products that would be offered at a Global Store. Furthermore no provision is made in this patent to accommodate Buyers wanting to use a variety of native languages to find products.

Shakib et al U.S. Pat. No. 5 778 213 Multilingual Storage and Retrieval 1998 describe a method for storing and retrieving information in multiple languages and multiple character sets in a computer system. Each language has at least one character set or code page that is required to display information. Each character set can include all of the characters used by the respective language e.g. the letters of the English alphabet or the symbols of Kanji . However more than one language may use the same character set. Consequently each language also has language specific rules for displaying information. The language specific rules are used for sorting the information.

In some existing computer systems each processor storage device only supports a single character set. For example a server in a Client server network stores and supports a database. The database is stored in a single character set. A Client requesting information from the database may receive the information only in the single character set. Also a sort of fields in the database may be created only in the single character set.

In other existing computer systems all of the information is stored in a universal character set. Using the Client server example all information on the network is stored in a universal character set e.g. Unicode. When a Client requests information it is converted from Unicode into the Client selected character set.

Unicode and other universal character sets use two bytes to represent each character. Many character sets that support specific languages use only one byte to represent each character.

The method invented by Shakib et al and made available by the Microsoft Corporation has yet to have been adapted and extended for use in a comprehensive global e commerce system.

In general Web servers are stateless with respect to Client transactions. In other words at the HTTP protocol level each transaction e.g. request for an HTML file is separate from all others. In other common networking system protocols a Client might initialize a connection to the server conduct a series of requests from the server and receive information for each request and then terminate the connection from the server and the entire exchange from the initialization to the termination of the connection would be considered a session which may comprise a transaction. In such systems the Client server connection may be considered to be in one of several different states at any instance depending on the nature of the requests and responses and their order. Such systems require state information to be saved by the server and also usually by the Client. Furthermore time outs and other connection failure strategies are required. The stateless nature of the Web simplifies the server and Client architectures.

The Internet has developed into a convenient medium by which consumers can purchase goods and services. The ability to purchase goods over the Internet is sometimes provided by software applications known as a shopping basket or cart . A shopping basket application which commonly executes on a World Wide Web WWW or Web site of a product manufacturer or retailer generally provides a virtual store in which a customer can view descriptions of and purchase various products electronically. A shopping basket application generally allows a customer to add products to or delete products from a virtual shopping basket and specify various attributes such as quantity size color etc. The customer s selections are generally stored in a database associated with the Website. When the customer is ready to purchase the contents of the shopping basket he may click on a hypertext link labeled Purchase Contents of Shopping Basket for example which causes the customer to be prompted to enter billing information i.e. name address and credit card number and to confirm the transaction.

Certain art used in electronic commerce is conventional and well known. Prior art however does not encompass a comprehensive global electronic commerce system that combines both innovative art and the following conventional art 

The primary object of this invention is to lower the bar for manufacturers to engage in global trade by augmenting or replacing the costly slow and inefficient Legacy Channel with a Virtual Channel of global trade. Recently invented and improved elements of information technology both hardware and software and the Internet provide the building blocks and the opportunity for a revolutionary use of the new Virtual Channel for global trade by even small manufacturers.

Using the multi language single logical database approach described here an international marketing agent called a Global Store working with e marketer Referral Websites and integrating other Ancillary Resources provides a multitude of manufacturers a timely and accurate way to spread their marketing efforts worldwide in the Virtual Channel of global trade.

The present invention makes use of the diversity of locales served by a multitude of Referral Websites serving Buyers around the world. A Buyer at a Referral Website is assumed to be ready and interested in buying a product after that Buyer clicks on the category name of products available for sale. The name of the category is in the same National Language as the language used on the Referral Website. The Global Store is enabled to conduct e commerce in that particular language as well as the National Languages used at all the other Referral Websites that refer Buyers to the Global Store.

By placing marketing information about products in the Global Store with its multi language single logical searchable database a manufacturer can engage in marketing efforts worldwide on the Internet in a multitude of different languages and adapted to various cultures and countries. It has become obvious during the past several years that manufacturers around the world need a global marketing method in order to stay competitive and to optimize their profitability. Use of the Global Store will allow manufacturers advantageously to meet their long felt need to tap into the global market to expand their customer bases increase sales and benefit from economies of scale.

Furthermore use of marketing resources in the Global Store meets the objective for manufacturers to access global marketing efforts without losing control over their marketing place presentation price promotions and policies of service. Thereby manufacturers may build a worldwide brand name based on authentic products ethical representations fair prices and good service to Buyers.

Another object of this invention is to provide manufacturers with a much more efficient and responsive feedback mechanism for adjusting marketing and production schedules. For example immediate feedback that a new line of skis was selling briskly in South America during May would prompt a ski manufacturer to start adding marketing and production resources for the new line s introduction to Buyers in North America in October.

Another object of the Global Store is to provide better controls over quality of products and services. A complete system of controls spans the Virtual Channel from start adding a manufacturer s product into a global multi version product database to end the expiration of an escrow period during which a Buyer may request a refund if a delivered product is not satisfactory .

Another object of the Global Store is to help manufacturers satisfy Buyers needs for customer service. In order to serve as an alternative to use of the Legacy Channel the Global Store matches and where possible exceeds the level of service that Buyers find in the Legacy Channel. For example a Buyer in the Legacy Channel may need to call a retail store to inquire about returning a purchased product. In order to find out about return policies and procedures it is a common experience that the Buyer will

In the Global Store the answers are readily available within the Virtual Channel information system at the same virtual location where the product was purchased.

Another object of this invention is for manufacturers to be able to provide Buyers with adequate information to make buying decisions. Many prospective Buyers will not complete a transaction unless they know not only the cost of the item but also the total price including shipping fees etc. The present invention overcomes this barrier by providing a comprehensive integrated system whereby Buyers from all over the world can get complete information about product price stated in the Buyer s currency and delivery prior to making the buying decision. Furthermore the use of a single marketing information database allows the manufacturer easily to control and communicate accurate information about product availability in inventory service availability warranties and return policies.

Another object of this invention is to improve the probability a Buyer will complete a purchase transaction after the Buyer has selected a product for purchase. With conventional art products are placed in a shopping cart. Unfortunately that cart often is later abandoned with no purchase made. The invention disclosed here includes an improved shopping cart design an improvement that facilitates a Buyer s decision to complete a purchase transaction by

An important advantage here is the immediate assumption that the purchase will be made plus the visual reminder that the Buyer has made a selection and that the product is ready for purchase. This approach overcomes the disadvantage of prior art in which the Buyer is implicitly told that the Buyer need only think about completing the purchase later. That implicit message is poor sales technique. It is best to have the Buyer complete the transaction as soon as possible before the Buyer forgets about the perceived benefits of the product gets distracted or hesitates because of second thoughts.

Another object of the invention is to provide Buyers from around the world with an improved way of finding and selecting a desired category of products to view. Conventional art presents the Buyer with a a limited selection of categories e.g. Amazon.com or b an overly large and confusing array of categories e.g. eBay.com .

The invention disclosed here includes an efficient universal method of organizing and displaying product categories for selection by Buyers. Using sequential drop down menus and a clearly organized hierarchy a Buyer quickly and intuitively navigates among thousands of possible categories of products to select a desired category. The process is easily understood powerful and efficient.

Furthermore the above method is a manifestation of a powerful underlying architecture that is independent of locale a multi level hierarchical logical taxonomy that can be implemented throughout the world. The logical taxonomy provides a framework for locale specific navigation and categorization that is itself independent of locale and language. The same underlying technology can be used advantageously to construct hierarchical taxonomies that are customized for different locales and languages allowing categorization of the same products in a way that is available for use by Buyers across various locales. Stated another way the same technology provides an architectural framework that can be used to construct a multitude of independent locale specific hierarchical taxonomies. The taxonomies are consistent in design and function for finding products while still accommodating differences among locales in language and in how products are customarily categorized.

Based on the taxonomy a hierarchy conveniently and concisely presented in drop down menus allows a Buyer quickly to step down through hierarchical levels with a multitude of nodes at each level. For example an English speaking Buyer would sequentially select among nodes listed under a Departments b Groups c Families and at an end d Categories of products to view. A possible list of sequentially selected nodes might be Apparel Women s Apparel Women s Outerwear and Women s Jackets. Because unique numeric values are used to identify the nodes of the hierarchy no dependence on any one language is made in specifying the nodes. The same products might be found by a German speaking Buyer looking under a Category node with the same numeric value as Women s Jackets but labeled Damenjacken. A Buyer anywhere in the world may use his or her own language to find a category of products to view regardless of the countries of origin of those products.

Another advantage of the disclosed method for organization and display of products is that a product may be assigned to more than one category. This will aid Buyers looking for certain products when the Buyers have different motivations for looking. For example one Buyer might look under the Category

 Survival Equipment to find Snowshoes while another Buyer might look under the Category Winter Sports Equipment. 

Another object of this invention is to increase Buyers confidence in buying products from foreign manufacturers by providing an escrow system to guarantee delivery and Buyer satisfaction. Thereby manufacturers will be more likely to sell their products across international boundaries when Buyers feel thus protected.

Another object of the Global Store is to allow manufacturers to provide customized and personalized service to Buyers. Buyers at the time of ordering can be given the option to specify attributes for customized manufacturing of some products. In that case the Buyer is told the number of extra days prior to delivery that will be needed to produce the customized product. Manufacturers thereby have the advantage of being able to deliver exactly what the Buyer wants without having to keep a large inventory of completed products.

There are social implications to new ways to facilitate global trade. No nation can afford to be left out of the global economy. Use of a public communications system like the Internet to enable global trade inevitably gives access to a nation s citizens to new information and new ideas. Broader implications of the use of the Internet should not be ignored. A benefit of an increase in global trade is that citizens of different nations become exposed to basic humanness in their trading counterparts. They see other citizens of the world as much like themselves and not to be despised or feared. Having access to information that is not controlled by any one government makes citizens less vulnerable to manipulations by despots.

The technology represented here will change the world. Just as tribes have integrated into nations nations will integrate into global organizations. An analogy to that integration is seen in the evolution of biological organisms. Individual cells became colonies of cells. Those colonies evolved into highly integrated living systems that are well suited to survive in their environment. Just so mutual interests and instantaneous communications allow nations of the world to evolve new methods of organization to meet global threats to peace and the environment.

Though the invention disclosed here focuses upon trade of physical products it also inevitably facilitates movement of information and ideas because digitalized products are included. What will it mean when citizens of the world have easy access to information and ideas across barriers of nations cultures and languages With respect to the invention disclosed here it can be seen that a powerful language neutral taxonomic system is part of the Global Store. That system lends itself finding not only tangible products but also digitalized information books software tapes films etc. . For example it would be possible to adapt the taxonomic system to make available online the about 100 000 000 items in the Library of Congress representing approximately 500 languages. And each item could be found by using no more than six or seven mouse clicks.

Other aspects advantages and novel features of the invention will become apparent upon reading the following detailed description and upon referring to accompanying drawings.

The present invention is a method and apparatus for overcoming barriers of nation culture and language between manufacturers and Buyers. Using their computers to visit selected Websites on the Internet Buyers are able to access a common multi language database of marketing information about a manufacturer s product. The marketing information about the product occurs in a multitude of versions adapted to Buyers in various local markets depending on nation culture and language.

Buyers in a local market are offered the opportunity to view products for purchase said offer made at a Referral Website that serves their particular locale. Having selected a category of products for viewing a Buyer then sees a version of marketing information about each product said version adapted for the language culture and nationality as indicated from the Buyer s use of the Referral Website.

The Buyer using his or her preferred language then orders the product tracks delivery and has access to customer service.

An innovative system of controls guarantees a high quality of product and a high level of service for the Buyer. The controller apparatus of the invention allows proactive control over a selection of manufacturers who provide products b selection products to go into the common database c selection of Websites from which Buyers are referred and d quality of service standards including the availability of products in inventory for immediate shipment.

While the preferred embodiment of this invention is shown and described here the invention is not thereby limited to the specific embodiment disclosed. The following description is merely illustrative having been presented by way of example only. Numerous rearrangements modifications and substitutions may be made within the spirit or scope of this invention by one skilled in the arts to which this invention pertains. These and other embodiments are considered to be within the scope and spirit of the present invention. For example the invention is not limited to use on the Internet or using the Web or private web such as an internal corporate web or using the HTTP communication protocol. Other protocols and usage variations using messages communicated over TCP IP connections are also possible. Another example is the use of scripts other than those specified e.g. Javascript. Markup languages other than HTML may be used or a mixture of markup languages may be used. The client and server may be connected by the Internet or a private intranet. Other server platforms operating systems gateways SQL servers locale definitions and locale specific character sets rather than UTF 8 may be substituted. The method of client server interoperability interface may be rearranged and reconfigured and still be within the teachings of the patent. For example the menu navigation product selection shopping cart panel can be implemented with a Java plug in. For scalability in other embodiments additional servers may be used and routers added. Functions may be combined on one server or dispersed onto multiple servers. The scope of the present invention is defined by the claims that are appended.

Technical descriptions and specifications are written at a level that assumes the reader has skill in arts of Web Servers Browser Client SQL Database Servers e commerce and internationalized Internet protocols and markup language standards. The following glossary describes how selected technical terms are used in this document. It is included here to make following sections easier to understand for a non expert.

The diagram seen in provides an overview of components of a Virtual Channel of global trade including the Global Store System which knits together components of the Channel. This section describes technical characteristics of the system and its relationships with other components of the Virtual Channel. In the description of that follows as well as in following sections indented Technical Notes are interspersed that provide details sufficient to enable one skilled in the art without undue experimentation to construct and implement a Global Store system.

HTTP requests and other communications over the Internet between the Buyer and the Global Store are routed via a Local Area Network and an Internet Information Server the IIS Web Server Platform . The Global Store also connects to various Ancillary Resources that enable the Global Store to provide information and services that support marketing sales and delivery processes. The connections to these Ancillary Resources are supported by Interfacing Applications for Use of Ancillary Resources . Software technology used to access those supportive resources over the Internet are provided by the purveyor of those services. That technology is well understood widely available and needs little exposition for the purposes of the present application.

Internationalization and localization are key concepts in the embodiment of the Global Store system a system that responds to Buyers around the world in locale specific ways from one integrated system that accesses information from a single multi version database. The technical description of how that is done using system locale identifier numeric values LCIDs is explained in detail below by documenting the use of LCIDs with ASP server scripts stored SQL procedures and externally linked Cascaded Style Sheets CSSs . Server Folders store locale specific ASP Server Scripts and linked CSSs.

To accommodate the storage retrieval and display of information across a multitude of National Languages certain sophisticated technologies are employed to create an integrated processing environment. Active Server Pages ASPs are used selectively to produce cultural locale and linguistic differences in Web pages. Those pages are constructed by automatically using National Language designator names to select correct text fragments and graphics from a plurality of such items in a table. Selection of proper text and graphics is enabled by use of LCIDs to differentiate database and server script versions.

Different versions of records containing product information appear in the Database SQL Server Platform . Different versions accommodate differences in Buyer s languages locales. Appropriate selective access to those records is enabled by the using locale identifier values of LCID to identify the various versions. LCID is a key field in records of product information and the values in that field vary from version to version.

Similarly LCID values serve to differentiate the various Server Scripts that generate content for Buyers in different locales. Those scripts are essentially identical in generating Web pages but they differ as to using a different locale specific versions of product records and b content that is invariant as to meaning from page to page but where the expression of that content varies from locale to locale e.g. labels for navigation fonts etc. . The mechanism whereby scripts are accessed is aided by storing the Server Scripts on the IIS Web Server Platform in Server Folders that are named with the values of the various locales that are served. Thus the server folder named 1031 contains a script named Disp.asp that is used to display product information from the database where a the LCID field of pertinent records has a value of 1031 and b HTML script is properly configured for labels fonts etc. for a Buyer in locale . By contrast the server folder named 222 contains a script named Disp.asp same name but the records accessed and the labels fonts etc. used are specific to locale 222. Similarly Cascaded Style Sheets CSSs described below are stored in locale specific folders. The CSSs are designed to provide the style appropriate for the locale including font specifications. Technical Note In the preferred embodiment the Global Store system provides a Client server interface to the Web Browsers of Buyers around the world using the Internet. Other communications means may also be used. Using ASP VBScript write statements served HTML pages are encoded in UTF 8 mapping from database information in 2 byte Unicode. Whenever information is to be stored for a particular National Language it is required that the desired glyphs of that language be encoded in Unicode. UTF 8 is a variable multi byte mapping of 2 byte 16 bit Unicode.

Cascaded Style Sheets are linked to the server from within written HTML pages headers using a LINK element. They provide information needed by Client Browsers to render Web pages using a consistent style of display characteristics from one page to another in a given locale. Cascaded Style Sheets also provide streaming fonts when a Client e.g. a Browser does not have a particular font that is needed for rendering text on an HTML page.

In the implementation of the above technologies a communication standard is HTTP version 1.1. The standard for rendering Web pages is HTML 4.01.

The Global Store acquires a global network of Referral Websites having HTML Web pages that display Global Store Department names in the language of a Buyer. The preferred language is deduced from the Buyer s visit to a Referral Website serving a particular language locale. Buyers are invited to click on a Department e.g. Women s Fashions to view selected products that are for sale. Referral Websites are paid commissions on sales. A Referral Website identifier ReferID is a numerical identifier used during a settlement process to allocate commission credits for product sales. A ReferID value is forwarded to the Global Store as part of a visit to the Store by a Buyer who requests Web pages served by the Global Store.

A Buyer who has TCP IP access to the Internet by the Buyer s Computer views Web page displays rendered by the Buyer s Web Browser . A Web page that comes to the Buyer s Browser over the Internet from a Referral Website contains an embedded HTML Form which allows the Buyer to send an HTTP request to the Global Store to request Client server function specific and locale specific responses.

Options for a Buyer to submit requests to the Global Store System are designed to transmit to the Global Store parameterized information that enables great power and flexibility of the Global Store to respond to Buyers. System parametric values called Tokens are passed along with a Buyer s requests. Locale identifier Tokens LCID values trigger the Global Store System to accommodate to the Buyer s language and locale. Other Tokens as described below allow the Global Store to offer the

Buyer choices for viewing information about many thousands of products for sale those choices conveniently and clearly arranged in drop down menus in the Buyer s language.

Passing of Tokens allows major components platforms of the Global Store System to interoperate in a multitude of system states. Use of Tokens allows Global Store platforms to have interoperable congruency and also to have congruency with the platform of a Buyer the Web Browser that operates on the Buyer s Computer . Interoperability is achieved between platforms because Tokens when passed across interfaces between platforms set states that affect a particular function that is realized by parameterized operations taking place across those platforms.

Interoperability between platforms in the Global Store System is shown for example to result even from the first contact of the Buyer with the Global Store System when the Buyer clicks on a Department name. The role of Tokens is shown as follows 

Technical Note The HTML body of the Referral Website Web Page includes an embedded FORM container that includes an action attribute to the Form HTML element. An abbreviated example of a Form container is shown as follows 

The IIS passes the HTTP request to the ASP parser Asp.dll for parsing the URI and creating a new session for the indicated server script Frameset.asp. The Frameset.asp server script first establishes the locale parametric value of the server script session via a SetLocale statement in Frameset.asp. For example a set value of 1031 for the session would be the same LCID value used for the 3081 name of the server folder containing the 3081 version of Frameset.asp. A separate method is used to set a locale for a session when a Cookie is installed on a Buyer s computer during a product purchasing process as described below.

The Global Store responds to a Buyer s request for product views by dynamically writing and sending a Locale Specific Category Selection Panel. The panel is sent via a sequence of HTML frames that include HTML embedded Forms one for each of four drop down menus used in navigating through a taxonomy to select a Category . The Buyer interacts with the Global Store using HTTP protocol whereby the information is conveyed by an integer identifier associated with a name in the Buyer s National Language. The Buyer s HTTP requests are assisted by a separate Client side JScript for each menu in the four frames. Having received the Locale Specific Category Selection Panel the Buyer selects a Category of products to view that selection being a culmination of using a series of four drop down menus. The selection process involves the Buyer navigating a four level hierarchal taxonomy that is used for organizing products. That taxonomy is described in detail in a later section. 

At the end of the Category selection process a Buyer selects a nodal value Node4ID from a menu showing choices at the fourth level of the hierarchal taxonomy. That modal value is used as a Token a value that will be passed along with the Buyer s LCID by the IIS Web Server Platform to select appropriate product records from Relational Database Tables in the Database SQL Server Platform . That process using Named Stored Procedures to select product records for display is described in detail in a later section.

Should the Buyer select a product for purchase the purchasing process is supported by a Payment Processing Service one of the Ancillary Resources in the Virtual Channel. When the purchase is completed e mail messages are sent to a notify the manufacturer that a product has been purchased and the product needs to be shipped and b confirm the order with the Buyer. The e mail messaging is supported by the SMTP E Mail Server . In the preferred embodiment the e mail server is the Microsoft RTM Exchange Server.

A Global Store application script that provides a means to collect any taxes that are due for the purchase of a product operates in conjunction with an external Tax Computing Service one of the Ancillary Resources . The interface with the Tax Computing Service is provided by one of the Global Store application programs included under the rubric Applications for Interfacing of Ancillary Resources .

The art that is used to access the above sources of information is well known and easily implemented by one normally skilled in the art of using services made available on the Internet.

The Global Store is visited by a Buyer at the invitation of a Referral Website. The invitation is accepted when the Buyer clicks on a link that the Buyer sees on a Web page at the Referral Website. That click causes a request message to be sent from the Buyer asking that information be sent from the Global Store.

The request message automatically also contains information about the locale where the Buyer is assumed to reside based on the primary locale served by the Referral Website. The information about locale allows the Global Store metaphorically to direct the Buyer to the proper linguistically compatible and culturally compatible floor in the multi storied Global Store. The Buyer is sent to a virtual floor matching the language and culture represented on the Referral Website.

All virtual floors of the Global Store are similar with respect to the products that may be viewed and purchased but the virtual floors are different in respect to language and custom. Stated another way the Buyer gains automatic access via the Referral Website and the Buyer s computer to a virtual floor of the

Store on which all business is conducted in a way to accommodate to the language and customs of the Buyer s locale.

The layout of products is essentially the same on the various virtual floors within the Global Store. Products are organized in a way that manifests an underlying taxonomy a taxonomy which is not dependent on the use of any certain National Language. The taxonomy of product organization is represented on each virtual floor still metaphorically speaking by the following layout 

Having navigated his or her way to the proper Category display case the Buyer then views the products for purchase. Help is given to the Buyer for navigating and purchasing in the Buyer s National Language.

Thus the Global Store System provides a drill down four step navigational process to a buyer allowing the buyer to find a Category of products to view. The process involves the sequential use of a series of four linked menus and the choices available in the menus are dynamically determined from each prior choice. After the first menu showing Departments and allowing a buyer to choose a Department the item choices shown in subsequent menus are those items that are in a child relationship to the parent that was the choice in the prior menu. A buyer chooses 

The clarity and convenience of the taxonomy is shown above. Its power is seen by looking at the number of products that could be conveniently found if there were only 20 divisions at each level of the taxonomy. Twenty Departments times 20 Groups per Department times 20 Families per Group times 20 Categories per Family times 20 products per Category equals 3 200 000 products. Furthermore the number of products that could be viewed would be twenty times larger than that i.e. 64 000 000 if another level of Subcategory were added to the taxonomy.

As shown in the system uses the following numbered operations in bringing manufacturers products to Buyers 

The Locale Specific Category Selection Panel LSCSP is presented to the Buyer in four persisting frames on the Buyer s computer screen. Each of these frames contains a menu that enables a Buyer to make navigational choices. Making those choices involves the Buyer in a drill down process that leads to selecting a number of products to view. The Buyer navigates within the Global Store using menus on the LSCSP to traverse from Department to Group to Family to Category. The choice of a Category causes the display of a number of products.

Technical Note A selected menu item is associated with a specific numeric value that becomes a Token a parameter that transcends platform interfaces to enable functions to be performed using cooperating platforms. For example selection of a Category name causes the transmission of a Tokenized Node4ID value to the Global Store IIS Web Server Platform that affects selection of a Named Stored Procedure on the Database SQL Server Platform . The stored procedure selects from the database product information for products at the fourth Category Level of the Taxonomy.

At the same time the four frames for the LSCSP are created two other frames are also specified as parts of a Frameset. The six frame Frameset contains

A Frameset Frame I and Frame II are returned from the server in response to an HTTP request a Node 1 request initiated when a Buyer selects a Department name for products to view from a Web page obtained from a Referral Website. The request is submitted using HTTP from an HTML Form containing a menu with a list of locale specific Department item options for the locale in the language of the locale.

A Client side JScript is triggered when the Buyer clicks on one of the locale specific Department names presented in the HTML Form s menu. The JScript causes a Form submission of numeric system parameters including LCID and selected Node1ID value that initiates the Node1 HTTP request for an LSCSP. The use of an HTML Form for this function was shown as an example in a prior section.

The LSCSP is constituted as four separate frames with a zero width border between them. The first menu populates the first frame. It contains the same Department item options as appeared on the Referral Website referral page. This feature allows re navigation of the taxonomy re starting at the Department level as well as any other level of the Taxonomy. 

Technical Note This section contains a lengthy detailed description of how software applications enable the drill down process for use by the Buyer when the Buyer uses menus in the four frames of the LSCSP. In the interest of conciseness technical descriptions in subsequent sections will refer back to this section thereby eliminating unnecessary repetition. This description applies to ASP scripts for all frames.

Frame technology specified is described in HTML 4.01 Specification and assumes compliant Browsers. A separate locale specific ASP server script is provided to interoperate with a each separate frame and b an associated Stored SQL Procedure in the SQL Server. Tokens are used among the platforms to accommodate interoperability. Each server script accommodates internationalization and localization goals by use of a 16 bit Unicode UTF 8 multi byte Unicode and b a locale specific linked Cascaded Style Sheet in a locale specific Frameset Header. These locale specific scripts serve to provide locale specific HTTP responses necessary for each Frame in every locale.

Server side a buyer initiated request is first received by an Internet Server Application Programming Interface ISAPI the routing software of the IIS Web Server Platform . The Form submitted request from a Referral Website Web page including a selected Node1ID Token invokes an ASP script Frameset.asp that was contained in the URI used by the Form to submit the request. Also contained in the URI is the locale specific server folder name for the folder containing Frameset.asp. This script provides as detailed below a locale specific server response that dynamically generates a six frame Frameset.

Another ASP script contained in the locale specific folder is chain executed at the end of the parsing of Frameset.asp. That script Frame I .asp using the Node1ID Token as a system parameter populates Frame with a menu of Department names expressed in the Buyer s language and with the selected Department name shown as pre selected in the menu.

Dept.asp executed at the end of Frame .asp generates a menu for the children of the selected Department a locale specific Group drop down menu appears in Frame 11 thereby enabling the Buyer to take the next navigational step choosing a Group.

The Frameset created by Frameset.asp is a housekeeping function that that reserves certain areas on the Buyer s computer screen for display of different persisting interactive areas. That function is a well known method of frame setting that allows IIS Server Scripts to send HTML pages to independent areas. Selection of a menu item in one frame in conjunction with a Client side JScript triggers a server script that targets its result to another frame. Selection of a menu item in that frame similarly triggers another server script that generates a result for another frame with the menu in the first frame remaining and so on. In this case the frame setting operation specifies four frames that hold the LSCSP in a narrow strip across the top of the screen. Two other areas are named and specified in Frameset.asp a a fifth frame wherein product displays appear in a large central area of the screen and b a sixth frame wherein a shopping cart display appears in a strip at the bottom of the screen. Each Web page created from the server is made locale specific by using a locale specific server side Include script.

Frameset.asp invokes ASP and IIS to establish a new Buyer s session upon the buyer s clicking on a Department name by having ASP IIS install a cookie in the Buyer s Browser. That cookie contains the session s SessionID value automatically generated by IIS ASP. For subsequent buyer initiated requests until timeout IIS and ASP working together automatically connect a buyer s further initiated HTTP requests to the already established session. This enables ASP scripts to have access to system variables established by an initial request invoking Frameset.asp from a Referral Website Web page. System Token Parameters Node1ID and ReferID for the session are obtained from the Request.Form collection and are established as session variables for subsequent Buyer initiated requests where the Cookie SessionID is the same. Frameset.asp invokes a VBScript statement to obtain Node1ID and ReferID Token values from the Request.Form Collection. These values are set in Frameset.asp script as system variables for the session established above for purposes of being available to succeeding buyer requests in steps below. The LCID Token is established for each locale specific server script when a SetLocale statement is used in the script to set the LCID value. That SetLocale statement sets a different LCID value for each version of Frameset.asp one version of which is contained in each of a number of locale specific folders. Those folders are named with the same differing values as the LCID values that are set.

When a Buyer clicks on a Department name JScript procedure is invoked that initiates an embedded Form s Action attribute that sends hidden LCID and ReferID Tokens and a selected Department Node1ID Node1Name pair to the Global Store. ISAPI receives and passes the URI contained file name Frameset.asp in the Form statement to an ASP.dll parser which in turn accesses and parses Frameset.asp from the URI referenced IIS server folder.

When the Frameset.asp script establishes frames in the Buyer s Browser an HTML document is written that describes frame layout called a Frameset document . That document includes a HEAD section and a Frameset section in place of the BODY of a regular Web page. A Frameset defines how the screen is divided into separate parts. The Frameset has different attributes that can be specified such as frame width. The Frameset statement provides frame names that designate Target locations for sending server side script response output.

Frameset.asp a creates the initial empty six frame Frameset and b executes a second script Frame I.asp that generates a drop down Department menu for Frame I. Frame I.asp in turn executes a third ASP script Dept.asp that generates a drop down Group Menu for Frame II. Frames III through Frame VI are left empty. Subsequent ASP scripts described below are designed to respond to specific choices in the menu items. The use of Frameset technology requires that when a Form initiated request is action triggered by a choice of an item in the menu of a frame a Target must be used as an attribute of the HTML Form statement the Target designates a frame to receive a response to the request.

The LSCSP is presented to Buyers in their National Languages rendered on their Browsers in appropriate fonts specified by a CSS. The Global Store writes and sends HTML page output to Buyers Browsers to populate menu lists in the LSCSP. Doing so necessitates converting to a universal encoding format UTF 8 that can be rendered in a variety of locales. Furthermore streaming fonts are specified for use by a Buyer s Browser if the Browser does not have a font set that allows rendering of the sent text.

Technical Note Text is authored in Unicode in the National Language. Output writing of HTML code for HTML Web pages to populate the frames of the LSCSP is accomplished using a Response Write method of VBScript. Preparation for this necessitates setting Output Encoding for UTF 8 using a CODEPAGE 65001 directive setting in the VBScript. UTF 8 enables ASP to process data scripted in multiple languages when using the Response.Write method. This setting directs ASP invoked VBScript write statements for example to convert stored 16 bit Unicode data obtained from SQL Stored Procedures to the UTF 8 format required of written output for HTTP communications which will be rendered by a Buyer s Browser.

Writing an HTMI Frameset Header includes writing a statement informing the Browser of the code set used in a Response. VBScript statements are used to create the output Header instructions to the Browser. For example the Response.Charset method is used to generate the second line of the HTML header Response.Charset UTF 8 that sets the Browser to process UTF 8 encoding.

A written HTML Web Page HEADER includes a LINKED Cascaded Style Sheet CSS in a server link folder. The CSS provides a method to supply streaming fonts for cases when the fonts are missing during the rendering process by a Buyer s Browser Engine. A missing font condition occurs when a Browser fails to have local access to a resident locale font for one or more UTF 8 code points. Streaming fonts are provided to cover the Unicode range necessary for the National Language of a Buyer s locale. Each CSS is locale specific and is stored in a locale specific folder named according to LCID values as described above. A Browser that is compliant to HTML 4.01 matches the fonts required versus those resident to the Browser. Browser compatibility with HTML 4.01 specification s vis a vis CSS1 and CSS2 style sheets and UTF 8 encoding is assumed for examples given. 

After a Buyer clicks on a Department name at a Referral Website the Buyer will have his or her selection confirmed the selected name will be highlighted in a drop down menu of Department names that occupies the first frame of the LSCSP. The presence of that menu also allows the Buyer to re start the drill down process at any time by clicking on another Department name in the menu thus choosing a new Node1ID and causing new children of the newly selected Department name to appear in Frame II.

Therefore along with the Department menu shown in Frame I also shown to the Buyer is a Group menu in Frame II that contains the names of Groups that are children to the selected Department. The Buyer may continue the drill down process by clicking on one of the Group names.

Technical Note Framel .asp is chain executed from the completion of Frameset.asp. FrameI .asp generates an LCID specific Department Menu for Frame I and at completion executes Dept.asp which populates Frame II with the Group names that are children of the Department name that was selected by the Buyer as is shown in the Department menu of Frame I. Client side JScript s for each Frame support the functionality provided by the server scripts described.

A locale specific Recordset used to populate a Department drop down menu is obtained using a Frame I Stored SQL Procedure to return a Department Node1ID Node 1 Name values Recordset. Frame I .asp executes an ADO statement using the LCID Token to initiate a Department Stored SQL Procedure. That procedure returns a Department Node1Name Node1ID pair Recordset to populate the locale specific Department Menu for Frame 1. Frame.asp writes using VBScript a Department drop down menu as specified in an HTML Form container for Frame I. This written HTML Form is populated with the Department names Recordset described above. The Form as written provides a means allowing the Client side JScript previously written by this server script to submit Form contents upon the event of a Buyer s clicking on a Department name in the drop down menu. FrameI.asp produces the following Form Statement Attributes within the written Form Container 

The Form Container includes an Option list of Department names for selection. The names come from the Department Recordset value pairs as described above. The Form is written such that when submitted it sends the selected Node1ID Token along with the other hidden Tokens described above. Node1ID and ReferID Tokens as system interoperable parameters are retrievable in a following step by a Dept.asp server script. 

At the end of the parsing of FrameI.asp Dept.asp is chain executed whereby a Group menu populates Frame II with children of the Department name selected in Frame I. The execution of Dept.asp also could take place from the Buyer s at some point restarting the selection process by selecting a new Department name from Frame I Department menu. Dept.asp is manifested in locale specific versions and each version is contained in the same locale specific server folder as the version of Frame I .asp that initiated its execution. Server side VBScript statements in Dept.asp write a Group Drop Down HTML FORM container for Frame II. This written HTML Form is populated with the Group Recordset from a Group Stored SQL Procedure. The Form provides a means to submit Group Form contents upon the event of clicking on a selected option a Group name associated with a Node2ID value from a Group drop down menu in Frame II. Doing so leads to a population of the Family menu in Frame III with Family names that are children to the Group name selected. Similarly selection by a Buyer of a Family name leads to population of the Frame IV Category menu.

For one skilled in the art the design of the four Frames and menus involves not much more than writing exactly the same code with slight differences in naming for the scripts Tokens and Targets involved. For example Group.asp Node2ID and Frame are used to populate Frame using the same programming steps used for populating Frame using Dept.asp Node1ID and Frame . Therefore to avoid unnecessary repetition only the populating of Frame II is discussed in detail below and no further technical explanation is offered for the remaining Frames and menus used to construct and operate the LSCSP.

After a Buyer selects a Department name further choices are enabled by population of the Group menu in Frame II with Group names that are children of the selected Department name. The following Technical Note describes the programming that supports populating that menu and serves as a model for the same kind of programming used for other menus.

Technical Note When the Buyer chooses a Department name the URI in the HTML Form that was rendered in Frame I is transferred to the IIS server in the Form s URI. That URI denotes a version of the ASP script named Dept.asp held in a locale specific server side folder. Dept.asp obtains a locale specific Recordset to populate the Group drop down menu by using a Frame II Stored SQL Procedure to return a Group Node2Name Node2ID values Recordset. Dept.asp executes an ADO statement using the LCID Token to initiate a Group Stored SQL Procedure which returns the Group Node2Name Node2ID pair Recordset to populate the locale specific Group Menu for Frame II.

The written HTML Form for this example has the following Form Statement Attributes within the written Form Container 

The User Interface Ul Text in the language of the locale specific Include is written by a VBScript procedure into HTML output that can be rendered by the Buyer s Browser for viewing by the Buyer.

If a Buyer wishes to go back to a previous step in the Taxonomy drill down process that is possible. The Buyer may choose to find a new Category of products to view in Frame V by re starting at any step of the drill down process by first selecting a a new Department b new Group c new Family or d new Category. This method allows complete flexibility to search new categories while keeping previously chosen products already selected for purchase in a shopping cart in Frame VI.

By completing the drill down process enabled by the LSCSP the Buyer at end selects a Category of products to view. The following section describes the operation of providing in Frame V views of those selected products.

Having made use of the Locale Specific Category Selection Panel to select a Category of products to view the Buyer receives a Web page displaying a number of products their descriptions images prices and links for getting more information about a product. Among the Relational Database Tables in the Database SQL Server Platform is a table named P that contains product information in various locale language specific versions. Product information that is available for display is stored in product records in relational database table P. Those records found in different versions for all locales served by the Global Store include the following fields 

Products selected for viewing are presented in a manner to accommodate the Buyer s language and culture. Metaphorically speaking on one floor of the Global Store a floor designed for service to English speaking Buyers the Buyer might see a Web page display of Women s Jackets with descriptions in English while a German speaking Buyer would see on another floor of the Store the same products but labeled Damenjacken with descriptions in German.

The product database is implemented on an SQL server. Access to data occurs when a calling process from the Internet server passes Tokens for the Locale of a Buyer and the product Category selected by the Buyer. The SQL Server includes a Named Stored SQL Procedure Category to receive calls from the Information Server in response to Buyers requests from around the globe in a variety of locales having different languages. The Category Stored SQL Procedure receives a call and associated Tokens for locale LCID and product Category Node4ID . These Tokens are used in all locales on Referral Websites around the globe. All incoming requests flow through the same server side script with the same script call to the same Category Stored SQL Procedure. In turn the Category Stored SQL Procedure accesses the same product table for product descriptions.

Technical Note The same general method is used by the server to send a display of product information to the Buyer as was used in responding to the prior request that caused menus to be displayed in the Locale Specific Category Selection Panel. Because a description of that method was provided in detail in the prior section the description here of providing a display of product information does not need to be as technically detailed.

A request to display product information comes from using a Post method of an HTML FORM submitted HTTP request containing a URI and hidden variables Tokens for LCID and Node4ID values . The request submission references in the URI an appropriate .asp file name. Specifically the URI contains references to a Disp.asp a server side ASP script to be parsed and b the locale specific folder on the server where the needed version of Disp.asp can be found. The ISAPI extracts the Disp.asp file name from the URI and passes it to Asp.dll resident in IIS for parsing using the referenced Disp.asp script found in its URI referenced server folder. A Disp.asp version in a given locale specific folder is specifically designed to process a Buyer s request function and to provide the server response for that Buyer s locale. For example Disp.asp in folder 1031 is a script for locale 103 1 that is different from Disp.asp in server folder 1041 that is a script for locale 1041. A localized Disp.asp script produces localized HTML output that will be rendered by a Buyer s Browser. Preliminary to all that however is retrieval of product information from the database. Steps that reach that goal are detailed below 

1 A database table of significance for accessing product information is the Product Category assignment table PRODCAT . This table has a product identifier value in one key field ProdID and a Category identifier value Node4ID in a second key field for each record. This table therefore accommodates a many to many relationship between products and categories a product among many products may be related to more than one category among many categories. Use of this table when joined with the Product Table P facilitates selection of all the products in a Category that are requested to be displayed.

2 Category Stored Procedure receives an ADO call from the ASP script Disp.asp with the LCID and Node4ID parameter values. The Category Stored Procedure includes an SQL statement that selects product information by using

a P the table containing product information records for all products with that information repeated in multiple records to accommodate different versions for different locales and

b PRODCAT the Product Category assignment table where products are shown in different records to be assigned to different Categories. The PRODCAT junction has fields for Node4ID and ProdID. In different records ProdID appears with one of the Node4ID values thus indicating in that record one of the Categories to which a product has been assigned.

When P and PRODCAT are joined records are available from the joined table that represent all the versions of product information of a product related to all of the Categories one or more to which a product has been assigned.

Shown below is the stored SQL procedure that selects product information into a Recordset using SQL statements with

b Where conditions using the SeILCID an LCID value of a selected locale and SelNode4ID a Category identifier value selected when a Buyer selected a Category 

d Where conditions to filter out records when the current system date DATE falls outside of the dates when a version of product information is set to be available i.e. on or after a STARTDATE and before a STOPDATE .

 In the example of an SQL SELECT statement that follows an is substituted as a wild card indicator for the names of fields of product information. This substitution is made in the interest of brevity and clarity because of the large number of product information fields that would otherwise need to be listed. 

3 The locale specific ASP script Disp.asp invokes a VBScript procedure that includes an ADO call statement to the above described Category Stored Procedure using LCID and Node4ID Tokens as system parameters. The Category Stored Procedure selects product description information from relational database table P in the database and a product Recordset is generated. That is the Category Stored Procedure returns locale specific versions of product descriptions for products assigned to the Category chosen by the Buyer from the menu in Frame IV. The product Recordset is stored in a temporary database using Transact SQL statements of the Windows 2000 SQL Server RTM . These stored procedures are pre compiled therefore greatly improving the efficiency of the database execution times. 

Thereafter the Recordset is returned to Disp.asp from the calling ADO script that initiated the Category Stored Procedure. Disp.asp maps the information received into a localized server script selected to produce HTML output using VBScript write statements as parsed by Asp.dll. The prepared HTML response includes a written header containing HTML elements that are necessary for the response and the locale.

Product information is transmitted to the Buyer in a Product Display Web Page in Frame V in a version that is compatible with the Buyer s language locale in UTF 8 encoding. The computer screen continues to display in four frames the still functional Product Category Selection Panel of the prior step. The Buyer when selecting products to view may restart the selection process at any level of the taxonomy. Therefore the computer screen continues to display a four frames allowing the Buyer to request product views and b a fifth frame displaying products. Technical Note Disp.asp provides output to populate Frame V. Frame V holds nested HTML tables composed of individual Cells for pertinent fields of a product record in the Recordset. A VBScript procedure in Disp.asp writes HTML output including nested table HTML. This run time server process uses available technology to bind content of an individual product record s field into its prescribed HTML Cell.

A cursor is used by the enabling VBScript procedure in Disp.inc to navigate in sequential manner all records in the Recordset and to process each product description in an identical fashion as the cursor is advanced from record to record. For each record in a Recordset product information is merged field by field into field specific scripts that together produce an HTML Strip. 

A Strip is defined as all of the HTML code written to complete the cells for the display of a single product. That code represents both information from the database and certain invariant locale specific content that appears in each display. For example each group of nested cells contains one cell that is invariantly coded with text that prompts a Buyer to add the product to a shopping cart. In English that prompt invariantly reads Purchase this Item. 

Each Strip comprises a few lines of HTML text one Strip for each product and in the sequence of the Recordset. A complete page of nested tables for the product description Strips has a constant format from product to product in the HTML page containing the entire display for the Category chosen by a Buyer. A vertical scroll bar in the target frame Frame V enables view of numerous products.

Each Product Strip for the Product Display in Frame V includes HTML Cells for the Following a MnfURLThumb Thumbnail graphic product picture b ProdTitle Product Title c ProdDscr Product Description d Price e Colorattr Drop Down menu for color if applicable f Sizeattr Drop Down Menu for Size if applicable g MfrURL URL to manufacturer s product information Web page if available and h ShipDays for future delivery of custom manufactured items if applicable .

In operation a Buyer a selects the color and or size from a drop down menu which serves to record the selected color size value in a Client side JScript variable and b checks the Purchase this Item to transfer the product to an Open Frame Interactive Shopping Cart described below. Each product s checkbox triggers a JScript form submission process that initiates transfer of the product information including the selected Color and or Size option to an Open Frame Interactive Shopping Cart for display in Frame VI.

When the Buyer clicks on Purchase this Item that event initiates further interactive communications with the Global Store and those interactions are described in detail in subsequent sections. In this section however some attention is given to certain in the background accounting operations that are initiated at the time a product is selected for purchase. All information in all tables is in Unicode.

First a unique BuyerID value is created and assigned to the Buyer. That value is placed in a new record in a Customer Table where the key field is BuyerID. Other information about the Buyer is added to the Buyer Table as it becomes available.

Second a unique transaction identifier TransID value is assigned in a new record in a Transaction Table during a session in which a Buyer first selects a product for purchase. At the same time an ItemID value is also created and placed in another field of the same record. Together TransID and ItemID constitute a unique primary key for the table. The TransID value in conjunction with the ItemID value allows the system to track a specific purchase of a specific product by a Buyer. The same BuyerID value that was assigned in the Customer Table above also is added to the Transaction Table to identify the Buyer and allow ready access to Customer Table information. Fields called Color and Size contain when appropriate attributes of Color and Size as selected by the Buyer.

Third a code value is entered in a status field in the Transaction Table to provide current information about the latest event in the purchase process the transaction. Every product in a transaction is subject to this status monitoring process. The status field is labeled StatID and values in that field include numerical codes to signify one of the following transaction status events 

Fourth a Payment Table contains records of the payment details for each transaction. A unique PayID value is assigned to a primary key for each record. Other fields include TransID and fields to identify the payment processing service total bill in the Fulfillment Center s currency and total bill in the Buyer s currency including tax and costs for options in the case of a custom order .

Technical Note A unique TransID value is created and placed in a new record in a Transaction Table in the database and at the same time an ItemID value unique for the session also is created and placed in another field of the same record. Together ProdID and ItemID constitute a unique primary key in the Transaction Table for each product s purchase. That enables a customer support system described below to track a plurality of purchases of individual products where those purchases are part of a transaction taking place in the same session. The Transaction Table is updated step by step until after each purchased product has been successfully delivered and settlements have been made with the Manufacturer and the Referral Website.

Selected values indicating attributes of Color and Size when appropriate are placed in fields called Color and Size in the Transaction Table at the time a product is selected for purchase. The Transaction Table also has foreign key fields that as those fields are updated provide ready access to details from Buyer Product Transaction Total Payment Escrow Manufacturer Status Fulfillment Tax Settlement Carrier Color Size Option and Bulk tables.

Transaction Table records include a TransID b ItemID c BuyerID d ProdID e OptionID f BulkID g Number of Products purchased. h Product Title i Total Shipping Weight for the product purchased Metric j Total Shipping Weight of the product purchased US k Size I Color k Product Price in Buyer s currency l Product Price in Fulfillment Center s currency m StatID n Shipping Cost in Buyer s currency o Shipping Cost in Fulfillment Center s currency p Selected Carrier s Service Category e.g. Two Day Air q Carrier s Tracking Number r PayID s Carrier s service level t Tax in Buyer s currency u Product Purchase Total currency in Fulfillment Center s locale v Product Purchase Total currency in Fulfillment Center s locale w Buyer s LCID x Fulfillment Center s LCID y SettleID z Manufacturer s product identifier and OpOrder1 OpOrder2 . . . OpOrder6 arbitrarily making available up to six fields to records choices for options when a product is available for custom order and aa Discount a percentage for volume discount .

The Buyer s Product Purchase Total includes Option Total if any Tax and shipping cost in the Buyer s currency based on the Buyer s locale. If a Bulk purchase is made a discount is applied using the discount determined for the number of products purchased. The Manufacturer s Product Purchase Total is the same amount expressed in the currency of the Manufacturer s locale without the Tax. Tax is added at time of checkout using Checkout.asp described below.

Records in the relational Transaction Table can be joined to records in other tables using Transaction Table foreign key fields that are common to primary keys of other tables. Tables with such fields that common with fields in the Transaction Table are as follow Customer BuyerID Payment PayID Escrow EscrowID Settlement SettleID Shipment ShipID Manufacturer MnfrID Fulfillment Center FulfillID Carrier CarrierID Status Code StatID Color ColorID Size SizeID Option OptionID Bulk BulkID Transaction Total TransID and Product ProdID and LCID . Information required from records in those tables can be related to a specific purchase by using a joins between the Transaction Table and the other tables and b an SQL statement to query Transaction Table records using for example Where conditions to identify the purchase of a particular product ItemID during a particular shopping session TransID . Thereby very complete and detailed information is readily available about a product its purchase and its purchaser.

Each change to a StatID value in a Transaction record is recorded as a new record in a Status Table including the date time for the change in status. Thus a permanent history of changes is kept for research and customer service needs. A Status Code identifier StatID value is language neutral. A textual description of a code is provided in another table Status Name Table which also provides a descriptive name of the code in different language versions for different locales. The Status Name Table has records that include fields for StatID Status Code Name Status Description and an LCID value of a locale. Thus the meaning of a StatID value is defined in the Status Name Table in various languages.

In the above section describing product displays it was explained that each individual product Strip display in Frame V consists of nested HTML cells. One of those cells contains an HTML Form one Form per product that enables selection of a ProdID value when a checkbox in the Product Strip labeled Purchase this Item is checked. An ASP script name ShipTo.asp is contained in the URI attribute of the Form s Post method.

Technical Note Purchase this Item is rendered in locale specific National Language as are all other similar text descriptions discussed here. This is possible because Disp.asp has many locale specific versions. Disp.asp and all of the other scripts corresponding to Buyer s requests serve Web pages that exist in multiple versions. They are all organized to be contained in and referenced by server folders that are named with specific LCID values associated with specific locales.

Form submission is aided by a Client side JScript upon the event of checking of the checkbox for Purchase this Item. Submission via an HTTP Post method sends to the IIS Server the URI and hidden variable values that identify the product selected by the Buyer for purchase ProdID ColorID SizeID BulkID OptionID and Discount. As described above those values were selected prior to the submission and were stored where appropriate in a Client JScript for that purpose.

The IIS Server s ISAPI extracts the file name ShipTo.asp from the URI of the HTTP Form submission and passes ShipTo.asp to ASP.dll for parsing. The URI includes the locale specific folder address from which ShipTo.asp is obtained. The first step is to obtain Form submitted product information from the Request.Form Collection and establish as session variables OptionID and BulkID. The second step of ShipTo.asp is to update the Transaction Table with a new record that reflects the selection of a product for purchase including Color and Size selections as appropriate.

Third ShipTo.asp sends a locale specific HTML Web page that occupies Frame V replacing the display of products that were in Frame V. ShipTo.asp caches the contents of Frame V display so that the display can be presented again should the Buyer later choose to return to shopping. The new Web page includes a ShipTo Data Entry Form page that is sent to the Buyer s Browser to collect shipping information that includes a quantity of an ordered Product ProdNo b ShipTo Address C ShipTo City d ShipTo State Province e ShipTo Country and f ShipTo Postal Code.

The new contents of Frame V also include explanatory text that prompts the Buyer to enter information to specify a destination where the purchased product is to be sent. Associated text in the Web page explains that destination information is needed to arrive at a total cost including shipping charges.

Technical Note Drop down menu choices sequentially offered are used as much as possible in collecting destination information. That approach allows standardization of the information into codes for more accurate processing than would be possible with non coded information.

A destination Country is selected by the Buyer via a drop down menu. Following selection of a country the Buyer is next presented with a drop down menu list of States Provinces for the Country selected. This process is similar to that described for the Category Selection Panel above. The Buyer then fills in blanks for the number of products street address city and postal code. A Client side JScript checks for empty fields upon submission. An auxiliary service is used to check for the accuracy of an address when available. In the event of an error an error message is sent that specifies the inaccuracy.

The same routine of asking for a shipping destination is repeated each time the Buyer selects another product for purchase. That task is neither time consuming nor onerously repetitive for the Buyer the same shipping destination is assumed and pre entered. A drop down menu for selecting a country is supplied in case of a new destination. Only when the shipping destination changes from one purchase to another does shipping information need to be entered more than once by the Buyer. The Buyer is always required to enter the number of products being ordered. All the above information is added to appropriately named fields in the transaction record in the Transaction Table described above.

Each product purchased during a session may have a separate ShipTo address. The ShipTo address is used to determine the shipping cost for delivery by a carrier the Carrier specified by CarrierID in the locale specific Product record.

Filling out the ShipTo form and submitting it a updates the transaction record in the Transaction Table with ShipTo information and b executes a statement that invokes an associated server side script Carrier.asp. As Carrier.asp is parsed by Asp.dll destination information is used to help determine shipping costs for different grades of delivery service to the Buyer s ShipTo destination from a manufacturer s Fulfillment Center location. That location is the shipping point of origin for the manufacturer s product fulfillment.

Within Carrier.asp a VBScript statement branches to an Include directive. Branching to a specific directive is determined by the value of CarrierID that is found in the locale specific version of a product record. That CarrierID value is specific to the Carrier nominated to be the carrier to deliver the product to Buyers in the locale of the Buyer. The Include directive to which the VBScript statement branches initiates parsing of a version of an Include script Carrier.inc. Each version of Carrier.inc is tailored for a specific carrier CarrierID and a specific Buyer s locale LCID . Each Carrier.inc version automatically implements an interfacing method provided by a carrier e.g. FedEx or UPS necessary to access that carrier s Web based Shipping Rate Quotation Service SRQS . Carrier.inc provides shipping point of origin ShipFrom information destination ShipTo information number of products and weight to the specified SRQS as needed to have a quotation returned. An SRQS then returns the costs for different delivery service grades. Costs are determined in the currency of the Fulfillment Center s locale by the SRQS. The cost to the buyer in the buyer s locale is determined by looking up the current exchange rate in a Currency Ratio table maintained daily on the Global Store. The Carrier.inc script invoked from within Carrier.asp generates and sends to Frame V a presentation with information about grades of service e.g. ground and air from a specific carrier and costs for those service options. That information is accessed from the carrier s Website where shipping rate quotations are made called here a Shipping Rate Quotation Service SRQS .

Upon receipt of the informational response from the carrier s SRQS Carrier.inc prepares and sends a Delivery Option Display Form to Frame V to display a quoted cost for each delivery service alternative. A Buyer selects a desired delivery service alternative by checking a checkbox.

Technical Note A description including price quote of each delivery alternative is displayed by employing HTML tables containing cells. Each description sent to Frame V includes the following additional information a item Title b Price of the item each and c quantity ordered ProdNo . Prices are displayed is in the currency of the buyer.

By checking a checkbox adjacent to a preferred grade of service a Buyer selects one of the carrier s delivery service alternatives. Each alternative is accompanied by a checkbox that may be checked to select the desired alternative. A JScript procedure monitors the alternative boxes and upon a checked event initiates an HTML Form submission. That submission includes a URI that contain Cart.asp as a script name and also the address of a locale specific folder in which Cart.asp is placed.

By checking a checkbox the Buyer selects a grade of service option for delivery of the purchased product. Upon the event of the Buyer selecting a desired option for delivery Cart.asp is invoked via the familiar Form submission Post method. Cart.asp a updates the transaction record in the Transaction Table to reflect the Buyer s choice of delivery service and b prepares and sends an Open Frame Interactive Shopping Cart OFISC display for Frame VI. That display using information obtained from the Transaction Table contains all of the products selected for purchase by the Buyer during the session started many pages ago at a Referral Website.

The latest product selection is added to the top of the display. The OFISC display in Frame VI is vertically scrollable to enable viewing previously selected products. Frame VI occupies approximately of the display space used for Frame V and is located below Frame V.

Cart.asp also sends an informational message to Frame V saying The Total Cost for Your Selected Item Including Shipping Is Shown in the Panel Below. Also visible in Frame V at the bottom is a navigational checkbox labeled Return to Shopping. 

When the Buyer looks in the Panel Below the Buyer sees in the OFISC a list of products that have been selected for purchase the latest selection at the top of the list. Those listings also show purchase quantity size and color where appropriate and total cost. Total cost includes costs for options if applicable. Selection of options is described in a later section. Also described in a later section are Bulk purchases and discounts for bulk wholesale purchases.

At this point the Buyer has the option to return to shopping or to proceed to checkout. If the Buyer chooses to return to shopping Frame V is restored from cache to again render the same product display information that was seen by the Buyer prior to the Buyer having clicked on Purchase this Item. Should the Buyer return to shopping the product just selected to be purchased would remain visible in the OFISC in Frame VI at the bottom of the screen.

Upon the Buyer s Checking the Return to Shopping Checkbox in Frame V with text rendered in the Buyer s National Language Restore.asp provides the function of resending the cached Products Display to Frame V. If the Buyer does not choose to return to shopping the other alternative is to go to Checkout. That option is enabled by a checkbox visible in the OFISC. The checkbox is labeled Go to Checkout as stated in the Buyer s National language.

Technical Note Restore.asp is invoked an HTML Form based submission using the Post method causing the server to invoke the script named Restore.asp. The submission is made when a Buyer checks a checkbox in Frame V labeled Return to Shopping. This script has the sole function of restoring the cached Product Display to Frame V.

Checking the Go to Checkout checkbox on the OFISC in Frame VI triggers an event monitored by Client JScript procedure to initiate an HTML Form submission using the Post method that sends to the server an HTTP Request including a URI. The URI includes a locale specific folder address where the script file InfoState.asp is to be found. That script initiates the first step in the checkout process.

Before proceeding to a description of the checkout process it is necessary to describe below two exceptions to the above procedure in steps taken to add a product to the OFISC. Those exception occur in the event that a selected product is a custom manufactured or b available in wholesale quantities i.e. business to business commerce.

Custom ordering is important to e commerce because it allows manufacturers e.g. Dell RTM to provide what customers want while keeping inventories very low. That capability enables an important transition from push marketing to pull marketing.

For the Global store to enable purchasing of custom ordered products an Options step is used that is parallel to the ShipTo procedure described in the above section. Even while this parallel step obtains information about a Buyer s options choices when making purchases of custom ordered products this step also obtains ShipTo information as well. A branch to an interactive Web page allows the Buyer to select among custom features of the product selected for purchase and also to obtain ShipTo information. Branching to that page is controlled by the presence of a particular value in the OptionID field of a Product Record. Specifically a 1 in that field causes a VBScript statement in ShipTo.asp to branch to an Execute statement that invokes Custom.asp script.

Custom.asp writes and sends to the Buyer s Browser a locale specific Web page that obtains ShipTo information and Option information. The Web page generated invokes a script that sets all of the information received from this form into session variables.

The following are fields required to be in Product Table records to provide option choices. The information in those fields is locale specific. It is locale specific in the same manner as other information about products that appeared in product display Web pages as described above. Furthermore prices are adjusted in the same manner. Six was arbitrarily picked here only for purposes of exposition as the maximum number of option choices that would be available for any one product. These fields are used to access and display option information 

The Product table contains locale specific records that each include up to six locale specific fields that contain triplets of information Names Descriptions and Prices of Options. Custom.asp is Buyer s locale specific. It creates and sends to the Buyer s Browser a Web page with the following features and functions 

In the Global Store for a product to be purchased in wholesale quantities a Bulk step is used that is parallel to the ShipTo procedure described in the above section. For a product that is sold for discounts in quantity that step involves branching away temporarily to present another interactive Web page a page that allows a Buyer to determine the number of products to order. Even while this parallel step obtains information about the quantity of a product that the Buyer chooses to purchase at wholesale prices this step also obtains ShipTo information as well.

Branching to that page is controlled by the presence of a particular value in the BulkID field of a Product Record. Specifically a 1 in that field causes a VBScript statement in ShipTo.asp to branch to an Execute statement that invokes Bulk.asp script. Bulk.asp presents an array of up to eight levels of discounts where both the discount and the number of products required to qualify for the given discount is provided. Information to display on the Web page come from a Bulk Table includes 

Bulk.asp. The Bulk.asp script writes and sends to the Buyers Browser a locale specific Web page that includes obtaining the ShipTo information and quantity Information. The Web page generated invokes a script that sets all of the information received from this form into session variables.

Bulk.asp is Buyer s locale specific. It creates and sends to the Buyer s Browser a Web page with the following features and functions 

When the Buyer clicks on the Go to Checkout checkbox the Buyer s screen no longer contains any of the frames described above. At this point the Buyer begins to see Web pages that are designed to accomplish the following goals 

While accomplishing the above stated goals other stated goals are pursued to make checkout procedures as quick clear and generally Buyer friendly as possible. To accomplish these goals certain practices and guidelines are followed 

The internationalization technology to implement checkout procedures across barriers of languages cultures and nations is not well known. Therefore those procedures are described in some detail below. It should be understood that those procedures in all cases implement not only internationalization goals but also all of the Buyer friendly practices and guidelines detailed above. The art needed to implement the Buyer friendly practices and guidelines is conventional and well known thereby needing no further elaboration. Though those procedures are not elaborated upon they are manifest throughout the checkout process.

Clicking on Go to Checkout invokes the first of a series of locale specific scripts that provide interactive Web pages during the checkout process. The same method is employed here are has been described extensively in prior sections the method of using locale specific scripts of the same name but in different versions and placing those versions in folders that include LCID values in the folders addresses.

InfoState.asp is the first of two scripts to obtain Customer Information. InfoState.asp is invoked in response to the Buyer clicking on Go to Checkout. InfoState.asp collects a the Buyer s name and b the Buyer s State Province from a drop down menu. The Buyer can correct the country assumed by the Buyer s LCID value collected in a prior step if it has been wrongly assumed. Should the Buyer not be in the assumed country based on the locale of the Referral Website the Web page delivered allows the Buyer to correct the assumption. In that case the Buyer simply chooses to enter the correct country in an alternate menu presented on the page. When that option is taken the submission leads to a corrected InfoState page absent the country menu.

The second script Infocity.asp is invoked upon Form Post submission the first one InfoState. InfoCity.asp is a script that presents choices of City in a drop down menu as Children of the State Province specified in the prior step. This method avoids problems in delivery due to buyer s entering misspellings. Locale specific names for cities states and provinces are obtained from LCID specific Place Name Tables. International standards for addressing are used.

The technology used for the interactive Web pages in this section is familiar from prior descriptions and need only be described in outline.

In operation Buyer s choosing a State Province in the HTML menu triggers an HTML Form Post submission. InfoCity.asp script is obtained by the server from the locale specific folder containing a locale specific version of the InfoCity.asp script. InfoCity.asp presents choices for City in a drop down menu as Children of the State Province selected in the prior menu. Steps are as follow 

In operation the Buyer s clicking on a City in an HTML menu presented to Buyer s Browser in full screen triggers an HTML Form submission using Post method. Doing so sends an HTTP Request for a Buyer s approval Form via a Form Post Submission containing the Approval.asp script name and the locale specific folder address in which to obtain a locale specific version of the Approval.asp script. Approval.asp is a script to obtain a Buyer s approval of a transaction. Steps are as follow 

In operation the Buyer s checking Approved results in an HTML menu being presented to the Buyer by Approval.asp script. A JScript procedure monitors an associated event and which triggers an HTML Form submission using Post method sending an HTTP Checkout Request. The Checkout.asp request is received by the server and invokes from the locale specific folder Checkout.asp script. Checkout.asp script performs the following steps 

When a product is a digital product like a book Checkout.asp invokes a method specific download for electronic item s . Electronic downloads are made from resident inventory using an Include ASP Script. That script is invoked by using an Include directive to a actuate a resident process appropriate for the kind electronic sale video audio etc. and b create an authorization for accounting purposes with the vendor. Transfer of the product purchased completes the transaction TransID ProdID triggering a change to a delivered status for the Status Code in the Status Code Record for the item. This process invokes a Form Post submission to a Deliver.asp script invoked by the server receiving the request. Deliver.asp obtains Request.Form collection to obtain the the status of the results of the electronic download. Deliver.asp the posts status to the Status Change Table.

Order fulfillment of physical items is made by each product s manufacturer. A Manufacturer s Order includes all products in the transaction from that manufacturer. A method to notify a manufacturer that a product has been purchase and needs to be shipped is described in the following section.

Status Code triggers invoke automated HTML encoded e mail. An event that creates a new record in the Status Change Table also may trigger the sending of an informative email notification to a Buyer or manufacturer. The email is generated in a format and language suitable to the recipient s locale. In the event of a status code value for StatID in the Transaction Table changing a new record is generated in the Status Change Table to record the change and the date and time of the change using a constant format throughout all locales. As a specified code value changes a monitoring Database procedure triggers a specific response. For instance a status code change that shows a completed sale transaction triggers a notification of Confirmation of Purchase to be sent to a Buyer. At the same time a Notification of Purchase is e mailed to each manufacturer that notification limited to the product s purchased from that specific manufacturer.

Technical Note The monitoring procedure referred to above uses a stored SQL procedure that is automatically triggered on a timed maintenance by an ADO call from a Web server script. The stored SQL procedure returns a Recordset to the server script. That Record set is composed of pertinent records from the Status Change Table records that were not collected since the last ADO call and which also meet other criteria. Those other criteria involve the values found in the StatID field for the recent records. The stored procedure returns those records having values that will trigger certain responses from the server script. Pertinent here are those responses wherein a locale specific email message is sent to either the Buyer or manufacturer to inform the recipient of a salient status change. One such change would be the completion of a purchase.

Technical Note A Buyer receives an email upon the event in the database that a Transaction Record in a Transaction Change Table shows a changed status for a transaction. An SQL procedure monitors changes in status of every transaction. A procedure generates an e mail to send to a Buyer the e mail address having been collected as part of the checkout process. The script that generates the content of the e mail uses a VBScript procedure s LCID specific E mail.inc process the same process as described above for the different Frames in the Locale Specific Category Selection Panel. Here where a multitude of these Includes are described they are specific for a the buyer s locale b the Status Code event that changes in the database and

 c the SQL procedure designed to monitor changes in the specific Status Code that triggers the e mail response.

An LCID specific Include server script obtains the appropriate identifiers and other information to be bound into HTML for inclusion into an e mail body. For example given that a Status Code for a transaction changes to show acceptance of a Buyer s payment by a Payment Gateway and an e mailed Confirmation of Purchase is required a process is triggered for

Methods to generate proper HTML coded content in all locales have been described in detail in previous sections. For example UTF 8 is used as the character set for encoding information. Because e mail accommodates HTML the same methods do not need to be repeated here.

Email may be processed to generate automatic responses like for example an email response in return a well known technology. That is done at the Global Store in response to Buyer s email messages a way of immediate confirming that their email has arrived and that a response will be given shortly to their specific concern. In that case the Buyer s email is added to the database to be processed by Customer Service Representatives.

Another response would be an automatic email message to a Buyer when an email notification came from a manufacturer that a purchased product had been shipped. That kind of incoming email is used in the Global Store to update the Transaction Table monitor service to Buyers and trigger appropriate email messages to Buyers.

Technical Note Automatic responses to incoming messages can be most useful when the incoming message is in a standard format. Email from manufactures comes in a specified format to a specified account in the Email Exchange Server Platform 1560. Use of those communication standards allows automatic update when for example a message arrives documenting the shipment of a purchased product. That kind of email is process by a monitoring script which updates StatID information in the

Transaction Record and in the Status Change Table. That record is accessed by using TransID and ItemID from the email a standard for communications that is part of the email format specified for manufacturer s notifications.

Following a purchase of a product a Buyer is able to view a Personalized Customer Serve Web Page PCSWP . The Buyer is provided with a URL for the page sent in an HTML version email that is automatically sent following a status code change signaling a completed purchase.

The PCSWP delivers individualized customer service information. The purpose of the PCSWP is to allow Buyers to find comprehensive customer service information at one easily accessed location. It is dynamically generated run time by a Buyer s clicking on a hyperlink that includes a server side script s file name. The hyperlink is included in the email described above.

Information is presented in two frames Frame I and Frame II within a Frameset. The left frame Frame I consists of a Directory of customer information services. Each service in the Directory consists of an embedded HTML form that when selected submits an HTTP Post request to the server. Each request specifies a server script that generates a locale specific response that is sent to the Frame I target. The LCID value needed to obtain a locale specific response from the server script is obtained from a Customer s record.

The localized Frameset is sent to the Buyer to display all of the Customer Information Services content described below. It consists of the two open frames Frames I and II. The left frame Frame 1 comprises about 20 of the screen. The right frame Frame II comprises the rest. Frame I which contains a localized Directory of services scrolls top to bottom and each Directory item provides a localized Form submission for a Web page to be delivered to the larger Frame II. Each selectable item in the Directory uses a localized Include ASP Script to generate content targeted to Frame II.

The methodology used for implementation of a Frameset and server scripts needed to generate and send Web pages in each locale has been described in prior sections. For example using LCID specific server side Includes containing localized ASP scripts to produce frame designated results are technical methods already amply described before and they need not be repeated here.

Information described with a title in Frame I and used selectively to populate Frame II includes the following a Current Order Status of products including delivery b hotlinks to connect with a Carrier s Parcel Tracking Service and automatically obtain Parcel Status from the Carrier for each parcel c Return Policies and Procedures d Past Transactions of prior purchases e Product Information Updates t Global Directory of local product specific Repair Centers that are searchable for products purchased g Directory of Customer Service Contacts E mail addresses phone numbers hotlinked Internet Telephony addresses etc. h Global Store Directory i status of products that have been ordered for custom manufacture j links to products accessories and services that are related to a purchase product and that the Buyer may wish to purchase and k links to any customer retention programs of the Global Store in which the Buyer participates or may wish to .

Most of the above content is self explanatory. Additional technical detail is provided as follows to show how dynamic content specific Web pages are used to populate Frame II.

Technical Note Current Order Status is delivered to Frame II in a locale specific Web page produced by a server side Buyer s LCID specific Include ASP script. That script provides an HTML bound tabular presentation of all products involving outstanding deliveries for all transactions. The ASP script automatically obtains the status in tabular form for each undelivered product. The status is provided for each product in the table using information from the Manufacturer s Carrier. Results of embedded parcel tracking results are used to update the product s status code.

A link on the Personalized Customer Service Web Page in the language of the Buyer provides the hotlink to the Carrier s parcel tracking service. The hotlink uses an embedded Tracking Number to access the Carrier s parcel tracking status page for a subject parcel. The Tracking Number is conveyed automatically to the Carrier s traffic service. This functionality is all transparent from the Buyer s PCSWP. 

A locale specific Past Transactions Web page produced by a server side LCID specific Include ASP script provides an HTML bound tabular presentation of all product orders found to have a delivered status in an Order Status Code table. Links are provided to additional information for each product as available.

A Buyer may check the status of products ordered for custom manufacture but not yet shipped. That information is sent in a locale specific Web page produced by a server side LCID specific Include ASP script to provide an HTML bound tabular presentation of all products found to have been ordered for manufacture but not yet shipped.

An Escrow process is a part of the purchase transaction for all purchases. The Global Store holds each payment in escrow until the buyer receives the shipment. The Buyer is granted three days after delivery to inspect the product and to initiate a return process if the product is unsatisfactory.

After funds are collected from during the purchase process they placed in a special escrow account at the Global Store pending expiration of the three day period for inspection.

The Global Store offers to the buyer the escrow process to help Buyers be more comfortable in making purchases internationally. The escrow process is facilitated by collection and monitoring of the following data a assigned escrow number b Transaction ID c Carrier ID d Carrier Tracking number and e Payment Gateway Approval.

A Settlement process is conducted periodically whereby manufacturers are credited with net receipts for a manufacturer s product after a product is delivered and after there is no outstanding or open escrow. Returns are handled on an exception basis. 

The Global Store debits from gross receipts for each transaction the commissions owed to the Referral Website and to the Global Store. The Manufacturer is reimbursed for shipping in the amount collected from a Buyer.

For a Manufacturer s account at the Global Store accounting is conducted in the language specified by the manufacturer and duplicate entries in the books of the Global Store are conducted in English. Settlement feeds into the Accounts Payable. After status code changes reflect satisfactory delivery of a product payments are made by Electronic Funds Transfer from Global Store accounts to Manufacturers and the Referral Websites.

An assumption is made that the funds received from buyer s purchase are automatically converted on the day of the buyer s purchase at the current exchange rate.

