---

title: Continuous disreefing apparatus for parachute
abstract: A continuous disreefing apparatus has a sleeve that has a diameter and is made from a flexible, resilient material that allows the sleeve to diametrically contract when the sleeve is under tension and to diametrically relax when such tension is substantially reduced or removed. The sleeve has a portion thereof configured for connection to a parachute suspension line. The continuous disreefing apparatus includes a reefing line that extends through the sleeve and is arranged for movement through the sleeve wherein the rate at which the reefing line moves through the sleeve is controlled by the amount of tension on the sleeve.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07416158&OS=07416158&RS=07416158
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07416158
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050921
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by the U.S. Government for Governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon.

The present invention generally relates to a continuous disreefing apparatus for use with parachutes.

Military cargo parachute systems that are used for heavy cargo delivery typically use large diameter parachutes which are reefed to slow their opening thereby reducing the forces on the entire system. Reefing cargo parachutes typically require the use of expensive pyrotechnic devices such as cutters configured with specific time delays. Some systems require multiple stages of reefing and multiple pyrotechnic devices. During each stage of reefing the partially opened parachute canopy slows the velocity of the payload. Once the pyrotechnic device fires the canopy will open to the next reefing stage or open fully. When disreefing occurs a peek force is observed producing repeated shocks to the parachute delivery system. Referring to there is shown a prior art reefed parachute. The reefed parachute canopy is reefed by reefing line which is attached to parachute skirt by reefing rings located at the attachment point of each suspension line . Reefing line is sized to allow canopy to initially open to some percent of its full inflated diameter. Canopy will remain in this configuration until pyrotechnic cutter fires and disreefing occurs. This causes canopy to open fully or to the next reefing stage. illustrates the forces on a typical prior art parachute system over time from deployment to full opening without reefing. illustrates the forces on the same type of prior art parachute system with a single stage of reefing. The time at which disreefing occurs is indicated by time TD. illustrates the forces on the same type of prior art parachute system with multi stage reefing. The times at which disreefing occurs are indicated by times TD and TD. The forces illustrated in demonstrate peak and repeated shocks to the parachute system even when reefing is employed.

What is needed is an apparatus that provides continuous smooth and consistent disreefing that causes the parachute canopy to open slowly and reduce or minimize peak and repeated shocks on the parachute system.

The present invention is a continuous disreefing apparatus that provides continuous consistent and smooth disreefing while using any one of load bearing suspension lines of the parachute system to provide sensing of forces in the parachute system. The continuous disreefing apparatus of the present invention does not utilize pyrotechnics electronics or electromechanical systems. The continuous disreefing apparatus of the present invention reduces or minimizes peak and repeated shocks on the parachute system.

In one aspect the present invention is directed to a continuous disreefing apparatus that comprises a sleeve that has a diameter and is made from a flexible resilient material that allows the sleeve to diametrically contract when the sleeve is under tension and to diametrically relax when such tension is substantially reduced or removed. The sleeve has a portion thereof configured for connection to a parachute suspension line. The continuous disreefing apparatus includes a reefing line that extends through the sleeve and is arranged for movement through the sleeve. The rate at which the reefing line moves through the sleeve is determined by the amount of tension on the sleeve. The amount of tension on the sleeve is determined by the magnitude of the force on the parachute suspension line to which the sleeve is connected.

The continuous disreefing apparatus includes a parachute suspension system which has suspension lines and the suspension system including the suspension lines performs as a mechanical sensing device for automatically controlling the function of continuous disreefing.

Other objects features and advantages of the present invention will be apparent from the ensuing description.

Referring to there is shown a parachute system that utilizes continuous disreefing apparatus of the present invention. The parachute system includes canopy suspension lines and reefing rings . Canopy has canopy skirt . Each reefing ring is attached to canopy skirt at the attachment point of a corresponding suspension line . The parachute system also includes reefing line that passes through reefing rings . The ends of reefing line are joined together at junction to form single reefing line .

Referring to there is shown continuous disreefing apparatus of the present invention. Continuous disreefing apparatus comprises sleeve . In a preferred embodiment sleeve is configured as a coarse braided generally cylindrical sleeve. In one embodiment this coarse braided sleeve is fabricated from high strength flexible resilient material that is capable of withstanding high temperatures. Suitable flexible materials include steel wire cable aramid or coated materials that provide the required high strength and high temperature characteristics.

As shown in load is attached to risers and . Risers and are connected to links and respectively. Risers and and riser links and are well known in the art and therefore are not discussed in detail. Continuous disreefing apparatus is connected to link .

Referring to in accordance with the invention one of the suspension lines indicated by reference number A functions as a sensing suspension line for sensing a force i.e. tension. Said sensing suspension line A may be any one of the suspension lines . This characteristic is explained in detail in the ensuing description. Suspension line A is relatively shorter than the other suspension lines and is connected to sleeve in such a manner that tension on suspension line A causes the diameter of sleeve to contract. This contraction produces friction on single reefing line thereby increasing the force needed to pull single reefing line through sleeve . Conversely a relaxation of the tension on suspension line A allows relaxation and expansion of sleeve which decreases the force needed to pull single reefing line through sleeve . In an alternate embodiment reefing line A is integral with sleeve . As shown in loop B is formed at the end of suspension line A. Loop B passes through the upper end of sleeve .

Referring to during packing of the parachute system a predetermined length of single reefing line indicated by reference number A is drawn through sleeve in the direction of riser link so as to establish an initial reefing position. This initial reefing position allows parachute canopy to open to a predetermined initial diameter prior to the start of the continuous disreefing process. When parachute canopy begins to open tension is produced in suspension line A which causes sleeve to contract diametrically. This diametric contraction of sleeve impedes the movement of single reefing line in the direction of canopy . As a result the movement of reefing line is impeded which in turn impedes or retards inflation of canopy . Once the initial deceleration of payload occurs due to the initial predetermined reefed canopy size the tension in suspension line A begins to decrease which causes a decrease or relaxation of the forces that caused the diametrical contraction of sleeve . This relaxation or decrease in these forces allows single reefing line to start sliding through sleeve more rapidly. The greater the rate of deceleration the faster single reefing line slides through sleeve . The rate at which single reefing line slides through sleeve depends on the tension forces created by deceleration of payload transmitted through suspension line A to link . If single reefing line accelerates through sleeve then reefing line is able to quickly move thereby allowing canopy to expand and inflate at an accelerated rate. This in turn increases the deceleration on the entire parachute system and payload thereby causing an increase in the suspension line forces and in particular the forces on suspension line A. This increase in the force or tension on suspension line A diametrically contracts sleeve thereby slowing or impeding the movement of single reefing line through sleeve so as to slow or impede the opening of canopy skirt . This self regulating process is continuous throughout the entire parachute opening process and ends when the parachute canopy is fully opened.

Continuous disreefing apparatus acts essentially as a linear brake device using the force in a suspension line A to control the breaking function of continuous disreefing apparatus . The implementation of the braking function of continuous disreefing apparatus depends on several factors including the length of sleeve the diameter of single reefing line and the friction coefficients between the materials used to fabricate continuous disreefing apparatus and of single reefing line . For example the degree of coarseness in the braid of sleeve is a factor that affects the braking function of continuous disreefing apparatus .

The continuous disreefing apparatus of the present invention takes advantage of the fact that each parachute suspension line carries an equal portion of the peak opening forces during symmetrical parachute openings. Each suspension line acts as a load bearing structural member and mechanical load sensor. Thus as shown in suspension line A functions as a load sensor that controls sleeve to either impede the movement of single reefing line or to allow single reefing line to move toward canopy unimpeded. illustrates the theoretical opening force trace of a parachute that utilizes the continuous disreefing apparatus of the present invention. This force trace shows the parachute system opening with a relatively lower than without the present invention but constant force throughout deceleration until final steady state descent is attained.

The continuous disreefing apparatus includes a parachute suspension system which has suspension lines and the suspension system including the suspension lines performs as a mechanical sensing device for automatically controlling the function of continuous disreefing.

Although the foregoing description has been in terms of a parachute system using one continuous disreefing apparatus of the present invention it is to be understood that a pair of apparatuses can be used wherein one apparatus is connected to riser link as shown and the other apparatus is connected riser link . Such an embodiment is explained in the ensuing description.

Referring to there is shown a parachute system that utilizes more than one continuous disreefing apparatus of the present invention. For purposes of facilitating understanding of this embodiment these continuous disreefing apparatuses are indicated by reference numbers A and B. Each continuous disreefing apparatus A and B is identical in construction to continuous disreefing apparatus described in the foregoing description. Continuous disreefing apparatus A comprises sleeve A which is identical in construction and function to sleeve described in the foregoing description. Similarly continuous disreefing apparatus B comprises sleeve B which is identical in construction and function to sleeve described in the foregoing description. In this configuration the parachute system includes canopy canopy skirt and parachute suspension lines . For purposes of simplicity in describing this embodiment not all suspension lines are shown. This parachute system also includes a reefing line that is divided into two parts reefing line and reefing line . Reefing line is positioned on the front half of parachute canopy and reefing line is positioned on the rear half of parachute canopy . One end of reefing line is joined to one end of reefing line at junction to form single reefing line . Similarly the opposite ends of reefing lines and are joined at junction to form single reefing line . Continuous disreefing apparatus A is connected to link . Riser is connected to and between link and payload . Similarly continuous disreefing apparatus B is connected to link . Riser is connected to and between link and payload . Suspension lines A and B are connected to sleeves A and B respectively in the same manner in which suspension line A is connected to sleeve see . Reefing lines and extend through sleeves A and B respectively in the same manner in which single reefing line extends through sleeve see . Continuous disreefing apparatuses A and B function in exactly the same manner as continuous disreefing apparatus discussed in the foregoing description. Tension on suspension line A causes sleeve A to diametrically contract which impedes movement of single reefing line through sleeve A. As deceleration decreases tension on parachute suspension line A decreases thereby allowing relaxation of the diameter of sleeve A. This relaxation allows single reefing line to move unimpeded in the direction of canopy . Similarly tension on suspension line B causes sleeve B to diametrically contract which impedes movement of single reefing line through sleeve B. As deceleration decreases tension on parachute suspension line B decreases thereby allowing relaxation of the diameter of sleeve B. This relaxation allows reefing line to move unimpeded in the direction of canopy . The movement of single reefing lines and directly affect the movement of reefing lines and which control the rate at which canopy opens.

Although two continuous disreefing apparatuses are shown in it is to be understood that more than two continuous disreefing apparatuses may be required depending on deployment velocities of the parachute altitude canopy design and the mass of the payload.

Referring to there is shown a front view of a rectangular gliding canopy that uses the continuous disreefing apparatus of the present invention indicated by reference number . It is to be understood that continuous disreefing apparatus has the same structure and functions in the same manner as continuous disreefing apparatus shown in . This view is of the opening phase of gliding canopy and shows leading edge as cells inflate. Suspension lines extend downward from canopy . Reefing lines and pass through reefing rings on the lower surface of canopy and are joined together at junction to form single reefing line . Single reefing line extends through continuous disreefing apparatus . Lines or lanyards and connect continuous disreefing apparatus to links and respectively. Risers and are connected between links and respectively and payload . Force in suspension line A is the sensing or control force for continuous disreefing apparatus in the same manner in which suspension line A is the sensing or control force for continuous disreefing apparatus see . Continuous disreefing takes place from the center of canopy toward its tips in a spanwise direction.

Multiple continuous disreefing apparatuses of the present invention can also be used on rectangular flexible wing type gliding parachutes. However the actual number of continuous disreefing apparatuses used depends on the same variables as round parachutes namely deployment velocity altitude canopy design and mass of payload.

The principles preferred embodiments and modes of operation of the present invention have been described in the foregoing specification. This invention should not be construed as limited to the particular forms disclosed as these are to be regarded as illustrative rather than restrictive. Variations and changes may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit of the invention. Accordingly the foregoing detailed description should be considered as exemplary in nature and not limiting the scope and spirit of the invention as set forth in the attached claims.

