---

title: Method of achieving high transduction under tension or compression
abstract: A method of using a magnetostrictive material to achieve a high magnetomechanical coupling factor comprising building an internal anisotropy energy into the magnetostrictive material and applying a tensile or compressive stress to the magnetostrictive material with the built-in internal anisotropy energy. The internal anisotropy energy is built into the magnetostrictive material by annealing the magnetostrictive material under an annealing stress or a suitable magnetic field. For a positive magnetostrictive material, when the annealing stress is compressive, the stress applied to the annealed material under operation is tensile, and when the annealing stress is the tensile, the stress applied to the annealed material under operation is compressive. For a negative magnetostrictive material, when the annealing stress is compressive, the stress applied to the annealed material under operation is tensile, and when the annealing stress is tensile, the stress applied to the annealed material under operation is compressive.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07597010&OS=07597010&RS=07597010
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07597010
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051115
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

1. Field of the Invention The present invention relates to transduction and more specifically to a method of using a magnetostrictive material to achieve high transduction under compression or tension.

Magnetostriction refers to a change in dimensions often the length of a magnetic material with a change in its magnetic state. Often the change in magnetic state results from the application of a magnetic field. By definition a positive magnetic material expands in the direction of the field upon application of a magnetic field and a negative material contracts upon application of a field. Alternatively a change in dimensions of a magnetostrictive material can cause a change in magnetization and thus produce an emf in an adjoining coil. Therefore a positive or negative magnetostrictive material can act as a transducer or motor converting between electrical and mechanical energy or work .

Magnetostrictive materials are commonly operated with a compressive load condition and can sometimes also operate under a tensile load condition. Typically positive magnetostrictive materials are operated under compression. Likewise negative materials work optimally under tension. Note that many of the high power active materials available today are brittle and cannot withstand any substantial amount of tensile stress.

Many of the currently available magnetostrictive materials have only nominal magnetomechanical coupling factors k . The square of the coupling factor k which is a measure of transduction is defined as the fraction of the total energy that is transformed from the magnetic state to the mechanical state. Perfect transduction occurs when k equals 1. For example nickel has a coupling factor of only about 0.3 indicating only about a 10 transformation from the magnetic state to the mechanical state. Therefore most magnetostrictive materials achieve low transduction which affects the efficiency and performance of the transduction device.

The aforementioned problems with the current technologies are overcome by the present invention wherein high transduction is achieved in magnetostrictive materials by building an internal anisotropy energy into the magnetostrictive material and applying a tensile or compressive stress to the magnetostrictive material with the built in internal anisotropy energy. The internal anisotropy energy is built into the magnetostrictive material by annealing the magnetostrictive material under an annealing stress or a suitable magnetic field. For a positive magnetostrictive material when the annealing stress is compressive the stress applied to the annealed material under operation is tensile and when the annealing stress is tensile the stress applied to the annealed material under operation is compressive. For a negative magnetostrictive material when the annealing stress is compressive the stress applied to the annealed material under operation is tensile and when the annealing stress is tensile the stress applied to the annealed material under operation is compressive.

The present invention is useful for providing highly efficient transduction devices actuators and positioners. Possible uses include sonar projectors and sensors stepping motors noise cancellation devices vibration mounts structure realignment devices and ultrasonic cleaners.

In a preferred embodiment a magnetostrictive material is annealed under stress and or magnetic fields to build in an internal anisotropy energy E a stress is applied to the annealed material and under operation a second magnetic field is applied to convert the internal anisotropy energy into useful work or to reconvert the external work into the original internal anisotropy energy.

The internal anisotropy energy can be built into the magnetostrictive material by annealing the material under stress and or annealing while applying a suitable magnetic field. When this internal energy equals the external stress energy during operation the conversion between Eand the external work requires only a small magnetic energy is the saturation magnetostriction and is the externally applied stress . Thus in a preferred embodiment high transduction is achieved by using a magnetostriction material with E under a stress of E . At this stress a small triggering magnetic energy can convert the internal energy introduced by the stress anisotropy into useful work or conversely it can reconvert the external work into the original internal stored energy. This follows from energy minimization of the simple magnetization rotation model. For simplification the model assumes that the material is homogeneous and that there is a single value of built in E. The equation for this model is shown in Equation 1 where k is the coupling factor sis the compliance Mis the magnetization and H is the magnetic field. 1 18 1 

Since s and Mare not vanishing this expression shows that for any field H 0 when E the coupling factor k equals unity i.e. perfect magnetomechanical transduction. Obviously all materials have some inhomogenities and impurities that lead to somewhat lower coupling factors. For example the stress annealing process may result in a distribution of E s.

For a positive magnetostrictive material operated under compression is negative therefore Emust be negative and built in with a tensile load or a suitable magnetic field. Optimum operation is at a compressive stress of E . High coupling could even occur under a very high compressive load the limit of the load being subjected to the limit of the built in E.

For a negative magnetostrictive material such as nickel or a nickel alloy operated under compression Eis built in by annealing under a tensile stress or a suitable magnetic field.

For a positive magnetostrictive material operated under tension Eis built in under compression or a suitable magnetic field.

For a negative magnetostrictive material operated under tension Eis built in under compression or a suitable magnetic field.

Highly textured FeGarods 6.35 mm diameter 50.8 mm long 0.25 2.00 in were annealed under compressive stresses of between 100 and 219 MPa at 600 C. for 20 minutes using the furnace shown in . The furnace consists of an outer vacuum jacket a stainless steel heat shield and a Nichrome heater wound on a ceramic form. Stress was applied by a hand operated hydraulic pump via two alumina rods. Stainless steel centering rings kept the sample in place on the alumina rods. Only a moderate 200 micron vacuum was used. Further details can be found in M. Wun Fogle J. B. Restorff Kitty Leung and A. E. Clark Magnetostriction of Terfenol D Heat Treated Under Compressive Stress IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 35 3817 3819 1999 the entire contents of which are incorporated herein by reference.

The magnetostriction was measured under tensile stress using the apparatus shown in . Soft iron end pieces 6.35 31.8 mm were attached to the sample using 28 threads that were machined into the samples see inset of . Two 4 40 stainless steel threaded rods about 25.4 mm long were used in the load path the rods were flexible enough to allow for some small amount of misalignment. Stress was applied via a spring indicated by the tensioning device shown in . Measurements were started near 0.3 MPa and stopped when the magnetostrictions dropped to about 30 percent of their starting values which usually occurred between 40 and 50 MPa. The magnetic field was supplied by a water cooled temperature controlled coil which also stabilized the temperature of the samples. Strains were measured by two Vishay Micro Measurements WK 06 500GB 350 strain gages mounted on opposite sides of the Galfenol rods the average of the two strain gages was used. A typical measurement set is shown in . At each applied stress the zero field value of the strain was measured and the resulting stress strain curve was plotted. Four samples are shown in . The moduli were determined by fitting the hard and soft modulus regions to a straight line. The coupling coefficient k was determined by Equation 2 where Eis the soft modulus and Eis the hard modulus. 1 2 

Thirteen measurements on eleven samples were made two were annealed twice . Table 1 shows the results of all samples. The annealing conditions E E and k are also shown. Five of the thirteen measurements showed k 0.7. Average values of the hard and soft modulus were E 40 7 and E 72 7. The average value of k was 0.66 0.08.

The above description is that of a preferred embodiment of the invention. Various modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described. Any reference to claim elements in the singular e.g. using the articles a an the or said is not construed as limiting the element to the singular.

