---

title: RSS feed generator
abstract: A really simple syndication (RSS) feed generator provides a user access to a set of data in the form of an RSS feed containing an object. The RSS feed generator allows the user to generate a feed definition using any of a user interface, a web based application programming interface, and an HTTP request. The RSS feed generator uses the feed definition provided by the user to generate the RSS feed and exposes the RSS feed in the form of RSS XML data. The RSS feed generator allows a business system to dynamically update the set of data contained in the RSS feed in a manner that allows a user to perform a plurality of functions on the RSS feed.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08606845&OS=08606845&RS=08606845
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 08606845
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051230
---
Computers and computer software make up a very important part of modern life and business. In today s business environment for any organization to stay competitive it is imperative that it uses computers and software applications to manage data customers employees finances etc. Business processes and workflows are typically managed using multiple forms of communications and organization. One method used by business organizations to exchange data with their partners customers etc. is by use of websites to publish relevant information. Web sites and other types of interactive systems commonly host electronic catalogs for assisting users in locating and evaluating various types of items. The items may for example include physical products journal articles movie and music titles downloadable software services stock assets businesses and or any other type of item that may be represented in a database. Electronic catalog systems also commonly support the ability for users to conduct various types of item related transactions such as purchasing an item downloading an item or selling an item.

However current business systems do not have an easy way to update data and share data with users and other systems without implementing significant integration between various systems. Generally speaking business data is typically stored securely behind a proprietary application interface or in a proprietary database. Access methods are available for application developers that allow them to build data level integration and data access applications. However designing such data level integration and data access applications puts the burden on the end user to clearly specify which business data they need access to how often they need it and in what format. Given the information technology IT departments development backlogs it is unlikely that an internal salesperson let alone an external supplier will ever see this data feed produced.

Typical solutions for implementing closer data integration include ad hoc query tools ad hoc reporting tools and direct database access. However there are three important problems to keep in mind with respect to such ad hoc solutions. First a typical user doesn t have the necessary skills to create these queries and reports. This problem puts us back in the IT pipeline. Second a semi skilled user has enough knowledge to be extremely dangerous to the application as a whole. There s usually nothing stopping the user from constructing such expensive queries that the application goes to its knees. And third such ad hoc solutions only work for internal users. There s still no solution for external users to get secure access to the business data. Therefore there is a need to provide a simpler web service model that allows efficient sharing and updating of data between various business entities.

This Summary is provided to introduce a selection of concepts in a simplified form that are further described below in the Detailed Description. This Summary is not intended to identify key features or essential features of the claimed subject matter nor is it intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter.

A really simple syndication RSS feed generator provides a user access to a set of data in the form of an RSS feed containing an object. The RSS feed generator allows the user to generate a feed definition using any of a user interface a web based application programming interface and an HTTP request. The RSS feed generator uses the feed definition provided by the user to generate the RSS feed and exposes the RSS feed in the form of RSS XML data. The RSS feed generator allows a business system to dynamically update the set of data contained in the RSS feed in a manner that allows a user to perform a plurality of functions on the RSS feed. The RSS feed generator may provide a snapshot in time of a data provides s instance data. A client may treat that instance data as something that may be modified and sent back to a system of record.

An alternate embodiment of the RSS feed generator allows embedding an XSL style sheet processing instruction in the RSS XML data. A client using such RSS XML data may organize or view data using the embedded processing instructions. For example using such an RSS feed generator a customer relationship management CRM software application may provide up to date information about various clients to a number of partners in a supply chain.

An alternate embodiment of the RSS feed generator includes a security check module that is used to enforce user level class level and item level security in providing the RSS feed to the clients. Using the security module the RSS feed generator may restrict data from the RSS feed to be available to only those clients who have relevant security permission to access such RSS feed data.

Yet another embodiment of the RSS feed generator allows generating RSS feed definition using a user interface where a client may select scope and attributes of an object to be included in the RSS feed. Alternatively the scope and attributes of such an object may also be specified using an HTTP document or by using an application programming interface dynamically interacting with an RSS feed definition module of the RSS feed generator.

Although the following text sets forth a detailed description of numerous different embodiments it should be understood that the legal scope of the description is defined by the words of the claims set forth at the end of this patent. The detailed description is to be construed as exemplary only and does not describe every possible embodiment since describing every possible embodiment would be impractical if not impossible. Numerous alternative embodiments could be implemented using either current technology or technology developed after the filing date of this patent which would still fall within the scope of the claims defining the invention.

It should also be understood that unless a term is expressly defined in this patent using the sentence As used herein the term is hereby defined to mean . . . or a similar sentence there is no intent to limit the meaning of that term either expressly or by implication beyond its plain or ordinary meaning and such term should not be interpreted to be limited in scope based on any statement made in any section of this patent other than the language of the claims . To the extent that any term recited in the claims at the end of this patent is referred to in this patent in a manner consistent with a single meaning that is done for sake of clarity only so as to not confuse the reader and it is not intended that such claim term by limited by implication or otherwise to that single meaning. Finally unless a claim element is defined by reciting the word means and a function without the recital of any structure it is not intended that the scope of any claim element be interpreted based on the application of 35 U.S.C. 112 sixth paragraph.

The memory may include computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM. RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . The memory may also be used to store data related to one or more programs codes used by the computer and or the RSS feed generator.

The storage device may typically include removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only the storage device may include a hard disk drive a magnetic disk drive nonvolatile magnetic disk an optical disk drive etc. One or more of the forms stored on the memory may be populated using data stored on the storage device . The I O controller may be used by the computer to communicate with an input device which may be a keyboard a mouse etc. an output device which may be a monitor a printer etc.

Really simple syndication RSS is a family of XML file formats for Web syndication used by among other things news websites and web logs. The term RSS is also known as abbreviation of rich site summary or RDF site summary. Notwithstanding the term used the RSS technology allows Internet users to subscribe to websites that have provided RSS feeds. is an illustration of a RSS feed provider system which may be implemented on the network . The RSS feed provider system provides RSS feed to a number of clients based on data located on the RSS feed provider system . Note that while in all of the various components of the RSS feed provider system are shown to be implemented on a single node on the network in an alternate implementation the various components may be located on different nodes on the network . Moreover some of the components of the RSS feed provider system may also be implemented on the nodes hosting the clients .

The RSS feed provider system includes a database an RSS feed definition module an RSS feed generator an RSS feed publisher a web interface and a security module . One or more of the modules may be omitted in an alternate embodiment of the RSS feed provider system . Alternatively one or more of the modules may also be combined into one another for example the RSS feed generator and the RSS feed definition module may be combined into one module. As one of ordinary skill in the art would recognize any of the various modules may be implemented using software hardware firmware or any combination thereof.

Moreover one or more of the modules may be implemented as part of other well known applications. For example the database may be part of a customer relation management CRM application the web interface may be part of a web hosting software application the RSS feed definition module may be part of an online accounting software etc.

The database may be any of the various database used by an entity that provides RSS feed of the data from the database . For example the database may be a CRM database a human resources HR database an accounting database etc. The clients may request RSS feed by communicating with the web interface module via the network such as the Internet etc. The web interface module may be implemented by using any of the well known web interface that may interact with various back end applications. An example of such a web interface module may be designed using a common gateway interface CGI software etc.

Upon receiving RSS data feed from the RSS feed provider system the clients may make such feeds available to other clients such as clients . Before making the RSS feed available to clients the client my further process the RSS feed. For example the client may sort the results of the RSS feed restrict certain parts of the RSS feed from viewing by the clients add further data to the RSS feed etc. Moreover the client may employ its own version of the RSS feed provider system to generate and communicate RSS feed to its clients . As one of ordinary skill in the art would recognize multiple level nesting of such RSS feeds may be implemented.

Now referring to an exemplary flowchart illustrates functioning of a RSS feed generation program that may be used by the RSS feed provider system . The RSS feed generation program may be implemented using one or more of the various modules of the RSS feed provider system . The RSS feed generation program may be initiated in response to a request for RSS feed from one of the clients or it may be initiated by any module of the RSS feed provider system . For example in an implementation the RSS feed generation program may be initiated by the RSS feed generator in response to a clock signal in response to an update to the database etc. The RSS feed generation program may be implemented on the memory of the computer in the form of software or alternatively in the form of hardware firmware or any combination thereof.

Now referring to the flowchart of the RSS feed generation program a block receives a request to generate an RSS feed based on data from the database . Such a request may be received from the clients via the network at the web interface . Such a request received at the web interface may have various parameters of the requested feed included in it. Alternatively the web interface module may direct the request to the RSS feed definition module to further assist in generating a feed definition. In an embodiment of the RSS feed provider system client specific feed definitions may be stored on the RSS feed definition module . In a yet another embodiment a client may construct a feed definition and supply the feed definition along with a request for the feed.

The RSS feed definition module may interact with the client requesting the RSS feed using the network in a number of different manners. For example in a particular embodiment the RSS feed definition module may request the scope and or the attributes of the object that is requested by the client. The scope of the object requested by the client may include the number of data fields an identification of the data source providing the data fields the names of the data fields etc. Various attributes of the requested object may include information about which fields are to be sortable the update time for the field values etc. For example the RSS feed request may have a time stamp attached to it specifying the last time the requested object was received and therefore any updates to the object from that time may need to be provided in the RSS feed containing the object.

Subsequently at a block the RSS feed definition module generates the feed definition that may be used to get data from the database to generate the requested RSS feed. Note that while in the embodiment of the RSS feed generation program described in here the steps of receiving object information and the step of generating feed definition are described as two separate functions in an alternate environment these two steps may be implemented together.

The RSS feed definition module may generate the feed definition using a number of different methods including but not limited to by using a user interface by using a web based application programming interface or by using an hypertext transfer protocol HTTP request. For example the RSS feed definition module may provide a user interface that may be activated by the client requesting the RSS feed where the client may define the scope and the attributes of the requested object by making various selections on the user interface or by inputting information in the user interface.

An example of such a user interface is illustrated by a column customization dialog interface illustrated in . The column customization dialog interface allows users to define which columns are to be included in the RSS feed generation definition. For example a user may add a field to be included in the RSS feed by selecting the column for that field using the Add Columns button of the column customization dialog interface . Similarly a user can remove a selected field by highlighting the field to be removed and then selecting the Remove button of the column customization dialog interface .

Alternatively the RSS feed definition module may provide an application programming interface API that receives definition of a query as provided by a client requesting an object and converts the definition into the format that can be used by the RSS feed definition module . Yet alternatively the RSS feed definition module may receive the object definition in an HTTP document and extract the object definition from such an HTTP document.

After the generation of the feed definition at a block the RSS feed definition module may generate an RSS feed with the requested object by converting the feed definition into the RSS feed. To convert the RSS feed definition into an RSS feed the RSS feed definition module may define and execute a query on the database where the query is defined using the feed definition. The RSS feed definition module may use a number of predefined query parameterization and construction routines to define the query from the feed definition.

Subsequently at a block the RSS feed definition module may convert the query results into the RSS feed. There are currently seven RSS formats of which three formats are widely used and converting results of a query into RSS feed conforming to any of these formats is well known to one of ordinary skill in the art.

At a block the RSS feed definition module may provide the RSS feed to the client requesting the RSS feed. Providing the RSS feed to the client may comprise exposing the RSS feed as a web page using the web interface . Alternatively the web interface may convert the RSS feed into RSS XML data generate an RSS feed URL for the RSS XML data and communicate the RSS feed URL to the client requesting the RSS feed. The client may incorporate the RSS feed URL into its own web page to expose the query results underlying the RSS feed. Because the RSS feed is constructed as an object with various sortable attributes provided to the client the client may also sort the data contained in the RSS feed generate different views based on the RSS feed and or perform its own queries on the data contained in the RSS feed.

In an alternate embodiment the RSS feed generator may expose various RSS feeds available to a client as a web page. Such a web page may display only those feeds to a client for which the client has a permission to view. illustrates an RSS web feed subscription page that may be used by clients to view various RSS feeds available from a CRM application.

This feature is specifically useful to clients using the RSS feeds to perform various operations. Especially given the prevalence of RSS readers build into various Internet browsers and the RSS platform built into various operating systems the RSS feeds provides clients with the choice to combine a query construction model RSS feed generation model and a query execution models into one produce. Such a combined product may allow users to construct queries of the business data that they re interested in and access those queries as RSS feeds from any device or application that supports RSS. Such a combined product may also allow a user operating a database to create a query specific to a particular partner or supplier share that query as a publication and let the partner or supplier have direct access to data necessary to keep the supply chain full.

In an implementation of the RSS feed generation program an RSS feed may include various items where each feed item may carry with it enough metadata as defined by RSS to provide a reasonably rich client side display. Note that other rendering options are also available. For example in one embodiment the metadata related to an item may contain a element containing a short text based sometimes HTML introduction or synopsis of the item. The item may also have a element that indicates to the client where to find the complete document specified in the item. This leaves all rendering to the client and requests that the user follow the URL to read the entire document.

In another embodiment an RSS feed may include an XSL style sheet processing instructions PI into the RSS XML data. Clients that honor this PI can then leave the ultimate layout and the display of the RSS feed to the RSS feed provider. In such a case the RSS feed provider has the burden of determining client capabilities display width available user input devices etc. and of providing a smart style sheet.

As one of ordinary skill in the art would appreciate not all the blocks of the RSS feed generation program need to be performed for a given implementation of the RSS feed provider system . As some of the blocks of the RSS feed generation program may be used primarily to increase the efficiency of the RSS feed generation program one or more such blocks may be omitted in a given implementation without affecting the functionality of the RSS feed provider system . Moreover one or more of the blocks in the RSS feed generation program may also be implemented in an alternate order without affecting the functionality of the RSS feed provider system .

Although the forgoing text sets forth a detailed description of numerous different embodiments of the invention it should be understood that the scope of the invention is defined by the words of the claims set forth at the end of this patent. The detailed description is to be construed as exemplary only and does not describe every possible embodiment of the invention because describing every possible embodiment would be impractical if not impossible. Numerous alternative embodiments could be implemented using either current technology or technology developed after the filing date of this patent which would still fall within the scope of the claims defining the invention.

Thus many modifications and variations may be made in the techniques and structures described and illustrated herein without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. Accordingly it should be understood that the methods and apparatus described herein are illustrative only and are not limiting upon the scope of the invention.

