---

title: Telescoping and locking lever arm
abstract: A telescoping lever arm comprises a tube and a rod. The tube has an opening at one end thereof and has an inner circumferential dimension along the inside thereof. The opening is smaller than the inner circumferential dimension of the tube. The rod has an outer circumferential dimension that is smaller than that of the tube's opening. The rod resides partially in the tube and extends therefrom via the tube's opening. At least one annular flange is coupled to the rod at a portion thereof residing in the tube. Each such annular flange is defined by a circumferential dimension that is larger than that of the tube's opening and smaller than the inner circumferential dimension of the tube. The other end of the tube is configured to be coupled to a workpiece or an adapter that can be coupled to a workpiece.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07299714&OS=07299714&RS=07299714
owner: United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07299714
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051114
---
This is a divisional application claiming the benefit of parent application Ser. No. 10 384 927 filed on Mar. 3 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 007 569 the entire disclosure of which is incorporated hereby by reference.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The invention relates generally to lever arms and more particularly to a telescoping lever arm that locks to prevent axial telescoping action when the lever arm is used to provide a mechanical advantage.

Lever arms are used in a wide variety of applications to improve one s mechanical advantage for the tightening loosening of couplings bolts nuts etc. In most cases a lever arm is a one piece rigid bar or rod. However some lever arms are constructed to telescope to provide a longer lever arm for greater mechanical advantage and to provide a shorter lever arm when there are space limitations.

Typically a telescoping lever arm is moved to a desired position and is locked axially with respect to a handle to provide a desired lever arm length. Conventional locking has been accomplished by coupling the telescoping portion to the handle by using a removable pin or locking collar arrangement. However these require the user to use both hands to make an adjustment. In addition when used in confined spaces the length of the lever arm may have to be adjusted during the use thereof. Such adjustment can be difficult or impossible if one must get both hands on the lever arm to make the adjustment.

Still another object of the present invention is to provide a telescoping lever arm that can be adjusted in length using only one hand.

Other objects and advantages of the present invention will become more obvious hereinafter in the specification and drawings.

In accordance with the present invention a telescoping lever arm comprises a tube and a rod. The tube has an opening at one end thereof and has an inner circumferential dimension along the inside thereof. The opening is smaller than the inner circumferential dimension of the tube. The rod has an outer circumferential dimension that is smaller than that of the tube s opening. The rod resides partially in the tube and extends therefrom via the tube s opening. At least one annular flange is coupled to the rod at a portion thereof residing in the tube. Each such annular flange is defined by a circumferential dimension that is larger than that of the tube s opening and smaller than the inner circumferential dimension of the tube.

To use the present invention a minimal axial force adjusts the length of the lever arm to suit space allocations or to provide a lesser greater amount of mechanical advantage as needed. Next a work force is applied to the rod in a direction that is substantially perpendicular to the longitudinal axis thereof. As a result one or more frictional forces result between i the outboard edges of flange s and inner surface of the tube and ii the tube s opening and the rod. The frictional force s alone or in combination resist any increase in axial forces applied to the rod and axially lock the tube and rod together to form the lever arm.

Referring now to the drawings and more particularly to one embodiment of a telescoping and locking lever arm is shown and referenced generally by numeral . Lever arm can be adapted for use in any application requiring the use of a lever arm to provide a mechanical advantage. Such applications can include but are not limited to the tightening loosening of bolts nuts etc. the locking unlocking of cam locks or the rotational movement of other rotating types of device requiring a mechanical advantage to bring about such rotation.

Lever arm has an outer tube shown in cross section and an inner rod shown in a side view. Tube is rigid and hollow with an inner dimension defined along its length. At one end of tube an opening is formed such that opening is smaller than the inner dimension defined by tube . Note that end opening can be integrated with tube or could be in the form of a removable part to facilitate assembly disassembly of lever arm . At the opposing end of tube provisions are made for the coupling of lever arm to a workpiece not shown . As will be explained further below end can be configured to accept attachment of a variety of adapters e.g. socket heads wrench heads etc. that can be coupled to a workpiece. Alternatively end can be configured in a particular fashion for coupling directly to a workpiece.

Rod is rigid and is sized to fit easily through opening in tube with a portion thereof residing in tube and a portion thereof extending from tube . Integral with rod or rigidly coupled thereto are one or more e.g. two are shown annular flanges or disks spaced apart along rod within tube . The dimensions of flanges are such that they move easily in an axial direction in tube but cannot pass through opening . Thus axial movement of rod in tube requires a minimal axial force e.g. For F on rod . The particular sizes of the interior of tube opening rod and flanges can be adjusted to suit a particular application or to provide adaptability to a wide variety of applications. Gripping of rod can be facilitated by either incorporating a grip e.g. ridges knurls etc. onto the end of rod or by attaching a grip thereto.

As mentioned above end of tube can be configured as shown in where an adapter e.g. socket head wrench head etc. is attached to end by any one of a variety of attachment schemes such as feedthrough fasteners . Alternatively end can be configured as shown in where end is formed shaped for example to incorporate a wrench opening for the direct coupling to a workpiece.

The outer inner shape of tube outer shape of rod and outer shape of flange s can be circular. In such a case tube is a cylindrical tube having an inner diameter that is i larger than the diameter of rod which is cylindrical and ii larger than the diameter of circular disk s or flange s . Opening could be circular with its diameter being larger than that of rod and smaller than that of disk s of flange s . However it is to be understood that the inner circumferential dimension of tube opening and the outer circumferential dimensions of rods and flange s need not be circular. Other geometrical shapes such as triangles squares etc. can be used without departing from the scope of the present invention.

Use of the present invention will now be explained with the aid of where it is assumed that adapter is coupled to a workpiece. A minimal axial force For F is used to adjust the length of lever arm to suit space allocations or to provide a lesser greater amount of mechanical advantage as needed. Next a force F is applied to rod in a direction that is substantially perpendicular to the longitudinal axis thereof. As a result one or more frictional forces result between i the outboard edges of flange s and inner surface of tube i.e. Fand F and ii opening and rod i.e. F . The presence of one or more of frictional forces F Fdepends on factors such as the length of lever arm the size of opening the diameter of rod and or the diameter of flange s . The frictional force s alone or in combination resist any increase in axial forces For Fas force Fis applied to rod . Thus under the applied work force F tube and rod are axially locked together to form the lever arm.

The present invention is not limited to the embodiment just described as is evidenced by additional embodiments illustrated in . More specifically illustrates a lever arm in which tube is configured to have a plurality of annular ribs formed on the inner surface of tube . Ribs define openings or passages referenced by dashed lines that allow rod and flange s to easily pass therethrough. Ribs give tube additional strength and serve as locking stops for flange s when a work force i.e. similar to force Fdescribed above is applied perpendicularly to the longitudinal axis of rod .

Lever arm illustrated in is further equipped with a spring mounted for example to a plate fixed in tube so that spring extends axially along a central longitudinal axis of tube . Rod is partially hollowed out to receive spring therein. In this way when no work force i.e. similar to force Fdescribed above is applied to rod spring will tend to centrally align rod in tube . This will facilitate axial movement of rod flange s and spring through ribs . Note that ribs could also be eliminated from lever arm without departing from the scope of the present invention.

The advantages of the present invention are numerous. The lever arm easily telescopes to either a short length for storage purposes or to a particular desired lever length throughout a range of desired lever lengths. Where space is limited the lever can be locked in a shortened configuration. Where there is additional space the lever can be locked in an extended configuration in order to provide additional output torque. Once the desired lever length is selected the lever locks at that length while under the applied torque load. The narrow sharp edges of the locking disks increase point loading to increase frictional forces at contact areas. If sufficiently small contact area is designed the contact surfaces can actually deflect or dig into each other so as to have a very large axial locking effect.

Although the invention has been described relative to a specific embodiment thereof there are numerous variations and modifications that will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art in light of the above teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced other than as specifically described.

