---

title: Fraud prevention and detection for online advertising
abstract: A system and a method are disclosed for detecting and preventing fraud in online advertising environments. In one embodiment, the system and process include a publisher with a web page with which an advertisement set and a unique request identifier are sent to a user browser when the user requests the web page. The unique request identifier is unique, publisher specific, advertisement specific, for a single instance. A database keeps track of the unique request identifier so that when a user “clicks” on a link to access an advertiser's web site, the unique request identifier associated with the advertisement can be checked against the unique request identifier in the database to determine whether the “click” was one that may be non-fraudulent or valid.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08719396&OS=08719396&RS=08719396
owner: Vibrant Media Limited
number: 08719396
owner_city: London
owner_country: GB
publication_date: 20051206
---
This application claims a benefit of and priority to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 60 683 437 filed May 20 2005 and titled Fraud Detection and Prevention for Online Advertisements the contents of which are herein incorporated by reference.

The present invention generally relates to the field of online advertising and more specifically to fraud avoidance and or detection for online advertisement.

Conventional online advertising in the context of pay per click is known. A conventional set up includes a publisher that supplies web content on web pages and an advertiser that advertises on the web page. In this arrangement an advertiser typically has a uniform resource locator URL link on the web page. An end user clicks on when that end user browses the publisher s web page if that end user is interested in the advertiser s link. For each click through the advertiser pays the publisher some predetermined amount that may be purchased real time on credit or some other financial arrangement that pays on a per click or group of click basis.

A problem with such conventional online advertising is that it is susceptible to fraud. One example of fraud is referred to as competitive fraud. In competitive fraud a competitor or other organization whose interests are not aligned with the advertiser may harvest from a webpage click URL addresses of advertisers. Specifically the competitor may employ individuals to click on the links of other advertisers on a web page so that those advertisers end up with a large financial bill to each advertiser with no associated sales for any of them which results in financial loss.

Another problem with conventional online advertising is click fraud. In some advertising arrangements a publisher may be paid on a per click basis for an advertisement so that each click on an advertiser s URL on a web page results in revenue for the publisher. With click fraud to maximize revenue a publisher may employ individuals or technology such as bots to trigger click throughs on a web page. Again this results in a large financial bill to the advertiser from the publisher and no associated sales for the advertiser which results in financial loss.

Hence there is a need for a system and a method for detecting and preventing fraud in online advertising environments to allow advertisers and publishers to track fraudulent conditions and take appropriate corrective action.

The present invention includes a system and a method for detecting and preventing fraud for online advertising. In one embodiment the system tracks activity associated with a web site. The system receives from a requester a request for information to supplement content on the web site. The request includes a unique request identifier and a publisher identifier. The system retrieves a unique information identifier. The unique information identifier includes information unique to the request for one instance. The system generates a unique request identifier. The unique request identifier includes the unique information identifier. The system transmits the unique request identifier to the requester and logs the unique request identifier and the publisher identifier in a database for later comparison.

Subsequently the system receives the unique request identifier and the unique information identifier when information that was transmitted to the requester was selected by the requestor when the requestor is on the web site. Upon receipt of this information from the requestor the system validates the unique information identifier and either logs it as valid or invalid. In particular the system compares the received unique request identifier and the unique information identifier with the logged unique request identifier and the unique information identifier to determine if they were previously paired. If they were previously paired the request is invalid and if not previously paired the request is valid. If the unique information identifier is logged as invalid the response is sent back to the requester indicating as such. If it is logged as valid the system redirects the requester to a second URL in response to logging a valid unique information identifier.

An advantage of the present invention includes providing additional information e.g. an advertisement in a manner that includes an identifier of that information and the URL of the web site with which it is associated so that when that information is selected it can be paired or matched with stored identifier data to determine whether the selection is valid. Thus the information is verifiable or auditable for applications that would benefit from such data for example advertisement providers or purchasers associated with content on a web site. Such data would then be used to identify whether clicks on a web site are fraudulent due to activity from for example a click harvesting mechanism.

The features and advantages described in the specification are not all inclusive and in particular many additional features and advantages will be apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art in view of the drawings specification and claims. Moreover it should be noted that the language used in the specification has been principally selected for readability and instructional purposes and may not have been selected to delineate or circumscribe the inventive subject matter.

The Figures FIGS. and the following description relates to preferred embodiments by way of illustration only. It should be noted that from the following discussion alternative embodiments of the structures and methods disclosed herein will be readily recognized as viable alternatives that may be employed without departing from the principles of the claimed invention.

Reference will now be made in detail to several embodiments examples of which are illustrated in the accompanying figures. It is noted that wherever practicable similar or like reference numbers may be used in the figures and may indicate similar or like functionality. The figures depict embodiments for purposes of illustration only. One skilled in the art will readily recognize from the following description that alternative embodiments of the structures and methods illustrated herein may be employed without departing from the principles of the described herein.

For ease of discussion embodiments of the system or method are described in the context of advertisement generation for placement on a web page and subsequent selection and reconciliation of that generated advertisement to determine whether such selection was a valid or invalid selection. It is noted that the principles disclosed herein are also applicable to other configurations that generate a specific instance of information forward that information allow selection of that information and validate that information through a reconciliation process.

Referring now to it illustrates one embodiment of a general operational architecture for a fraud prevention and detection system. The architecture includes an advertiser a publisher and a fraud monitor . The advertiser is configured to purchase click advertisements on a web page or web site . The publisher provides content on the web page and sells the click advertisements e.g. to the advertiser . Typically the publisher sells the click advertisement to the advertiser on a per click or per set of clicks basis. The publisher logs each click or selection or each set of clicks selections on the web page to charge it back to the advertiser .

In one embodiment the publisher is a host or web server on the Internet. In such embodiments the publisher allows for the content to be accessed by a client computing system client system computer and or site through a browser e.g. Microsoft Internet Explorer or Mozilla Firefox on the client system. Subsequently a user at the client system may select one or more of the advertisements of the advertiser on the publisher s web page by clicking on that advertisement. However the advertisements of the advertiser on the publisher s web page may be continuously selected over and over either accidentally or maliciously. Moreover a computing mechanism such as a bot may be configured to continuously select the advertisement. In such instances the advertiser is charged a fee for each time the advertisement is selected. Thus to combat such activity the fraud monitor is configured within an embodiment of a system and a process to detect report and for or prevent it.

The fraud monitor is configured to monitor and report on click activity. Further the fraud monitor can be configured to generate advertisement sets that allow for subsequent reconciliation for monitoring or auditing when any of the advertisements in the set are selected. In one embodiment selection of an advertisement can be reconciled as described herein the selection is considered to be valid else it is considered to be invalid. Thus in one embodiment the fraud monitor may be configured as an advertisement generation and reconciliation system.

The advertisement generation and reconciliation system includes an advertisement identifier engine an advertisement database a request identifier engine a code generation engine a log engine a generated log database a validation engine a validation log database and a command engine . These components are communicatively coupled together through a data bus . It is noted that the data bus may be wired or wireless and that the communications coupling may be direct e.g. physical or indirect e.g. logical . Operation of the components is further described with reference to .

Turning to it illustrates one embodiment of a client server interaction for advertisement generation in accordance with the present invention. The process configuration includes client side processing and server side processing that are communicatively coupled through a communications medium for example the Internet or an Intranet. In one embodiment the client side processing includes a client system that executes a web browser and the server side processing includes one or more web servers configured to execute processes as further described below.

The illustrated process starts with a user viewing a web page on a client system e.g. a browser on a client computer . In the web page is an embedded advertising link or links . The process continues with receipt of a request from the client system e.g. user clicks on a link as the web page displayed in the browser to serve the embedded advertising link as well as the uniform resource locator URL of the web page referrer URL . Specifically in one embodiment the client system forwards an identification of the publisher or publisher identifier to the web server to identify the publisher web page or site into which the advertising link s are to be served.

When the web server receives the request it determines through the advertisements identifier engine which set of advertisements from the advertisement database to return for display. The set of advertisements may be one advertisement or two or more advertisements. Each advertisement has a unique advertisement identifier that is also retrieved from the advertisement database .

The process continues with calculating a URL hash of the referrer URL. As an example the referrer URL is a URL an end user types into a browser in an attempt to access a web page at that URL address. The calculated URL hash is a one way hash of the referrer URL of the web page into which the advertising link s are to be served. In addition for each advertisement the process generates a unique advertisement view identifier. In one embodiment the unique advertisement view identifier is a globally unique identifier GUID which can be a pseudo random number generated to be unique for each unique web page and each unique advertisement identifier. The paired unique advertisement identifier and the unique advertisement view identifier provide a fingerprint for a single instance of the serving of a specific advertisement which is later reconciled .

The process continues with the code engine assembling a response payload for the client system. The response payload comprises executable code e.g. Javascript that includes the publisher identifier the URL hash the unique advertisement identifier and a hash of the corresponding unique advertisement view identifier. The hash of the unique advertisement view identifier also may be referred to as a GUID hash. Once assembled the response payload is sent by the web server to the client system.

The client system receives the executable code which contains the publisher identifier URL hash and the set of unique advertisement identifiers and corresponding unique advertisement view identifier pairs along with the contents and format of the link or links to be displayed and a URL pointing to a click handling page and displays the appropriate advertisements therein on the web page in the browser. When a link is selected by a user as further described herein the browser on the client system can execute the executable code redirect the browser to the URL pointing to the click handling page.

Note in one embodiment the process writes the publisher identifier the URL hash the unique advertisement identifier and a hash of the corresponding unique advertisement view identifier to database e.g. a valid link table. The log engine logs this data for storage in the generated log database for later access. In addition it is noted that the valid link table is periodically replicated to a back end statistics server.

Turning to it illustrates one embodiment of advertisement interaction in accordance with the present invention. Referring first to the client side processing a process is executed in conjunction with the executable code received from the server side processing . Specifically the process displays the link or links and asserts a mouse over e.g. OnMouseOver and click e.g. OnClick event trap on each link. The mouse over includes moving a pointing device e.g. mouse trackball computing pen etc. cursor over a link e.g. advertisement link in the browser.

If the pointer over event fires or triggers the process enables a click on advertisement corresponding to the unique advertisement identifier by setting the link to active and clickable by a status flag. When the user clicks selects or triggers the advertisement link in the browser the process determines if the click has been enabled i.e. a selection has been made . Specifically if a click event fires or triggers the process checks to determine if the pointer over event has fired. If no click was enabled the process ignores the click and does nothing.

If the click event fires and the pointer over event has been fired the process generates a destination URL containing the destination URL of the click handling page on the web server and a query string containing the unique advertisement identifier the unique advertisement view identifier the publisher identifier the URL hash. In one embodiment the process opens a new instance of the browser a window or a tab that targets the destination URL. In one embodiment a user can observe this new instance of the browser beginning with a blank screen. The unique advertisement identifier the unique advertisement view identifier the publisher identifier the URL hash are sent from the browser to the web server on the server side processing .

On the server side processing the web server receives the page call with information from the client side processing . The validation engine in the web server looks up the unique advertisement identifier in its valid advertisement list to determine if the advertisement is valid and to retrieve the valid advertisement destination URL. The process determines that the advertisement is valid by determining whether the unique advertisement identifier is valid. In one embodiment they are one to one linked. If the unique advertisement identifier is not valid the process logs the invalid unique advertisement identifier the publisher identifier and the URL hash for storage in the validation log database . The command engine then sends a window or tab close command to the browser on the client system. This closes the browser window on the client system.

If the advertisement is valid the validation engine logs the valid unique advertisement identifier the hash of the unique advertisement view identifier GUID hash the publisher identifier and the hash of the referrer URL URL hash in the validation log database . It is noted that the validation log database can be configured to function as a back end statistics database. The command engine then sends a command to the browser on the client system to redirect the browser to the target URL which is a valid advertisement destination URL.

In one embodiment the process logs the valid unique advertisement identifier as a click token that corresponds to the publisher identifier the unique advertisement identifier a hash of the unique advertisement view identifier GUID hash and the hash of the referrer URL URL hash . Periodically the table of click tokens is replicated to the validation log database e.g. a back end statistics database .

The process of validating a unique advertisement identifier includes a reconciliation process that compares the data received from the browser on the client system with the previously stored data in the generated logged database on the server side system. illustrates one embodiment of a click reconciliation process in accordance with the present invention.

Initially a set of unique advertisement identifiers the publisher identifier GUID hashes and URL hash are processed for each click or selection or trigger from a collated click log file or files . In one embodiment processing includes the steps in through in a for each loop. The information is logged in the log database shown in for example . In addition the process obtains access to the validation log database of valid unique advertisement identifiers publisher identifiers GUID hashes and URL hash. In particular the validation log database provides a back end statistics database that maintains a list of all valid unique advertisement identifier and GUID hash pairs issued within a predefined rolling time period which is derived from the valid link tables of the generated log database from the web servers.

By referring to the entries in the validation log database the process determines whether the unique advertisement identifier and the GUID hash matches an entry in the validation log database e.g. a fingerprint . In one embodiment a click token from the validation log database is checked to determine if it corresponds to a valid unique advertisement identifier and GUID hash entry in the generated log database.

If there is no match between the pairs of entries the process logs the invalid unique advertisement identifier publisher identifier and URL hash click information into a database. The data can be structured for dissemination through a report function. If there is a match i.e. the two entries are appropriately paired the process determines if the pair has already been counted. For example the process determines if a link relating to advertising associated with the pair has already been served.

If the unique advertisement identifier and GUID hash pair is valid i.e. they match and the link has not previously been served the process e.g. through a statistics server logs or counts the activation as a valid click for a revenue reporting perspective against the publisher identifier. If the unique advertisement identifier and GUID hash pair is invalid or this link has previously been served the process logs into a database e.g. an invalid click table information that includes the publisher identifier click details and time and date stamp of the invalid click.

The process monitors the invalid click database or table on a predetermined time or periodic basis to respond to occurrences of invalid clicks based on predefined thresholds. Based on the rules e.g. user defined system pre defined governing the predefined threshold the process executes pre defined actions associated with the rules. For example the rules can be structured so that when the predefined thresholds are exceeded a warning communication is transmitted to a machine that monitors transactions.

An advantage of the present invention includes providing additional information e.g. an advertisement in a manner that includes an identifier of that information and the URL of the web site with which it is associated so that when that information is selected it can be pair or matched with stored identifier data to determine whether the selection is valid. Thus the information is verifiable or auditable for applications that would benefit from such data for example advertisement providers or purchasers associated with content on a web site. Such data would then be used to identify whether clicks on a web site are fraudulent due to activity from for example a click harvesting mechanism.

Upon reading this disclosure those of skill in the art will appreciate still additional alternative structural and functional designs for a system and a process for a system and a method for detecting and preventing fraud for online advertising through the disclosed principles of the present invention. Thus while particular embodiments and applications of the present invention have been illustrated and described it is to be understood that the invention is not limited to the precise construction and components disclosed herein and that various modifications changes and variations which will be apparent to those skilled in the art may be made in the arrangement operation and details of the method and apparatus of the present invention disclosed herein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined in the appended claims.

