---

title: Man overboard beacon
abstract: A user worn man overboard beacon that provides multiple indication means to alert a ship to an overboard crew person and to assist in locating the crew person. The beacon device is contained in a housing attached to the clothing of the sailor and is activated upon contact with seawater. A battery powers the multiple indicators contained in the housing, which include a high intensity strobe light to provide a visual indication, an x-band radar patch antenna to transmit a radar signal indication that can be detected by the ship's radar system, and an acoustic transducer to project an acoustic signal indication that can be detected by the ship's sonar system.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07125298&OS=07125298&RS=07125298
owner: The United States of America represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07125298
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050218
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore.

The present invention relates to beacons and more specifically to a beacon device that can alert a ship if a crewmember falls overboard and can assist the ship in locating the crewmember.

On large naval vessels especially aircraft carriers with the harried activity that occurs on deck involving multiple crewmembers sailors run the risk of falling overboard during operations without being noticed. In situations where a person has fallen off a ship at sea the time elapsing between going overboard and being rescued is inversely proportional to the chance of survival for the overboard sailor. It is therefore critical that the ship be alerted immediately of such an occurrence before a fatality occurs. It is also critical that the ship be alerted through an automated means in the event that the sailor has lost consciousness once overboard.

Currently there is no device that can be worn by U.S. Navy sailors that will significantly enhance the probability that they will be found if they fall overboard. Most life vests contain small water activated lights. Due to the low intensity of the lights however they are of limited use during the daytime. In conditions of reduced visibility the low power of such lights is inadequate at night. Some vests do contain strobe lights which are much more effective but still not ideal in daytime. The ubiquitous whistle is not likely to be heard over all the other noises on a ship. What is needed is a man overboard beacon device that provides multiple indication means to effectively alert a ship that a crewmember is overboard and to assist the ship in locating the crewmember. This is accomplished through the present invention by incorporating a visual indicator a radar indicator and an acoustic indicator as alertment and location beacons to alert ships.

It is a general purpose and object of the present invention to provide a device that can be worn by sailors enabling them to be more readily located and rescued if they fall overboard.

It is an additional purpose that the device not compromise emissions containment rules EMCON of the United States Navy.

These objects are accomplished through the introduction of a man overboard beacon device that provides multiple indication means to alert a ship to an overboard crew person and to assist in locating the crew person. The beacon device is activated upon contact with seawater. A battery powers the multiple indicators which include a high intensity strobe light to provide a visual indication an x band radar patch antenna to transmit a radar signal indication that can be detected by the ship s radar system and an acoustic transducer to project an acoustic signal indication that can be detected by the ship s sonar system.

The beacon is contained in a housing . In the preferred embodiment the housing is approximately the size of a pack of cigarettes. The housing can be made of any suitable waterproof material. Choice of material can be dictated by the desired weight of the beacon . The lighter the beacon is the easier it is to use since in the preferred embodiment it is intended to be worn by the user. The housing should be strong enough to sustain high impact force and should be buoyant enough to support the various components of the beacon. In the preferred embodiment a carbon fiber shell with a Styrofoam lining is used. The housing contains the various components including a seawater activated battery a small acoustic transducer an X band patch antenna and a strobe light .

The beacon is designed to activate when it comes into contact with water. There is a water inlet on the side of the housing such that water can flow into the inlet and activate the battery . In the preferred embodiment the water reacts with a micro switch that activates the battery . The battery can be either removable or rechargeable and should be of sufficient voltage to energize various components of the beacon . Once the battery activates it energizes the programmable X band transceiver circuit . The X band patch antenna will then begin listening for X band navigational radar signals that are being emitted from the ship. If the X band patch antenna detects the navigational radar signals then that is an indication that the ship is not under emissions containment rules EMCON . The X band transceiver circuit will then respond by broadcasting a signal through the X band patch antenna . The signal will be such that the presence of the man overboard beacon will be obvious on the display of the navigational radarscope on the ship s bridge. The user will be made aware of the status of the X band transceiver circuit by the indicator light which in a preferred embodiment will be an LED shining green if transmitting red if not transmitting and dark if the X band transceiver circuit is not operating.

Activation of the battery will also in turn energize the strobe light . In a preferred embodiment a protective dome that is transparent to light impact resistant and water resistant covers the strobe light . In a preferred embodiment the light source for the strobe light is a xenon lamp or NEOBE lamp. Once energized the strobe light will emit a high intensity flash of white light in a periodic manner.

Activation of the battery will also energize the acoustic transducer deployment apparatus . In a preferred embodiment the deployment apparatus is a tube of compressed air that will discharge to force the trap door at the bottom of beacon to open. Once the trap door is open the battery activates the acoustic transducer . The acoustic transducer is connected to the beacon by a 3 to 6 foot long wire . The wire is coiled around a rotating spool . Once the trap door is open the acoustic transducer deploys from the bottom of the beacon and the weight of the transducer draws the wire off of the rotating spool . The acoustic transducer then begins to emit acoustic energy at a designated frequency that is easily detectable by standard passive sonar systems common throughout the U.S. Navy.

A manual override is available for all three of the alertment indicators. The X band transceiver circuit has a three way override switch located near the X band patch antenna with settings of receive transmit or off. The acoustic transducer has an override switch at the base of the beacon . The strobe light has an override switch at the top of the beacon . The beacon as stated above is designed to be conveniently worn by the user particularly at times the user is on deck. In the preferred embodiment the beacon is attached to the user s clothing by means of a Velcro fastener . The combined capabilities of the beacon will make it much more likely that a person who has gone overboard will be detected located and recovered in short order.

The advantages of the present invention over the prior art are that the current invention provides faster detection classification localization and recovery of a person who has fallen overboard by providing three different types of indicators to alert a ship and does so in a compact and convenient device that can be easily worn by the user.

