---

title: Apparatus and method for interconnecting a child seat and monitoring system
abstract: A child seat adapted for use in a vehicle, the child seat comprising: a base portion; a carrier portion configured to be removably secured to the base portion; a restraint system component; a sensor for providing a signal indicative of a state of the restraint system component; an electronic control unit secured to either the carrier portion or the base portion, the electronic control unit being operably coupled to the restraint system component to receive the signal, the electronic control unit being capable of processing the signal to provide an output indicative of the state of the restraint system component; and an electrical connector for providing electrical connection between the sensor and the electronic control unit.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07288009&OS=07288009&RS=07288009
owner: Delphi Technologies, Inc.
number: 07288009
owner_city: Troy
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050908
---
The application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional application Ser. No. 60 607 988 filed Sep. 8 2004 the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference thereto.

This application is also related to the following U.S. patent applications filed Jun. 6 2005 and entitled CHILD SEAT AND MONITORING SYSTEM Ser. No. 11 146 927 CHILD SEAT MONITORING SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR DETERMINING A TYPE OF CHILD SEAT Ser. No. 11 146 939 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR MONITORING INSTALLATION OF THE CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM Ser. No. 11 147 148 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR MONITORING INSTALLATION OF THE CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM Ser. No. 11 146 926 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM COMPRISING WEIGHT SENSOR Ser. No. 11 146 921 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM COMPRISING CONTROL UNIT FOR EVALUATING HARNESS ADJUSTMENT Ser. No. 11 147 149 and CHILD SEAT AND MONITORING SYSTEM Ser. No. 11 146 928 the contents each of which are incorporated herein by reference thereto.

This present invention relates generally to child seats and restraint systems wherein the child seat is equipped with an apparatus and system for monitoring various states of the restraint system and the child secured therein. More specifically the present invention is related to an apparatus and method for facilitating the electrical connection of the monitoring system and its sensors when the monitoring system is used with a child seat utilizing a base portion and a removable portion.

Usage of child and or infant seats in vehicles has become commonplace and in some situations legally required. Many child seats are removably secured to the vehicle by securing a base portion to the vehicle by passing a seat belt or anchor tether through an opening or openings in the base portion wherein the child seat or infant seat further comprises a removable carrier portion configured to snap in or lockingly engage the base portion.

As discussed in the above identified related patent applications an electronic control unit is configured to provide indications of conditions relating to the child seat e.g. base portion and carrier portion its occupant and or its installation. In these applications the child seat will comprise an electronic control unit secured to either the base portion or the carrier portion of the child seat. In addition the electronic control unit will also be operably coupled to a plurality of sensors each providing additional signals indicative of states of the child seat to the electronic control unit and the electronic control unit is capable of processing the additional signals to compare the additional signals to acceptable values wherein the electronic control unit provides additional outputs indicating whether the additional signals are at acceptable values and the additional outputs are provided to a display. Examples of such parameters being monitored by the sensors include but are not limited to monitoring infant seat harness latch state monitoring infant seat harness tension perform infant seat weight classification monitoring infant seat to base interlock state monitoring infant seat angle and seat orientation monitoring infant seat for exposure to severe impact or vehicle crash monitoring rear facing infant seat base for contact with vehicle seatbelt monitoring rear facing infant seat base for tension of vehicle seatbelt or lower tether monitoring chest retainer clip for proper engagement monitoring chest retainer clip for proper vertical height on the harness monitoring shoulder harness slots for proper adjustment wherein audible and or visual indications or warnings are provided to alert an individual if there is non compliance with any of the monitored states.

In each instance the sensors are electrically coupled to the electronic control module wherein the electronic control module provides an electrical signal indicative of the property being sensed. However and since the sensor may be located in both the carrier portion and the base portion and the electronic control unit may be disposed on either the carrier portion or the base portion there exists a need to provide a means for electrically connecting the components of base portion to the carrier portion. Moreover and since the intended use is for a child seat the electrical connector needs to be able to withstand exposure to debris liquids etc. as well as be configured to withstand repeated contact as the carrier portion is constantly inserted and removed from the base portion.

Accordingly it is desirable to provide an electrical connector that will complete electrical connections for a child safety restraint system when a carrier portion of the child seat is secured to a base portion of the child seat.

Disclosed herein is a device and method for providing an electrical connection between a carrier portion and a base portion of a child seat having a system for monitoring and providing an indication of various parameters of the child seat.

In accordance with an exemplary embodiment a child seat adapted for use in a vehicle is provided. The child seat comprising a base portion a carrier portion configured to be removably secured to the base portion a restraint system component a sensor for providing a signal indicative of a state of the restraint system component an electronic control unit secured to either the carrier portion or the base portion the electronic control unit being operably coupled to the restraint system component to receive the signal the electronic control unit being capable of processing the signal to provide an output indicative of the state of the restraint system component and an electrical connector for providing electrical connection between the sensor and the electronic control unit the electrical connector comprising a first contact member secured to either the base portion or the carrier portion the first contact member having a plurality of contact surfaces and a second contact member secured to either the base portion or the carrier portion the second contact member having a plurality of spring biased contacts movably secured to the second contact member wherein the plurality of contact surfaces of the first contact member are configured to make contact with the plurality of spring biased contacts when the carrier portion is secured to the base portion.

Disclosed herein is a method for providing an electrical connection between a carrier portion and a base portion of a child seat having a electronic control unit configured to receive a plurality of signals from a plurality of sensors located in the carrier portion and the base portion the method comprising securing a first contact member to either the base portion or the carrier portion the first contact member having a plurality of contact surfaces securing a second contact member to either the base portion or the carrier portion the second contact member having a plurality of spring biased contacts movably secured to the second contact member wherein the plurality of contact surfaces of the first contact member are configured to make contact with the plurality of spring biased contacts when the carrier portion is secured to the base portion wherein the second contact member further comprises a plurality of springs disposed in a housing of the second contact member wherein each of the plurality of springs are configured to make electrical contact with a respective one of the plurality of spring biased contacts while also providing a termination end that depends away from an exterior surface the housing wherein each of the plurality of springs also provides a biasing force to a respective one of the plurality of spring biased contacts and the electrical connector is configured to provide tolerances in three separate directions.

Also disclosed herein is an electrical connector configured to provide an electrical connection between a carrier portion and a base portion of a child seat having at least one sensor disposed in the carrier portion and an electronic control unit located within the base portion the electrical connector comprising a first contact member secured to either the base portion or the carrier portion the first contact member having a plurality of contact surfaces and a second contact member secured to either the base portion or the carrier portion the second contact member having a plurality of spring biased contacts movably secured to the second contact member wherein the plurality of contact surfaces of the first contact member are configured to make contact with the plurality of spring biased contacts when the carrier portion is secured to the base portion.

The above described and other features of the present disclosure will be appreciated and understood by those skilled in the art from the following detailed description drawings and appended claims.

Disclosed herein is a method and apparatus for providing an electrical connector for a child seat having a system for monitoring and providing an indication of various parameters being sensed by a sensing system of the child seat.

Referring now to a child seat constructed in accordance with an exemplary embodiment of the present invention is illustrated. Child seat is configured to be secured to a seat of a vehicle not shown by at least one adjustable securement tether which is fixedly secured to the child seat at one end and comprises a latching device at the other although only one adjustable tether is shown in it is contemplated that multiple adjustable tethers may be used. In accordance with an exemplary embodiment latching device comprises a hook or clasp for securement to at least one universal anchor disposed on or proximate to the vehicle seat. Alternatively the vehicle seatbelt may be used to secure the base portion to the seat.

Infant seat comprises a carrier portion removably secured to a base portion . In accordance with an exemplary embodiment base portion is fixedly secured to the vehicle seat by an adjustable tether comprising a pair of clasping portions disposed at either end adjustable tether for securement of the same to the vehicle via universal anchors . The base portion is intended to remain in the vehicle while the carrier portion is intended for transport of the child in vehicle as well as outside of the vehicle thereby allowing transport of the infant without having to remove the infant from the seat or carrier portion.

Accordingly carrier portion securely couples to the base portion for transporting a child within the vehicle but may be disengaged from the base portion for carrying the child outside the vehicle.

Referring now to and in accordance with exemplary embodiments of the present invention each child seat further comprises an electronic control unit . In accordance with an exemplary embodiment electronic control unit is integral with a shell portion of carrier portion or base portion . In accordance with an exemplary embodiment the electronic control unit will comprise a microprocessor microcontroller or other equivalent processing device capable of executing commands of computer readable data or program for executing a control algorithm that receives signals from a plurality of sensors and provide an output to a display via visual and or audio drivers wherein an indicator of the electronic control unit is activated. In accordance with an exemplary embodiment the electronic control unit is configured to have analog comparator circuitry for processing analog signals. In one embodiment analog comparator circuitry is provided as a stand alone feature or in combination with other processing electronics.

In order to perform the prescribed functions and desired processing as well as the computations therefore e.g. the execution of fourier analysis algorithm s the control processes prescribed herein and the like the electronic control unit may include but not be limited to a processor s computer s memory storage register s timing interrupt s communication interfaces and input output signal interfaces as well as combinations comprising at least one of the foregoing. For example the controller may include input signal filtering to enable accurate sampling and conversion or acquisitions of such signals from communications interfaces. As described above exemplary embodiments of the present invention can be implemented through computer implemented processes and apparatuses for practicing those processes.

In one contemplated embodiment the electronic control unit is adapted to receive signals transmitted thereto one non limiting example would be direct electrical communication via a wiring. In any of the aforementioned patent applications sensors are configured to provide signals to an electronic control unit coupled to the sensors which comprises logic comparators etc. and or is adapted to provide additional signals upon receipt of a signal indicating the tether has a tension within an acceptable range.

In accordance with an alternative exemplary embodiment the sensor signal may then be processed in the electronic control unit with other signals from a child seat for example a chest harness buckle switch sensor and or a chest harness tension sensor of the restraint belts of the child seat. Accordingly the electronic control unit can determine the status of all the sensors and make an appropriate determination whether the child is secured properly in the child seat or not. The electronic control unit then can provide an output to the driver such as Insufficient adjustable Tension adjustable Installation OK or adjustable Sensor Faulted as a result of performing internal electronic control unit and sensor diagnostics such text read outs may be viewable on a liquid crystal display of the display.

Each status indication can also be displayed as a series of LED lights that are visible to the driver or through a speech system communicated by the electronic control unit or alternatively communicated to the vehicle for display in the instrument panel as part of a display to the driver. In accordance with an exemplary embodiment a standalone sensing system with an internal power supply such as a battery or kinetic device that derives its power from the motion of the vehicle is provided wherein the display is integral with the child seat. Alternatively the system could plug into the 12V DC power of the vehicle.

Examples of such additional parameters being monitored by the additional sensors include but are not limited to monitoring infant seat harness latch state monitoring infant seat harness tension perform infant seat weight classification monitoring infant seat to base interlock state monitoring infant seat angle and seat orientation monitoring infant seat for exposure to severe impact or vehicle crash monitoring rear facing infant seat base for contact with vehicle seatbelt monitoring rear facing infant seat base for tension of vehicle seatbelt or lower tether monitoring chest retainer clip for proper engagement monitoring chest retainer clip for proper vertical height on the harness monitoring shoulder harness slots for proper adjustment wherein audible and or visual indications or warnings are provided to alert an individual if there is non compliance with any of the monitored states.

In each instance the sensors are electrically coupled to the electronic control module wherein the electronic control module provides an electrical signal indicative of the property being sensed. The electronic control module will determine using a look up table or analog circuit monitors and suitable algorithms a desired value for the sensed property which desired value may be based upon the tension of the tether as determined by the tension sensor and if necessary the control module provides an alert signal. In accordance with an exemplary embodiment a simple analog switch can be monitored with a simple comparator op amp circuit or logic gate wherein a signal may be generated for illuminating the display or providing another form of output e.g. audible chime or visual text message . For the display shown herein and in accordance with an exemplary embodiment the alert signal illuminates a green light when the sensed property is within a desired range and a red light is illuminated when the sensed property is not within the desired range.

In accordance with an exemplary embodiment and since it is contemplated that both the electronic control unit and the sensors may be located on both the base portion and the carrier portion there must be a form of transmission of the signals to the electronic control unit. In the case of direct wiring of the sensors to the electronic control unit there must be an electrical connector that will complete this connection when the carrier portion is inserted into the base portion. Electrical connector is illustrated schematically in . In accordance with an exemplary embodiment electrical connector will comprise a first contact member electrically coupled to a plurality of wires or wire harness coupled to sensors or the electronic control unit or both and a complimentary second contact member electrically coupled to a plurality of wires or wire harness coupled to sensors or the electronic control unit or both depending upon the location of the electronic control unit e.g. base or carrier portion .

As illustrated electrical connector will provide a means for sending signals to the control module of the electronic control unit. Also illustrated in are sensors that do not require the electrical connector for providing a means for sending the signals to the electronic control unit. These sensors may be those directly wired to the electronic control unit e.g. sensors disposed on the same portion of the child seat and thus do not require a connection . In addition and in accordance with an exemplary embodiment of the present invention the majority of the sensors and or electrical hardware can be located at the base portion of the child seat thus limiting the amount of weight which may be added to the carrier portion. For example the microprocessor may be located on the base portion and only the display portion will be located on the carrier portion. Accordingly connector will also provide a means for coupling the display portion to the microprocessor. Therefore exemplary embodiments of the present invention are directed to apparatus and methods for integrating a spring loaded axial contact or plunger based electrical connection between any stay in car base and a detachable seat carrier type Child Restraint System CRS .

Another significant consideration when evaluating the type of electrical connection technology best suited for this application is the engage and disengage forces required to mate and un mate the electrical connection. The mass of the detachable seat carrier with or without an infant can be used as the necessary force required to engage the electrical connection during re attachment into the stay in car base. However and during the detachment process any detachment forces created by the electrical connection will be in addition to the forces already required to remove the seat carrier. Therefore an electrical connection method that can both take advantage of the mass of the detachable seat carrier most often occupied by an infant during re attachment to the stay in car base and assist during the removal process is desirable.

Exemplary embodiments are directed to incorporating a spring loaded axial contact based electrical connection system within the design of the Child Restraint System CRS in order to provide an electrical connection between any stay in car base and a detachable seat carrier type CRS. The spring loaded contacts or plungers portion of the connection system would be attached to either the seat carrier or the stay in car base. The mating contact pads part of the connection system would be rigidly mounted to the other portion of the CRS. With this type of electrical connection system the spring loaded contacts or plungers would compress along an axis perpendicular to the rigidly mounted contact pad surface while interlocking the seat carrier into the stay in car base. The large interface tolerances found in a CRS application can readily be incorporated into this connection system design. This electrical connection system can also be designed to take full advantage of the mass of the detachable seat carrier with or without an infant to compress the spring loaded contacts and providing sufficient normal force to minimize the electrical contact resistance across the electrical interface and finally the spring loaded contacts can assist the operator in removing the detachable seat carrier from the stay in car base therefore providing an ergonomic enhancement to the system.

In accordance with an exemplary embodiment and as illustrated in a first connector portion or first contact member is secured to a lower surface of carrier portion . First connector portion or first contact member comprises a plurality of termination pads which are configured to engage a plurality of contacts disposed on a second connector portion or second contact member which is secured to base portion . In accordance with an exemplary embodiment first contact member and second contact member are mounted within receiving areas or cavities disposed on a surface of the base portion or the carrier portion. Alternatively the first contact member and a second contact member are directly mounted to a surface of the base portion or the carrier portion.

In accordance with an exemplary environment of the present invention plurality of contacts are movably secured to second connector portion . More particularly and in an exemplary embodiment plurality of contacts are spring biased such that the same can be depressed into second connector portion or second contact member when carrier portion is inserted into base portion . In addition the surface area of termination pads is significantly larger than the contact points of contacts . Accordingly tolerances of three different directions are provided e.g. the directions corresponding to the dimensions of the contacts on first connector and the amount of movement provided by spring biased contacts . In addition and since contacts are spring biased the same will continue to make contact with termination pads as the tips of contacts wear down from repeated insertion and removal of carrier portion with respect to base portion . Moreover it is also understood that the movement of contacts and the surface area of pads will provide a form of direct electrical contact as the carrier may slightly move within the base portion when the same is secured therein.

It is of course understood that the first connector may be disposed on the base portion and the second connector may be disposed on the carrier portion. In addition and referring now to the exterior configuration of first connector and second connector are configured to facilitate contact between termination pads and contacts . For example second connector may comprise a chamfered surface configured to slightly engage and direct a surface of first connector which may also be angularly configured with respect to first connector .

Referring now to an exemplary embodiment of first connector is illustrated. Here a header portion is configured to receive a plurality of termination pads by for example passing a portion of the same through a slotted opening in the header portion. Once installed therein termination pads provide a low profile or flat surface for making contact with spring biased termination contact of the second connector. As illustrated each of the termination pads will comprise a termination end which will ultimately be secured to a wire or an electrical connector that is either secured to a sensor or the electronic control unit of exemplary embodiments of the present invention. In addition header portion may also be configured to have a securement feature for securing the same end to a cavity of either the carrier portion or the base portion. Thus header portion with a wire harness secured thereto may be snapped into its desired location on either the carrier or base portion. As illustrated securement feature comprises an elongated portion integrally formed with the header portion wherein the elongated portion is configured to have a portion for engaging a feature on a feature of the surface to which it is mounted. Of course numerous configurations for securement feature are contemplated to be within the scope of the present invention.

Referring now to an exemplary embodiment of second connector is illustrated. Second connector comprises a housing portion . Housing portion is configured to define a receiving area to receive a plurality of contacts . As illustrated and in accordance with an exemplary embodiment of the present invention contacts are shaped as a pin rivet or any equivalent structure having an elongated body portion configured to slide within an opening of housing and head portion that prevents the contact from passing completely through opening . In order to provide an electrical path to contacts a plurality of contact members are positioned to make contact with head portion while also providing a terminating end depends away from housing after contact members are secured therein by for example placing a cover portion on to housing portion . As illustrated in contact members are received within slotted openings or other equivalent features located within housing portion . In one exemplary embodiment contact members provide spring bias to contacts e.g. configuring contact members to have a cantilevered spring configuration as well as also providing a terminating end . Thus termination end of the contacts are biased to protrude from an exterior surface of housing portion .

A non limiting example of exemplary dimensions of housing portion are as follows 2.18 inches 1.26 inches 0.49 inches of course dimensions greater or less than the aforementioned values are contemplated to be within the scope of the present invention.

Referring now to an alternate exemplary embodiment of the present invention is illustrated. Here housing portion is configured to have alternative exterior and interior configuration. As illustrated in contact members are configured to have cantilevered spring portions each having U shaped contact ends . The contact ends are disposed at one end of contact member which in one non limiting embodiment comprises a reduced thickness portion of contact . The U shaped contact end will provide enhanced electrical contact with head portion . As illustrated the contact end portion is configured to make contact with head portion of contacts .

As illustrated in housing is configured to have a raised shoulder surface configured to define a lip or feature for engagement with first connector . Moreover housing is also configured to have a plurality of securement features for securing the same to either a base portion or carrier portion of the child seat. Non limiting exemplary dimensions of second connector comprise a height of 2.34 inches a width of 2.60 inches and a depth of 0.96 inches to shoulder surface . Of course dimensions greater or less than the aforementioned values are considered to be within the scope of exemplary embodiments of the present invention.

In addition and referring now to first connector comprises an angular orientation for termination pads as well as providing a ridge lip or feature configured for engaging second connector . Non limiting exemplary dimensions of first connector comprise a height of 1.43 inches a width of 2.10 inches and a depth of 0.49 inches to ridge . Of course dimensions greater or less than the aforementioned values are considered to be within the scope of exemplary embodiments of the present invention.

Referring now to yet another alternative configuration of second connector is illustrated. In this embodiment a plurality of biasing springs are provided to provide a biasing force to contacts as well as make an electrical connection with head portions at one end and a termination pad at the other end which is an electrical communication with the contact point wherein termination of a wire may be facilitated through soldering mechanical fasting or any other suitable method. It is also contemplated that springs may be combined with the embodiments of in order to increase the biasing force provided to the contacts.

Non limiting exemplary examples of contact normal forces are 70 160 gmf. Of course values greater or less then the aforementioned ranges are contemplated to be within the scope of the present invention. Non limiting exemplary examples of the contact material of the second connector are C26000 brass pins with a contact plating of Gold over Palladium Nickel or Gold over Nickel on mating interfaces C52100 phosphor bronze springs while non limiting exemplary examples of the contact material of the first connector are C26000 brass and the insulator material comprises glass filled thermoplastic.

Non limiting exemplary examples of allowable misalignment of exemplary embodiments are X dir 0.15 Y dir 0.15 and Z dir 0.05

Exemplary embodiments of the present invention provide a rugged design that can withstand abuse spills and cleaning. Moreover the second connector will not trap debris and therefore no protective covers are required. The receptacle pins of the second connector cannot be bent or pulled out. The first connector has a very low profile and is self cleaning e.g. will not trap loose debris . The large allowable misalignment eliminates the need for floating carriers and flexing of wires cables. In addition both connectors can be installed snapped in from the outside of the seat base. This provides the best punch in resistance and the connectors can be designed to withstand the forces associated with securing the car seat base into a vehicle.

While the invention has been described with reference to an exemplary embodiment it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes may be made and equivalents may be substituted for elements thereof without departing from the scope of the invention. In addition many modifications may be made to adapt a particular situation or material to the teachings of the invention without departing from the essential scope thereof. Therefore it is intended that the invention not be limited to the particular embodiment disclosed as the best mode contemplated for carrying out this invention but that the invention will include all embodiments falling within the scope of the appended claims.

