---

title: Two-mean level-crossing time interval estimation method
abstract: N-sample level-crossing estimator methods and devices are provided that extract more information from given time samples than the current two-sample approach and that are more resistant to interference from noises. The two-mean level-crossing time-interval estimation method extracts more information from given time samples than existing methods, advantageously estimates a level-crossing time interval with a limited number of time samples and is quieter than current noisy estimation techniques. The two-mean level crossing time-interval estimation method for N-sample estimation uses all N time samples by calculating the mean value of the first N/2 time samples and subtracting it by the second N/2 time sample to average out the noises in time samples. The two-mean level crossing time-interval estimation method can be implemented by using a Finite Impulse Response filter to take level-crossing time samples as inputs, take the differential level-crossing time samples as inputs, or take the N/2-step differential level-crossing time-interval as an input. An addition only one-step differential level-crossing time-interval estimator device and a one-step differential level-crossing time-interval estimator device are also provided.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07133791&OS=07133791&RS=07133791
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07133791
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050331
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured used imported and licensed by or for the Government of the United States of America without the payment to me of any royalty thereon.

This invention relates generally to the field of signal frequency estimation. In particular the present invention relates to a two mean level crossing time interval and signal frequency estimation technique.

Level crossing time interval estimation techniques can be useful for signal frequency estimation rotation angular velocity estimation and signal modulation classification. The time interval between two level crossing points of a periodic function can be estimated by using a moving average of the level crossing time samples. Current level crossing time interval estimation techniques are based on a certain number of important mathematical expressions.

Assuming that the signal g x is periodic in a given time domain x x xand also assume that signal g x has N number of level crossing time samples or measurements x k x k 1 . . . x k N 1 between xand xsuch that g x k g x k 1 . . . g x k N 1 E where E is a given level for measuring crossings. If E 0 the time samples x k x k 1 . . . X k N 1 are considered to be zero crossing points. The time interval between two level crossing time samples x k and x k v is then defined as v step differential level crossing time interval denoted by the expression 1 where 1 vV N 1 . . . is a positive integer. Since the function g x is noisy in practice the level crossing time interval will be estimated by taking the time average of 1 1 2 as shown below 

There are a number of disadvantages shortcomings and limitations with the current two sample estimation technique. One problem with the current two sample estimation technique is that it only uses two samples at a time so that the information from numerous other given time samples is not accessed and used. Another problem with the current two sample estimation technique is that noises in samples x k N 1 and x k from various sources such as electronic components interference in transmission or even thermal noise will directly affect the two sample estimation result of m k N 1 . Thus there has been a long felt need for other estimating techniques and devices that are quieter and extract more information from given time samples than the current two sample approach.

The long felt need for new time estimation techniques has now been answered with N sample level crossing estimator methods and devices that extract more information from given time samples than the current two sample approach and that are more resistant to interference from noises. The two mean level crossing time interval and signal frequency estimation method of the present invention extracts more information from given time samples than existing methods can advantageously estimate a level crossing time interval with a limited number of time samples and is more accurate than the inefficient and noisy prior art estimation techniques. The present invention also encompasses addition only one step differential level crossing time interval estimator and one step differential level crossing time interval estimator devices that are less noisy than inefficient prior art estimation techniques.

It is an object of the present invention to provide a method for two mean level crossing time interval estimation.

It is still another object of the present invention to provide a method for two mean level crossing time interval and signal frequency estimation that extracts more information from a greater number of samples.

It is also an object of the present invention to provide an addition only one step differential level crossing time interval estimator device that extracts more information from a greater number of samples and is less noisy than prior art techniques.

It is still a further object of the present invention to provide a one step differential level crossing time interval estimator device that extracts more information from a greater number of samples and is less noisy than prior art techniques.

These and other objects and advantages are accomplished with this invention s two mean level crossing time interval and signal frequency estimation method for N sample estimation. The new technique uses all N time samples by calculating the mean value of the first N 2 time samples and subtracting it by the second N 2 time sample to average out the noises in time samples. The two mean level crossing time interval estimation method can be implemented by using a Finite Impulse Response FIR filter to take level crossing time samples as inputs take the differential level crossing time samples as inputs or take counter outputs as an input. The present invention contemplates this N time sample estimation method an addition only one step differential level crossing time interval estimator device and a one step differential level crossing time interval estimator device.

Referring now to the drawings is a conceptual flow diagram depicting a basic N sample time estimator showing a signal g x being sent to a level crossing sampler so that the level crossing time x k represented by arrow is sampled and recorded whenever the value of the signal g x equals a given level E so that signal g x E. Level crossing time samples x k x k 1 . . . x k 2p 1 are inputs to the H k filter resulting in estimating an average time difference z k k 2p 1 represented by arrow between two consecutive time samples and an estimated level crossing time interval output .

Referring now to which depicts a two mean N sample time interval estimator device that is a more detailed implementation of the N sample time interval estimator where like numerals are employed for similar structures. Signal g x is shown being sent to level crossing sampler . Giving N 2 p 1 number of samples x k . . . x k p x k p 1 . . . and x k 2p 1 where p 1 2 . . . is a positive integer a time sequence input is provided to a means for filtering and as shown in the output of the filtering means arrow is a time interval estimated output according to the equation 

Because the range of time difference sample x k within time sequence input is very large the differential time of Equation 1 may be used to simplify the operation. Equation 6 can be rearranged as follows 

Referring now to which depicts an N 2 step differentiator type of level crossing time interval estimator device that is a more detailed implementation of the estimator where like numerals are employed for like structures. The N 2 step differentiator level crossing time interval estimator device may be implemented by using multiple shift registers or other means to generate 2 k k 2p 1 . The N 2 step differentiator type of level crossing time interval estimator device further comprises a level crossing sampler a differentiator and a means for filtering . The filtering means further comprises p number of shift registers A D which provide shift register outputs A and B to p 1 inputs adder so that a multiplier is not required and an amplifier .

In this device the N 2 step differential level crossing time interval y k p 1 provides a time sequence input for the filtering means . Adder sends a filtered output to amplifier that provides gain adjustment and calibration for the average level crossing time difference z k k 2p 1 resulting in an estimated level crossing time interval output . The average level crossing time difference z k k 2p 1 is defined in Equation 8 above. The filtering means can also be a moving average filter or a FIR filter.

Referring now to the drawings depicts the steps of the method for two mean estimating level crossing time intervals and signal frequency estimation of the present invention. Step is a collecting step for collecting a group of time difference samples from a signal g x . The group of time difference samples further comprise N 2p 1 number of consecutive time samples x k x k 1 . . . x k 2p 1 where p 1 2 . . . and is a positive integer and electronic noise. Step is a generating a time sequence input step where the time sequence input from the collected time difference samples is generated for a means for filtering. Step is a first calculating step during which a time interval estimate output is calculated in the filtering means the filtering means having 2p 1 number of shift registers a group of adders an amplifier and a set of coefficients j 1 1 . . . 1 1 the time interval estimate output having the same formula as Equation No. 5. Step is a providing step where a series of shift register outputs are provided by the shift registers to the adders. Step is a generating step to generate an increased accuracy N sample level crossing time interval estimate from estimating said N sample level crossing time interval by two mean values 

The present invention also encompasses the one step embodiments of differential N sample time interval estimators depicted in . In practice it may be easier to measure the difference between two consecutive time samples y k 1 rather than to measure either x k or y k p 1 . is a conceptual flow diagram of a simplified one step differential level crossing time interval estimator comprising a signal g x being sent to a level crossing detector to detect a level crossing event a local oscillator a counter and a FIR H k filter .

In this embodiment the time difference between two consecutive time samples y k 1 is obtained by using counter which is reset to zero at the level crossing time k 1 and starts to count the oscillation cycles of the local oscillator . When the next level crossing time k is detected the counter reports the value of y k 1 to shift registers A D before being reset to zero for the next measurement. The number of cycles recorded by y k 1 is converted and calibrated to a time scale by using a constant K. The frequency of the local oscillator is much higher than the frequency of signal g x in order to have a good time resolution. The sequence of time difference samples y k 1 y k 1 1 . . . y k 2p 1 are time interval inputs to the filtering means . The 2p number of shift registers A D and coefficients of 1 2 . . . p p 1 p . . . 2 1 estimate the average level crossing time difference z k k 2p 1 represented by arrow with amplifier being used for gain adjustment and calibration. The estimated level crossing time interval output of the one step differential level crossing time interval estimator of the present invention is more accurate than prior art estimation techniques because of the higher number of samples used. The filtering means may be a FIR filter.

Yet another variation of the estimation devices of the present invention is provided by the addition only one step differential N sample time interval estimators depicted in . is a conceptual flow diagram depicting a simplified addition only one step differential N sample time interval estimator comprising a signal g x being sent to a level crossing detector a counter and two means for filtering A and B. Here the time difference between two consecutive time samples y k 1 is obtained by using counter to provide an input to the filtering means A and B for estimating the average level crossing time difference z k k 2p 1 represented by arrow resulting in an estimated level crossing time interval output . The filtering means A and B may be a FIR filter.

To avoid using multipliers and to further simplify the computation one can replace y k i p 1 in Equation 8 with

These embodiments of the present invention are intended to be illustrative and not limiting with respect to the variety of possible embodiments. It is to be further understood that other features and modifications to the foregoing detailed description of the estimating methods and devices are all considered to be within the contemplation of the present invention which is not limited by this detailed description. Those skilled in the art will readily appreciate that any number of configurations of the present invention and numerous modifications and combinations of materials components geometrical arrangements and dimensions can achieve the results described herein without departing from the spirit and scope of this invention. Accordingly the present invention should not be limited by the foregoing description but only by the appended claims.

