---

title: System and method for providing search results based on location
abstract: A method for providing a listing of common searches based on a location. The method includes receiving a location of a mobile computing device, generating a listing of common searches associated with the location, and transmitting the listing of common searches to the mobile computing device.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07565157&OS=07565157&RS=07565157
owner: A9.com, Inc.
number: 07565157
owner_city: Palo Alto
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051118
---
Users of mobile computing devices are becoming more and more accustomed to being able to obtain instant access to information. The information may be downloaded to the mobile computing devices using a variety of different types of wireless or wired connections such as WiFi Bluetooth cellular networks etc. The information that can be downloaded may include information on almost any subject of interest to the user.

A user can access this information by performing a search. A search may include one or more keywords that are entered by the user of the mobile computing device at one or more search engine websites. For example if a visitor to the search engine website enters the term flowers web sites that may be relevant to flowers are displayed. Searches can be specifically tailored to access desired information.

The amount of information that is available is often daunting. A user may recognize that a vast amounts of information is available but may be unfamiliar with the searches that need to be performed to locate useful information. This may particularly be true where a user is using the mobile computing device in a new and unfamiliar location. Additionally the information that is available and the searches that need to be performed to locate that information may be constantly evolving and changing.

What is needed is a system and method for assisting users of mobile devices with locating useful information. What is further needed is such a system and method that may be configured to customize the search results to the particular user.

One embodiment relates to a method for providing a listing of common searches based on a location. The method includes receiving a location of a mobile computing device generating a listing of common searches associated with the location and transmitting the listing of common searches to the mobile computing device.

Another embodiment relates to a location aware searching system. The system includes a location database configured to maintain a listing of locations where each location is associated with a listing of searches. The system further includes a location aware search engine system. The location aware search engine system includes a computer program stored on a computer readable medium configured to perform the steps of receiving a location generating a listing of common searches associated with the location from the listing of searches and transmitting the listing of common searches to a mobile computing device.

Yet another embodiment relate to a location aware searching system. The location aware searching system includes a computer implemented web site. The web site is configured to generate a user profile for a user based on activity of the user when visiting the web site. The location aware searching system further includes a location aware search engine system including a computer program configured to perform the steps of receiving a location generating a listing of common searches associated with the location filtering the listing of common searches based on the user profile from the web site system and transmitting the listing of common searches to a mobile computing device.

This summary and the following detailed description are directed to certain specific embodiments of the invention. The invention is not limited to the particular embodiments and applications described herein. The invention is defined only by the claims.

Referring to a location aware searching system configured to provide a listing of common searches to a user of a mobile device based on the location of the mobile device is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. System includes a mobile computing device global positioning satellites a mobile communication infrastructure a gateway server an information network a location aware search engine system and a search engine . According to alternative embodiments system may include additional fewer and or a different configuration of the components shown in .

Mobile computing device may be configured to provide telecommunication functions using mobile communication infrastructure . Mobile computing device may be for example a cellular telephone a personal digital assistant PDA a portable music player a portable web browser a digital camera a video game console or any other portable computing device. For purpose of explanation mobile computing device is described herein with reference to a cellular telephone or a device having cellular capabilities. Mobile computing device may be configured to include one or more components configured to facilitate computing functions related to searching for information and presenting search results including a processor memory a display etc.

According to an exemplary embodiment mobile computing device may be configured to include a location detection system . Location detection system may include any type of system configured to determine the location of mobile computing device . Location detection system may be implemented using hardware software or some combination thereof. According to an exemplary embodiment location detection system includes a Global Positioning System GPS receiver configured to receive global positioning signals from a plurality of global positioning satellites to determine a current location of mobile computing device . In an exemplary embodiment location detection system may be used to determine the location of mobile computing device within approximately 15 feet.

Alternatively the location of mobile computing device may be determined using any of a number of alternative locating methods. Further location detection system may be associated with any of the systems or devices within system . For example where mobile computing device is a cellular telephone and mobile communication infrastructure is a network of cellular towers gateway server may be configured include location detection system implemented as software configured to determine the location of mobile computing device based on a signal received from mobile computing device . The accuracy of the location detection may be improved in the software using for example triangulation techniques and an increased number of cellular towers.

Mobile communication infrastructure may be any type of communication infrastructure configured to provide connectivity between mobile computing device and one or more other computing devices. An exemplary communication infrastructure may include a network of cellular communication towers as shown in . Alternative communication infrastructures may include a wireless computing communication network such as a WiFi network a Bluetooth network a satellite network or any other type of system configured to provide connectivity to mobile computing device .

Location detection may be provided based on the node or nodes of communication infrastructure receiving a signal from device as described above. Location detection using mobile communication infrastructure may provide improved location detection inside buildings where GPS receivers may fail to receive GPS signals. Mobile computing device may also be configured to use a combination of any number of location detection techniques to determine its current location. Location detection may be configured to be performed either automatically or based upon a user driven location update instruction.

Location detection system may further be configured to determine the orientation and or direction of movement of the user. Orientation may be the current direction that the user is facing such as north east south west. Direction of movement may be the direction in which the user of device is traveling. The orientation and direction of movement may be determined using compass readings data obtained from multiple waypoints etc.

Orientation and direction of movement may be utilized by location detection system to predict future locations. Specifically the location may be set to locations that are in front of or along the direction of travel of the user. For example where the location and or direction of movement indicates the user is on an expressway the location may be set to the next available exit from the expressway. Location detection system may further be configured to implement a pathfinding algorithm where a user provides a destination and the location is set to include a travel route including locations along a path between the user s current location and that destination. The predicted location may further be refined based on a detected mode of travel such a walking biking driving etc. The mode of travel may be determined based on location speed of travel etc.

Gateway server may be any type of computing system connected to communication infrastructure and configured to connect infrastructure to at least one other network such as information network . Gateway server may be configured to transfer messages from one type of network to the other. For example gateway server may be configured to receive a web page request from mobile computing device over mobile communication infrastructure and convert that message to a web page request for communication over information network to the computing host of the requested web page.

According to an exemplary embodiment information network may be the Internet. Information network may be configured to facilitate the transfer of information to and from search engine system to mobile computing device through gateway server and mobile communication infrastructure .

Location aware search engine system may be a computing system configured to provide a listing of common searches based on the current location of a user utilizing mobile computing device described in further detail below. Location aware search engine system includes a location database and a user database configured to facilitate providing the listing of common searches based on location and based on one or more attributes of the user respectively. Location database is described in further detail below with reference to .

User database includes a listing of attributes associated with a user of device . The attributes may be manually entered by the user or may be automatically determined by device search engine system and or by another system e.g. an on line service with which the user has registered . For example manually entered information may include the user s name home address place of employment interests etc. Examples of automatically determined information may include attributes of device usual connection points to infrastructure frequency of use of device location patterns for device etc. The implementation and use of user database is described in further detail below with reference to

Referring now to a table representative of location database including a listing of locations and listing of searches associated with each location is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. Location database may be implemented for example using any of the database computer programs that are well know in the art.

The listing of locations may include possible locations from which searches have previously been requested by users of mobile computing devices. A location may be broadly defined to include a general geographic description such as the city of Chicago may be narrowly defined according to an exact longitude and latitude or may be defined according to any location based criteria such as a region a climate an area of a city etc. A location may further be defined as a location type for example a location may be coffee shop independent of the particular geographic location or identity of the coffee shop.

Each listing in listing of searches is a listing of all of the searches associated with a particular location from listing of locations . The listing of searches may be sorted according to a frequency ranking of the search. A frequency ranking of the search is how many times the search has been entered by users at the particular location. Accordingly search as shown in may have be entered by users more frequently than search . Accordingly search received the search designation.

The frequency ranking of a search may be adjusted according to the recentness of the search. For example the most popular search at a particular location may be for a music concert that happened a month ago. Even though the music concert may be the most common search the fact that the searches are all at least a month old may be used to adjust the frequency ranking. The recentness of the search may also be used by user to target searches of interest. For example a young professional user may be interested in finding the hottest new nightclub and be interested just in searches performed within the last month while a tourist couple may be interest sightseeing at perennial favorites in a location and be interested in consistently favorite searches performed over a long period of time. As described below filtering may also be performed based on other parameters.

It is important to note that although only a few searches are shown in listing of searches each listing of searches may include any number of searches. The listing may continually be updated and reordered based on the frequency ranking of the searches or the occurrence of new searches.

The configuration of the listing of searches may depend on the location type and or how the listing of locations is configured. For example where the listing of locations includes geographic designations e.g. a city an area of a city and so on the listing of searches may be sorted based on the frequency ranking of the searches as previously stated. In another embodiment rather than comprising a list of locations and a list of searches performed at each of those locations the database may comprise a list of searches and for each search an identification of the location where the search was performed e.g. a GPS longitude and latitude . In this embodiment the list of common searches may be determined dynamically as described below.

Mobile computing device may be configured to download the most common search requests for a location upon detection that the user has entered a new location. For example a traveler upon arriving in a Chicago airport may desire to see the most common searches that have been performed by other users at the Chicago airport. The most common searches may be the top ten searches the top twenty or some other selection of the common searches.

Downloading the most common searches may also include downloading current search results for the most common searches. For example the Chicago traveler may use device to receive a common searches listing indicating that the most common search at the Chicago airport is for cold weather gear. Device may be configured to also download a listing of search results for cold weather gear to device for easy and fast access of the search results by the user of device .

Each of the searches in listing of searches may further include additional search information associated with the searches. According to an exemplary embodiment the additional information may include one or more attributes associated with each search. Exemplary attributes may include timing information such as a time of day a time of year a season etc. type of user information a user grouping associated with the searches search type information etc. The attributes may include any information that is available and associated with the common search. As shown by the varying number and size of the boxes of additional information the amount and type of information associated with each of the searches may also be variable. The attributes may be used in generating a more customized listing of common searches as described in further detail below with reference to .

It should be understood that the listing of searches in location database may be continuously updated. Accordingly each time a user of a device uses the device or any other device to perform a search on search engine a location may be associated with the search and this information may be used to update location database . The location database may similarly be updated based on searches performed by any other user. Accordingly the listing of common searches i.e. the listing that is presented as common searches will also evolve or change over time based on current events shifting interests as determined by the searches that are performed changes in demographics at a location etc. Database may be maintained and implemented using a computer program and processor associated with location aware search engine system .

Referring now to a flowchart representing a method for providing a listing of common searches based on the location of mobile computing device is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. The method may be implemented by location aware search engine system .

In a step the method for providing a new listing of common searches based on location is initiated. The initiation of method may be based on any of a variety of events such as a user request detection of a new location by device an elapsed time detection of a change in the listing of common searches within listing etc. Method may further be initiated by either the mobile computing device in a pull type operation for example where user of the mobile computing device inputs a request for a new listing of common searches based on its current location or by location aware search engine system in a push type operation for example after detecting that a specified amount of time has elapsed since the listing was last updated or that device is in a new location.

Device may be configured to transmit the request for a listing of the most common searches associated with the current location to location aware search engine system . The request may be transmitted using any of a variety of techniques such as an application programming interface API function call to a computer program running on location aware search engine system an email request that can be parsed by location aware search engine system a file transfer protocol ftp request for a file containing the requested information etc.

The location of device may be determined in a step . For example the location of device may be determined based upon one or more GPS signals received by device . Upon initiation of method device may be configured to automatically attempt to determine its current location. For example a user arriving in Chicago may power up device . Upon powering up device may be configured to receive a GPS signal to determine its current location. Alternatively device may be configured such that the user may manually enter a desired location using an input device associated with device . Alternatively the location of device may be determined by location aware search engine system based on for example information received from one or more cellular towers associated with mobile communication infrastructure or a location received from gateway server .

Upon receiving the location and the request for a listing of common searches search engine system may be configured to generate a listing of the most common searches for that location in a step . Where listing of searches is pre sorted based on the frequency ranking of the searches step may simply include retrieving a top number of searches from listing of searches associated with the current location from location database .

Alternatively the listing of common searches may be generated dynamically upon receipt of the request based on a frequency ranking associated with each search. The listing of searches may be ranked according to both how often the search has been performed and a geographic proximity between each of the searches and the current location of device . The listing of common searches may be generated using the highest ranked searches.

The listing of common searches may be transmitted by location aware search engine system to device in a step . The listing of common searches may be transmitted to device through information network and communication infrastructure . The listing of common searches may be transmitted in any of a variety of formats. For example the listing of common searches may be transmitted as an html document in an electronic mail message as a text document as a spreadsheet etc. The format for the listing of common searches may be configured to be dependent on one or more attributes of device . For example where the device is a cellular phone with a relatively smaller display the preferred format may be a simple text document. However where device is a portable computer the format may be a full html document with SVGA graphics embedded links etc.

Where device and location aware search engine system are configured to implement a push type operation location aware search engine system may be configured to transmit the listing of common searches when device is not otherwise active to avoid a negative effect on a communication throughput for device . Push type operations provide updated listings of common searches to the user on demand without requiring interaction by the user.

The listing of common searches that is transmitted to device may include the most common searches from listing of searches from database . The listing may further be configured to include additional information that may be useful to a user viewing the listing. For example the listing of common searches may be configured to include the results of the common searches advertising related to the common searches advertising related to the location links to additional information based on the current location etc. For example where a user of device in Chicago receives a listing of common searches including the search for cold weather gear the listing may be configured to include an advertisement offering winter coats for sale.

Upon receipt device may be configured to either display or store the listing of common searches based on location. A stored listing may be updated based on receipt of a new listing or based on a new search request by the user of device . Search engine system may also be configured to monitor user interaction with the list of common searched that is presented. For example if a user selects a particular search this information may be tracked so that the search may be ranked higher in the future.

Device may further be configured to utilize the listing of common searches to implement and or supplement an autocomplete function when a user is manually entering a search string using device for example in accordance with the teachings of U.S. Pat. No. 6 564 213 entitled Search Query Autocompletion hereby incorporated by reference. The listing of common searches may be used to suggest autocompletion strings and or to bias suggested autocompletion strings to favor strings corresponding to searches commonly performed at the user s location. For example a user may start typing a keyword restaurants in a search engine web page being displayed on device . Device may be configured to recognize using the listing of common searches that users at the current location of device often search for restaurants. Accordingly device may automatically display the keyword restaurants after the user has only entered a first few letters such as re reducing the amount of typing for the user. An autocomplete function based on location may be utilized to eliminate or reduce the prominence of autocomplete keywords that may not be applicable to the current location such as for example red square red pandas regulators etc.

Referring now to a flowchart depicting a method for applying a filter to a listing of searches to generate an optimized listing of common searches is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. Method may be used to customize the listing of common searches according to one or more criteria associated with a user of device . Providing a customized listing provides the most common searches performed at the current location that may be of interest to a particular user.

In a step location aware search engine system receives a request for the most common searches based on the current location of device similar to step in . Search engine system may be configured according to a user profile set in user database to filter the listing based one or more user attribute filters also stored in user database described in further detail below. Alternatively the request received in step may be configured to include an indication that the listing of common searches should be generated based on one or more user attribute filters and one or more of the user attributes.

User attributes may include any type of information associated with the user of device . Exemplary attributes can be any information that may be useful in determining the type of searches that may be of interest to the user. For example user attributes may include the user s age the user s employer the user s past purchase history user defined interests such as sport technology outdoor activities dining etc. The user attributes may be manually defined by the user or may be determined automatically based on the user s activity location attributes of device etc. For example user attributes may be determined based on a user s on line behavior. Exemplary behavior may include items purchased items viewed searches entered wish list items selected amount of time spent or frequency of visits at any one particular web site or type of web site etc.

User attributes may be stored and maintained in user database . Search engine system may be configured to maintain and update user database . User database may be updated based on detected changes to one or more attributes associated with the user of device such as new interests as evidenced by recent searches etc.

The user attribute filters may be determined in a step . The user attribute filters may be received in the request for a listing of common searches or may be retrieved from user database . User attribute filters stored in user database may be generated based on a request from the user that future listings of common searches should be filtered based on one or more of the user attributes. The request may be accompanied by a designation of one or more user attributes to be used for filtering the results. The user attribute filter may also be dynamically maintained by modifying the user attributes based of actual user activity. For example if a user habitually elects to receive more information on searches related to outdoor activities a user attribute indicating a preference for outdoor activities may be used to filter future listings of common searches. Each user attribute may further be associated with a weighting to emphasize or de emphasize user attributes based on user activities.

In a step the listing of searches may alternatively be filtered according to a defined sub group of users referred to hereafter as a user group. The user group may be defined by the user. For example a user may select a known group of users. The known group of users may be specifically identified users e.g. designated by a username or may be users having defined attributes.

Alternatively a user group may defined automatically based on the user s past activity. For example user attribute information may be available based on a user s activity at an on line retail website. The activity may include searches entered items clicked on advertisements clicked on items purchased frequency of purchases cost of items purchased etc. The activity may be analyzed to predict the user s future behavior and associate the user with a user group having the same pattern of activity. The user group and assumptions about the user group may be used to filter the listing of common searches to target the user s interests i.e. the searches that are presented to the user may be determined based on whether previous users in the same user group have selected the searches for viewing or have manually entered the search .

Filtering the listing of searches according to a user group allows the user to only receive searches including additional search information indicating that the searches were performed by a group of users that the user has specifically designated or that has been chosen based on mutual interests. The user group may also be either received in the request for a listing of common searches or retrieved from user database .

It should be understood that the filters described above in steps and may be combined such that the user requests filtering based on both a user attribute filter and a defined user group. The degree to which each filter method is used may also be defined by the user or automatically defined based on the activities of the user.

In a step the listing of searches may be filtered according the filtering technique designated in either step or step and by frequency ranking to produce an optimized listing of common searches. Advantageously the optimized listing of common searches will be more likely to have searches that are of interest to the particular user of device . Further any information that is included with the listing of common searches may also be customized based on the designated filters.

Although two filters are described in detail above with reference to it should be understood that the listing of common searches may further be filtered according to other criteria methods. For example a listing of common searches may be generated and or filtered according to other information such as information received from a news source. The news source may be selected based on the location for example the news source may be a local news source which provides information relevant to the current location. Examples may include local traffic locations that are the subject of a blog local events such as a parade that will occur near the user s location etc. The news source may also be selected based on the user s interests. The user s interests may be manually entered or may be generated based on the user s activities e.g. recent searches entered recent purchases made travel habits etc. . For example the news source may be a local newspaper restaurant review. Accordingly the listing of common searches may be filtered such that only restaurants that have been recently reviewed by the local newspaper are displayed in the listing of common searches.

Referring now to a table representative of location database including a listing of locations where each location includes a listing of user groups and a listing of searches for each user group is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. Table is similar to table with the exception that the information associated with each location is sorted according to one or more defined user groups.

Filtering the listing of searches in method may be implemented using table . The listing of searches may also be sorted according to any additional fields. The additional fields may be included in the additional information associated with each of the common searches. For example although table shows the listing of searches by location sorted according to a defined user group as described in step of the method the results could alternatively be sorted according to one or more user attributes as described in step of the method both shown and described above in .

Referring now to a location aware searching system similar to the system of but further including a web site system is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. Web site system may be any type of computing system configured to host a web site and maintain a database of user information . Web site system may be configured to display any type of information and or provide any type of function such as retail shopping a search engine mapping functions etc.

According to an exemplary embodiment web site system may be a web site associated with a retail goods provider. Web site may be configured as a web page or series of web pages configured to offer goods for sale to users of the web site . For example where the retailer is a seller of printed materials web site may be configured to allow a user to search browse and purchase the printed materials through web site . Web site may further be configured to perform additional functions such as storing wish lists generating one or more suggestions to the user etc.

Retail web site system may include programming logic configured to maintain the database of user information . Database of user information may be populated based on information associated with the user such as the user s name the user s address the user s gender the user s income level etc. Database may further be populated based on the user s activity at web site . For example database may be populated based on the user s past purchasing activity the user s searches performed at web site the items in the user wish list etc.

Database may be used by system and or system to identify a user group described above with reference to step or define user attributes described above with reference to step that can be associated with the user as described above with reference to . For example the user may have recently purchased a Japanese cook book through a retail web site. The purchase history information may be used to filter the listing of common searches such that searches and corresponding search results related to Japanese cooking such as for example Japanese restaurants will be displayed more prominently. Accordingly other things being equal if the user has just purchased a Japanese cookbook the user may be presented with common searches relating to Japanese restaurants and not other types of restaurants even if the searches for the other types of restaurants were equally commonly performed at that location.

Referring now to a flowchart representative of a method of providing a listing of common searches based on location where the location is a location type is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. Flowchart illustrates a method where a received location is matched to a location type such that the listing of common searches can be aggregated with searches performed by the user at other locations of the same type.

In a step the current location of device is determined similar to step in method described above with reference to . The location may be received as an input value or may be determined by search engine system .

In a step the determined location may be matched to a location type. Location types may include a variety of types. The types may be defined either specifically or broadly. For example a location type may include cold weather cities. This location type may be associated with any city location having a latitude that is above a certain degree and or based on historical average temperatures for the city location. According to another example the location type may be coffee shop. This location type may determined by matching received GPS coordinates with a street address and determining that a coffee shop is located at that street address. Although two examples are provided it should be understood that the concept of a location type may be broadly applied to any selection criteria that may be associated with a location. The location type may also be determined based on any of a variety of methods.

In a step a listing of common searches may be generated based on the location type independent of the specific location similar to step of . The listing may also be customized based on one or more filters as described above with reference to .

For example a user of device may enter a gourmet coffee shop. The gourmet coffee shop may be located close to a brokerage house such that the most common searches at that coffee house are related to stock market news. However the particular user may have a filter set up such that the listing of common searches is displayed according to location type. Accordingly the listing of common searches may uses an expanded group of users that reflects a broader range of interests.

Alternatively it may be that this particular user although liking gourmet coffee does not like the food that is served at gourmet coffee shops and always performs a search for other nearby food vendors when he visits a gourmet coffee shop. Accordingly one exemplary filter designating a user group may be automatically configured to include just the user to target that user s particular interests. The listing of common searches for this solo user group including just the user may indicate that the most common search associated with the location type of coffee shop is doughnuts. Accordingly the user may select to run this highly personalized search using the listing of common searches.

Although the filtering of search results is described above as being done during generation of the listing of common searches one of skill in the art will recognize that the filtering step may be performed by the user at any time. For example filtering of the listing of common searches may be performed based on a selection by the user of a filter while the user is viewing a unfiltered listing of common searches.

Here and throughout terms such as user are to be understood in the broadest possible sense. By way of illustration and not of limitation a user may be an individual who visits and views or otherwise perceives a listing of common searches and any associated information or advertisements via a web browser or other client software program running on a personal computer wireless handheld device or the like but may also be for example a corporate or other entity whose servers access published web content and advertisements by invoking web services through appropriate application programming interfaces APIs a user may or may not be the intended or actual end consumer of a product or service that is the subject of an advertisement etc. In sum persons of skill in the art will appreciate that a wide variety of actors more than can be conveniently set forth here can play the roles of user for purposes of the present invention. In a similar vein and as will be apparent from the foregoing terms such as web page website and so forth are used to give specific illustrative examples of settings in which search content and advertisements can be presented to and perceived by users. Such examples are not intended to be limiting and persons of skill in the art will appreciate that many other such settings now known or yet to be developed may be suitable to the practice of the present invention in specific embodiments.

It should be noted that although flow charts may be provided herein to show a specific order of method steps it is understood that the order of these steps may differ from what is depicted. Also two or more steps may be performed concurrently or with partial concurrence. Such variation will depend on the software and hardware systems chosen and on designer choice. It is understood that all such variations are within the scope of the invention. Likewise software and web implementations of the present invention could be accomplished with standard programming techniques with rule based logic and other logic to accomplish the various database searching steps correlation steps comparison steps and decision steps. It should also be noted that the word engine as used herein and in the claims is intended to encompass implementations using one or more lines of software code and or hardware implementations and or equipment for receiving manual inputs. It is to be understood that any method steps as recited herein e.g. in the claims may be performed by a configuration utility e.g. Java based executed by a computing device based on input by a user. Of course according to various alternative embodiments any suitable configuration utility application system computing device etc. may be used to execute implement and or perform method steps as recited in this disclosure including the claims .

The invention is described above with reference to drawings. These drawings illustrate certain details of specific embodiments that implement the systems and methods and programs of the present invention. However describing the invention with drawings should not be construed as imposing on the invention any limitations associated with features shown in the drawings. The present invention contemplates methods systems and program products on any machine readable media for accomplishing its operations. The embodiments of the present invention may be implemented using an existing computer processor or by a special purpose computer processor incorporated for this or another purpose or by a hardwired system.

As noted above embodiments within the scope of the present invention include program products comprising machine readable media for carrying or having machine executable instructions or data structures stored thereon. Such machine readable media can be any available media which can be accessed by a general purpose or special purpose computer or other machine with a processor. By way of example such machine readable media can comprise RAM ROM PROM EPROM EEPROM CD ROM or other optical disk storage magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to carry or store desired program code in the form of machine executable instructions or data structures and which can be accessed by a general purpose or special purpose computer or other machine with a processor. When information is transferred or provided over a network or another communication connection either hardwired wireless or a combination of hardwired or wireless to a machine the machine properly views the connection as a machine readable medium. Thus any such connection is properly termed a machine readable medium. Combinations of the above are also included within the scope of machine readable media. Machine executable instructions comprise for example instructions and data which cause a general purpose computer special purpose computer or special purpose processing machines to perform a certain function or group of functions.

Embodiments of the invention are described in the general context of method steps which may be implemented in one embodiment by a program product including machine executable instructions such as program code for example in the form of program modules executed by machines in networked environments. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Machine executable instructions associated data structures and program modules represent examples of program code for executing steps of the methods disclosed herein. The particular sequence of such executable instructions or associated data structures represent examples of corresponding acts for implementing the functions described in such steps.

Embodiments of the present invention may be practiced in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers having processors. Logical connections may include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN that are presented here by way of example and not limitation. Such networking environments are commonplace in office wide or enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet and may use a wide variety of different communication protocols. Those skilled in the art will appreciate that such network computing environments will typically encompass many types of computer system configurations including personal computers hand held devices multi processor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. Embodiments of the invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by local and remote processing devices that are linked either by hardwired links wireless links or by a combination of hardwired or wireless links through a communication network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

An exemplary system for implementing the overall system or portions of the invention might include a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer including a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit. The system memory may include read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . The computer may also include a magnetic hard disk drive for reading from and writing to a magnetic hard disk a magnetic disk drive for reading from or writing to a removable magnetic disk and an optical disk drive for reading from or writing to a removable optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. The drives and their associated machine readable media provide nonvolatile storage of machine executable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer.

The foregoing description of embodiments of the invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed and modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teachings or may be acquired from practice of the invention. The embodiments were chosen and described in order to explain the principals of the invention and its practical application to enable one skilled in the art to utilize the invention in various embodiments and with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.

