---

title: Acceleration insensitive piezo-microresonator
abstract: An acceleration insensitive piezo-microresonator provides substantially reduced acceleration sensitivity with a plano—plano piezo-microresonator, upper gap and lower gap embedded in a rigid structural supporting member holding major surfaces of the piezo-microresonator firm and steady. The piezo-microresonator has neither electrodes on its surfaces nor contacts with any electrodes. Electrodes are doped regions incorporated into the support member. The upper and lower gaps are adjacent to the major surfaces of the piezo-microresonator, permitting it to vibrate freely. The support member surrounds and supports the plano—plano piezo-microresonator plate, upper gap and lower gap, maintaining a constant upper gap height and lower gap height. The electrodes provide a thickness-directed electrical field exciting the piezo-microresonator. A method of desensitizing a resonant frequency of a piezo-microresonator to acceleration stresses is also provided.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07154212&OS=07154212&RS=07154212
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07154212
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050105
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured used and licensed by or for the United States Government for governmental purposes without payment to me of any royalties thereon.

The invention relates generally to the field of piezoelectric resonators and more particularly to a piezoelectric resonator whose resonant frequency is unaffected by external acceleration or vibration.

Piezoelectric resonators are well known in the art. Piezoelectric resonators are electronic elements used to select and make a frequency stable. Piezoelectric resonators are widely used in various kinds of electronic equipment including communication systems intelligence sensors precision guided munitions cordless telephones broadcast and television satellite telecommunication electronic clocks digital instruments and so on. Piezoelectric resonators can also be used as sensors of temperature pressure and weight. One of the shortcomings and limitations with piezoelectric resonators is that they are prone to undesired shifts in resonance frequency when they experience external acceleration or vibration.

The advent of modern personal satellite communications systems has transformed acceleration sensitivity from a military specific technology barrier to an important concern for commercial systems. The vast majority of communications systems maintain phase coherence by using low noise oscillators. Commercial off the shelf crystal oscillators are capable of meeting nearly all systems requirements provided that the systems are at rest.

The problem of acceleration sensitivity has been the subject of research for more than 30 years initially at Bell Labs and Hewlett Packard and later at the U.S. Army Electronics Technology and Devices Laboratory and the U.S. Army Research Laboratory. Additional efforts have also been pursued by the U.S. Army Research Office and the French Laboratorie de Chronometrie et Piezoelectric. Yet none of these efforts has succeeded in providing a clear and complete understanding of the fundamental nature of acceleration sensitivity in piezoelectric resonators. As a consequence previous approaches to reduce acceleration sensitivity that are based on an imperfect understanding of the acceleration phenomenon have been less successful than desired. Such unsuccessful efforts include ring supported resonators aspect ratio compensation visco elastic mounting and mode shape modification. Each approach offers a particular set of advantages but they all suffer from the common disadvantage of excessive acceleration sensitivity. None of these unsuccessful techniques has yet to yield a piezoelectric resonator with acceleration insensitivities repeatedly below 1 10 g.

The stresses caused by acceleration vibration and shock are well known to those skilled in the art. Periodic acceleration in the form of vibration can cause frequency modulation in piezoelectric resonators and shock can cause a step frequency change in a piezoelectric resonator due to the typical piezoelectric resonator s acceleration sensitivity. Shock can also cause a permanent frequency change in a piezoelectric resonator if either the supporting structure or the electrodes is stressed beyond their elastic limits. Therefore the stresses caused by acceleration vibration and shock and the consequent significant effects on piezoelectric frequency instability have caused prior art piezoelectric resonators to suffer from numerous disadvantages limitations and shortcomings. Current piezoelectric resonators continue to suffer from the long standing difficulties shortcoming and limitations associated with excessive acceleration sensitivity and do not provide acceleration insensitivity repeatedly below 1 10 g. Up until now there has been a long standing and continuing need for piezoelectric resonators with repeatable acceleration insensitivities on the order of below 1 10 g. Thus there has been a long felt need to provide piezoelectric structures that reduce the undesirable and harmful effects of the stresses caused by acceleration vibration and shock and provide affordable and easy to produce piezoelectric resonators.

The structures of the present invention provide added support and restraint techniques that significantly reduce the undesirable effects of acceleration sensitivity through a plano plano piezo microresonator a plurality of gaps and a rigid structural securing member that can essentially eliminate any excessive sensitivity without suffering from the long standing disadvantages limitations and shortcomings of prior art acceleration sensitive resonators. The piezo microresonators of the present invention satisfy the long standing and continuing need for piezoelectric resonators with repeatable acceleration insensitivities on the order of less than 1 10 g with an acceleration insensitive plano plano piezoelectric resonator with a predetermined proportionality constant that is supported by a rigid support member without suffering from the disadvantages shortcomings and limitations of prior art resonators.

A thorough mathematical and theoretical analysis of the acceleration sensitivity problem is helpful to better appreciate and comprehend this invention s acceleration insensitive plano plano piezoelectric resonator.

For example with the BAW c mode one can show that the normal acceleration sensitivity of the simple BAW mode propagating in a rotated Y cut quartz plate simply supported along rectangular edges is given by the equation 

It is an object of the present invention to provide an acceleration insensitive piezo microresonator.

It is another object of the present invention to provide an acceleration insensitive piezo microresonator whose resonant frequency is not affected by external acceleration or vibration.

It is still a further object of the present invention is to provide an acceleration insensitive plano plano piezo microresonator having a predetermined proportionality constant and whose resonant frequency is not affected by external acceleration or vibration that can achieve repeatable acceleration sensitivities below 1 10 g.

It is yet another object of the present invention is to provide methods of desensitizing the resonant frequency of a piezo microresonator with a predetermined proportionality constant to external acceleration or vibration and achieving repeatable acceleration sensitivities below 1 10 g.

These and other objects and advantages are provided by this invention s acceleration insensitive piezo microresonator comprising a plano plano resonator having a predetermined proportionality constant embedded within a rigid structural support member and a plurality of gaps that desensitizes the plano plano piezo microresonator against external acceleration or vibration and provides a resonant frequency unaffected by those deleterious external stresses. The plano plano piezo microresonator having flat and parallel major surfaces is braced and stabilized against acceleration induced stress and vibration induced stress and is capable of achieving repeatable acceleration sensitivities below 1 10 g without suffering from the disadvantages shortcomings and limitations of prior art resonators.

The lateral profiles of both the piezo microresonator and the rigid structural securing member are illustrated as rectangular however circular and oval geometries are other possible embodiments for this invention. The present invention also contemplates a method for desensitizing the resonant frequency of a piezo microresonator with a predetermined proportionality constant.

These and other objects advantages and features will become readily apparent in view of the following descriptions.

Referring now to the drawings is a cross sectional view of the acceleration insensitive piezo microresonator apparatus of the present invention further comprising a plano plano piezo microresonator positioned between an upper gap and a lower gap which are all embedded within a rigid structural support member . The rigid structural supporting member surrounds the plano plano piezo microresonator plate upper gap and lower gap and holds the major surfaces of the piezo microresonator firm and steady. The piezo microresonator having a first end and a second end has neither electrodes deposited on its surfaces nor contacts with any electrodes. This electrode free feature serves to obtain a thickness direction symmetry of the acoustic mode shape i.e. 0. A corollary requirement for the piezo microresonator is that the major surfaces should be made flat and parallel. Electrodes and are doped regions incorporated into the first and second portions and respectively of the support member . Electrode is coupled to a first conductive path located in the first region of the support member . In a similar fashion electrode is coupled to a second conductive path located in a second portion of the support member . The upper gap and lower gap are adjacent to the major surfaces of the piezo microresonator and permit the piezo microresonator to vibrate freely and flex. Electrical connection for the electrodes and to an external circuit may be accomplished with the conductive paths and . The contacts between the doped regions forming the electrodes and and the other metal regions in the apparatus are configured to be ohmic.

The support member surrounds and supports the plano plano piezo microresonator plate upper gap and lower gap and needs to meet a number of critical requirements. The support member must be structurally rigid with respect to both fixing the first and second ends and respectively of the piezo microresonator and maintaining a constant overall height of upper gap and lower gap . The support member must also provide adequate structural support for electrodes and and conductive paths and . The electrodes and provide a thickness directed electrical field used to excite piezo microresonator but other alternate electrode placement arrangements are within the contemplation of this invention.

It is critical that the support member hold the piezo microresonator firm and steady so that under acceleration the resonator frequency of the piezo microresonator will not be affected by the load capacitance of the upper gap and lower gap provided that the total overall gap from the upper gap and lower gap remains constant. Under acceleration this invention s piezo microresonator may flex substantially but will exhibit negligible thickness change. Thus if the positions of electrodes and are rigidly fixed as is the case in this invention s structure the total overall gap on both sides of the piezo microresonator remains constant even as the piezo microresonator moves within the upper gap and lower gap .

The approximate mathematical relationship between the structural elements of this invention s acceleration insensitive piezo microresonator and the acceleration sensitivity is now understood to be proportionality constant dimensional tolerances 16 where the proportionality constant is 

The use of a plano plano piezo microresonator without surface electrodes addresses the important issue of fabrication tolerances because this provides a means of minimizing the h thickness direction argument which has been shown to be intrinsically 2R times larger than the in plane arguments when dimensional tolerances are comparable. The acceleration insensitive piezo microresonator device of the present invention also takes into account the difficulties associated with in plane tolerances by specifying photolithographic processing for the formation and alignment of the electrodes and the support member and other aspects of this invention that contribute to improved in plane tolerances. In accordance with the present invention tolerances of 

A number of variations of the acceleration insensitive piezo microresonator device have also been considered. The support member can be formed in many ways including polysilicon in this embodiment. The upper gap and lower gap adjacent to the major surfaces of the piezo microresonator can be evacuated or filled with a suitable gas such as nitrogen. The electrodes and are formed as conductively doped regions within the polysilicon support member . The electrodes and can also provide a lateral field excitation electrical field to excite the piezo microresonator . The electrodes and can also be configured into an electroded region. Electrical connection for the electrodes and to an external circuit may be also accomplished with the metallic traces and located inside substrate . These variations and any others are considered to be within the contemplation of the present invention.

The present invention also encompasses a method of desensitizing a resonant frequency of a piezo microresonator to acceleration induced stresses comprising the steps of forming a plano plano piezo microresonator with a resonator length a a plate thickness a given proportionality constant a predetermined resonant frequency and a plurality of major surfaces the piezo microresonator having a diameter to thickness ratio R between the resonator length a and a plate half thickness h positioning the piezo microresonator between an upper gap and a lower gap of a rigid structural support member the plurality of major surfaces being flat parallel and adjacent to the upper gap and lower gap stacking the support member on a substrate embedding the piezo microresonator upper gap and lower gap within the support member the support member impinging the plurality of major surfaces to hold the piezo microresonator rigidly fixing a pair of electrodes in a first doped region and a second doped region of the support member generating a thickness directed electrical field to excite the piezo microresonator and providing structurally rigid support to a first and a second end of the piezo microresonator. In a holding step holding the piezo microresonator firm and steady under acceleration and maintaining a constant overall height of the upper gap and the lower gap with the support member with the predetermined resonant frequency being unaffected by a load capacitance of the upper and lower gaps. In an allowing step allowing the piezo microresonator to vibrate freely and flex under acceleration with a minimal thickness change the proportionality constant being directly proportional to a square of the diameter to thickness ratio R and the proportionality constant being directly proportional to the plate half thickness h resulting in a reduced acceleration sensitivity and an enhanced energy trapping characteristic. Numerous variations of the acceleration insensitive piezo microresonator apparatus and piezo microresonator also apply to the method of desensitizing a resonant frequency of a piezo microresonator to acceleration stresses.

It is to be understood that such other features and modifications to the foregoing detailed description are within the contemplation of the invention which is not limited by this description. As will be further appreciated by those skilled in the art any number of variations and configurations as well any number of combinations of circuits differing materials and dimensions can achieve the results described herein. Accordingly the present invention should not be limited by the foregoing description but only by the appended claims.

