---

title: NMR clinical analyzers and related methods, systems, modules and computer program products for clinical evaluation of biosamples
abstract: The clinical NMR analyzers can be configured as a networked system with a plurality of clinical NMR analyzers located at different use sites; and at least one remote control system in communication with one or a plurality of clinical NMR analyzers, the at least one remote system configured to monitor selected local operating parameters associated with a respective clinical NMR analyzer.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08013602&OS=08013602&RS=08013602
owner: LipoScience, Inc.
number: 08013602
owner_city: Raleigh
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050330
---
This application claims the benefit of priority of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 558 516 filed Apr. 1 2004 the contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference as if recited in full herein.

The present invention relates generally to NMR systems and may be particularly suitable for clinical NMR in vitro diagnostic systems capable of analyzing biosamples.

In the past NMR detectors have been used to provide NMR LipoProfile lipoprotein panel reports. The NMR detectors have been located in a central testing facility with on site support. The LipoProfile report available from LipoScience Inc. located in Raleigh N.C is a lipoprotein test panel that assesses a patient s risk of coronary artery disease CAD and provides NMR derived quantitative analysis lipoprotein measurement average low density lipoprotein LDL particle size as well as LDL particle number the latter representing the concentration or quantity in concentration units such as nmol L and the former representing the average size of the LDL particles in nm units making up the LDL in the sample. HDL and VLDL subclass measurements can also be provided. See www.liposcience.com and U.S. Pat. No. 6 576 471 for exemplary reports of particular lipoprotein subclass parameters the contents of the patent are hereby incorporated by reference as if recited in full herein.

It is known that NMR spectroscopic evaluation techniques can be used to concurrently obtain and measure a plurality of different lipoprotein constituents in an in vitro blood plasma or serum sample as described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 933 844 entitled Measurement of Blood Lipoprotein Constituents by Analysis of Data Acquired from an NMR Spectrometer to Otvos and U.S. Pat. No. 5 343 389 entitled Method and Apparatus for Measuring Classes and Subclasses of Lipoproteins also to Otvos. See also U.S. Pat. No. 6 617 167 entitled Method Of Determining Presence And Concentration Of Lipoprotein X In Blood Plasma And Serum and co pending co assigned U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 513 795 entitled Methods Systems and Computer Programs for Assessing CHD Risk Using Mathematical Models that Consider In Vivo Concentration Gradients of LDL Particle Subclasses of Discrete Size. The contents of all the above patents and patent applications are hereby incorporated by reference as if recited in full herein.

As is well known to those of skill in the art NMR detectors include an RF amplifier an NMR probe that includes an RF excitation coil such as a saddle or Helmholtz coil a cryogenically cooled high field superconducting magnet and an enclosed flow path that directs samples to flow serially from the bottom of the magnet bore to a predetermined analysis location in the magnet bore. The NMR detector is typically a high field magnet housed in a magnetically and or RF shielded housing that can reduce the magnetic field level that is generated to within a relatively small volume. NMR detectors are available from Varian Inc. having corporate headquarters in Palo Alto Calif. and Bruker BioSpin Corp. located in Billerica Mass.

In operation to evaluate the lipoproteins in a blood plasma and or serum sample the operator places the patient samples in a sample tray and an electronic reader correlates the sample to a patient typically using a bar code on the sample tray. The sample is aspirated from the sample container and directed to flow through the flow path extending through the NMR detector. For detailed lipoprotein analysis the NMR detector may analyze the sample for 1 5 minutes to determine amplitudes of a plurality of NMR spectroscopy derived signals within a chemical shift region of the proton NMR spectrum. These signals are derived by deconvolution of the composite signal or spectrum and are compared to predetermined test criteria to evaluate a patient s risk of having or developing coronary artery or heart disease.

In the past a plurality of NMR spectrometers all disposed at a central testing facility have been used to carry out lipoprotein analysis on blood plasma samples to generate LipoProfile test reports. The NMR spectrometers communicate with a local but remote computer the computer is in a different room from the spectrometers to allow the remote computer to obtain NMR spectra and analyze the NMR spectra to generate the patient diagnostic reports with quantitative lipoprotein values. Unfortunately an operator manually carries out adjustments to the equipment using a manually input quality control sample to adjust the line width. In addition the sample handler does not communicate with the NMR spectrometer and is not capable of electronically notifying the system of handling problems. The NMR spectrometer systems are complex and typically require dedicated on site experienced operational oversight.

In view of the above there remains a need for improved NMR analyzers that may be used in high volume quantitative clinical applications at one or more remote locations.

Certain embodiments of the present invention are directed at providing automated NMR clinical analyzers that can be used without requiring dedicated on site NMR support staff and or undue technician support to reliably operate the NMR analyzers. The automated NMR clinical analyzers can be configured to obtain quantitative analysis measurements that can be used for in vitro diagnostics. In some embodiments the automated NMR analyzers can be configured to meet governmental medical regulatory requirements such as those described in applicable federal regulations including those in 21 CFR such as 21 CFR 820 and 21 CFR 11 for medical devices.

In some embodiments the NMR analyzers can monitor and adjust selected operating parameters on the fly reducing the need for manual assistance and providing automated operation. The NMR analyzers can include interactive sample handlers that communicate with the NMR spectrometer and or remote control system. The NMR clinical analyzers can be configured to reliably run and obtain quantified clinical measurements for diagnostic tests on high volume throughput of biosamples while reducing the amount of operator input or labor required to operate the automated analyzers. The NMR analyzers can be constructed and or configured in such a manner as to be able to obtain PMA pre market approval and or 510 k approval from the United States Food and Drug Agency USFDA and or corresponding foreign agencies.

Certain embodiments are directed to methods of operating a clinical NMR in vitro diagnostic analyzer. The methods include a electronically monitoring data associated with selected equipment and or environmental operational test conditions of a clinical NMR analyzer b electronically determining whether the selected test conditions are within desired operational ranges based on the monitored data c automatically adjusting operational parameters of selected components of the clinical NMR analyzer based on data obtained by the electronically determining step d obtaining NMR signal spectra of a biosample and e analyzing the obtained NMR spectra to generate target clinical measurements of the biosample.

Other embodiments are directed to clinical NMR in vitro diagnostic analyzers. The analyzers include a an automated sample handler configured to automatically introduce biosamples into a magnet bore of a high field superconducting magnet of a NMR spectroscopy instrument associated with a clinical NMR analyzer b means for automatically obtaining NMR signal spectra of the biosamples c means for automatically electronically sensing data associated with selected operating parameters to verify that test conditions of the NMR diagnostic analyzer are within target operating ranges and d means for automatically electronically adjusting selected operating parameters based on the verified test conditions.

Some embodiments are directed to clinical NMR in vitro diagnostic analyzers that include a an automated sample handler configured to automatically introduce biosamples into a magnet bore of a high field superconducting magnet of a NMR spectroscopy instrument associated with a clinical NMR analyzer b a control circuit in electronic communication with the NMR spectroscopy instrument and c a plurality of electronic sensors disposed in the clinical NMR analyzer the electronic sensors in communication with the control circuit the electronic sensors configured to detect data associated with selected operating parameters to verify that selected conditions of the NMR diagnostic analyzer are within target operating ranges. The clinical NMR analyzer is configured to automatically electronically adjust selected operating parameters based on data provided by the electronic sensors so that the clinical NMR analyzer operates within target process limits.

Still other embodiments are directed to computer program products for automating clinical NMR in vitro diagnostic analyzers. The computer program products include a computer readable storage medium having computer readable program code embodied in said medium. The computer readable program code includes a computer readable program code configured to automatically run an automated self diagnostic quality control and or calibration test for the clinical NMR in vitro diagnostic analyzer and b computer readable program code configured to automatically electronically monitor selected operating parameters of the NMR in vitro diagnostic analyzer over time during operation.

Still other embodiments are directed to methods of analyzing undiluted plasma and or serum by a obtaining a proton NMR composite spectrum of an undiluted biosample and b generating a spectral deconvolution of the NMR composite spectrum using a predetermined doublet region of the proton NMR spectrum for spectral referencing and or alignment.

The undiluted biosample may be neat serum and the doublet may comprise a lactate doublet generally centered at about 1.3 ppm of the proton NMR spectrum. The undiluted sample can be serum that comprises glucose and the doublet can be an anomeric proton signal from glucose in the serum that is generally located at about 5.2 ppm of the NMR spectrum.

Another embodiment is directed to computer program products for analyzing undiluted plasma and or serum. The computer program product includes a computer readable storage medium having computer readable program code embodied in the medium. The computer readable program code can include a computer readable program code configured to obtain a proton NMR composite spectrum of an undiluted biosample the proton NMR composite spectrum being devoid of a CaEDTA peak and b computer readable program code configured to generate a spectral deconvolution of the NMR composite spectrum using a predetermined doublet region of the proton NMR spectrum for spectral referencing and or alignment.

Yet other embodiments are directed to clinical NMR in vitro analyzers that include a an automated sample handler for serially presenting respective biosamples to an input port b an enclosed flow path configured to serially flow the respective biosamples presented by the automated sample handler wherein the enclosed flow path includes a non magnetic rigid straight flow cell c an NMR detector in communication with an NMR flow probe the NMR detector comprising a high field cryogenically cooled superconducting magnet with a magnet bore the flow probe configured to generally reside in the magnet bore wherein the straight flow cell is configured and sized to extend into the magnet bore and direct the samples to serially flow from a top of the magnet bore into the magnet bore during operation and d a processor comprising computer program code for obtaining and analyzing NMR signal spectra of the biosamples to determine desired quantitative measurements of the respective biosamples.

Some embodiments of the present invention are directed to a networked system of clinical NMR analyzers. The system includes a a plurality of clinical NMR analyzers located at different use sites and b at least one remote control service support system in communication with the plurality of clinical NMR analyzers. The at least one remote system is configured to monitor selected local operating parameters associated with each clinical NMR analyzer.

In some embodiments the remote system monitors the local NMR analyzers to inhibit down time and or identify and correct process variables before test data is corrupted to increase the reliability of the equipment and quantitative test results. The local and or remote system can be configured to monitor predetermined process parameter data service histories cryogen use patient test data and the like.

In some embodiments the local system can be configured to monitor and identify process variation and generate an alarm that is sent to the remote system local and or remote site for appropriate corrective action investigation. In other embodiments the remote system can monitor the process variation and generate an alert to a service support technician at the remote site. Combinations of the local and remote monitoring can also be used. The remote station can reduce the technical support and or operator knowledge needed at each local use site thereby allowing increased numbers of clinical analyzers to be used in field sites with relatively economic operational costs.

The local systems may generate and store an electronic history file of selected operational parameters. The electronic history file can be configured to be accessed by the remote system. The local and or remote system may be configured to automatically monitor process variables and statistically analyze data corresponding to measurements of the monitored process variables to thereby perform an automated quality control analysis such as maintain the parameters within a 3 sigma and or in some embodiments a 6 sigma process limit . In some embodiments the local system can be configured to automatically adjust operating equipment to keep the process variables within a predetermined statistical variation responsive to the monitored data.

In some embodiments the clinical NMR analyzers can be configured to automatically adjust scaling of the NMR lineshape when the height and or width thereof is outside a desired range. The local system can monitor RF excitation pulse power and automatically adjust the RF excitation pulse power if the power is outside a desired operating range and or varies from pulse to pulse by more than a predetermined amount and or percentage. In particular embodiments the clinical NMR analyzers can be configured to disregard NMR signal data obtained when power variation of the RF pulses is greater than a predetermined amount.

Other embodiments are directed to methods of generating NMR derived quantitative measurement data for diagnostic clinical reports of patient biosamples. The methods include a automatically serially introducing biosamples of interest into an NMR analyzer which can be carried out by aspirating to an enclosed flow path that serially flows the biosamples into the NMR analyzer having a NMR spectroscopy instrument with a magnet and a bore at a plurality of different clinical sites b automatically correlating a patient identifier to a respective patient biosample c obtaining NMR derived quantitative measurements of the biosamples for diagnostic reports and d automatically monitoring the NMR analyzers at the different clinical sites from a remote monitoring station.

In some embodiments the methods can include configuring the analyzer user to decide in situ how to analyze a particular patient biosample. The obtaining step may include determining NMR derived concentration measurements of lipoproteins in an in vitro blood plasma and or serum sample.

In certain embodiments the automated clinical NMR analyzer is configured with modular assemblies including an automated sample handling assembly an NMR spectrometer an NMR probe and a sample flow path to the NMR spectrometer each configured to releasably attach and operate with its mating modular components thereby allowing ease of repair and or field replacement.

The clinical NMR analyzers may be configured to automatically run an automated self diagnostic quality control test at startup. The analyzer may include computer program code that is configured to determine a patient s risk of having and or developing CHD based on the NMR derived quantitative measurements of the patient s respective biosample and or computer program code that is configured to determine a patient s risk of having and or developing Type II diabetes based on the NMR derived quantitative measurements of the patient s respective biosample.

Yet additional embodiments are directed to clinical NMR in vitro diagnostic apparatus for obtaining data regarding lipoprotein constituents in a biosample. The apparatus includes a an automated sample handler system comprising a plurality of in vitro blood plasma and or serum samples b an NMR spectrometer for serially acquiring an NMR composite spectrum of the in vitro blood plasma or serum sample in communication with the automated handler system c at least one sample of validated control material configured to repeatedly controllably flow into and out of the NMR spectrometer at desired times and d a processor configured to receive data of the validated control material. The processor includes a computer program code configured to define an a priori single basis set of spectra of validated reference control material b computer program code configured to obtain NMR spectra of the validated control material and c computer program code configured to perform a spectral deconvolution of a CHregion of the obtained NMR spectra of the validated control material and comparing data associated with the spectral deconvolution of the CHregion with data associated with the a priori spectra of the validated control material to determine whether the NMR analyzer is in a suitable operational status and or ready for diagnostic testing operation.

As will be appreciated by those of skill in the art in light of the present disclosure embodiments of the present invention may include methods systems apparatus and or computer program products or combinations thereof.

The foregoing and other objects and aspects of the present invention are explained in detail in the specification set forth below.

The present invention will now be described more fully hereinafter in which embodiments of the invention are shown. This invention may however be embodied in different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth herein. Rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the scope of the invention to those skilled in the art. In the drawings like numbers refer to like elements throughout and thickness size and dimensions of some components lines or features may be exaggerated for clarity. The order of operations and or steps illustrated in the figures or recited in the claims are not intended to be limited to the order presented unless stated otherwise. Broken lines in the figures where used indicate that the feature operation or step so indicated is optional unless specifically stated otherwise.

It will be understood that when a feature such as a layer region or substrate is referred to as being on another feature or element it can be directly on the other feature or element or intervening features and or elements may also be present. In contrast when an element is referred to as being directly on another feature or element there are no intervening elements present. It will also be understood that when a feature or element is referred to as being connected attached or coupled to another feature or element it can be directly connected attached or coupled to the other element or intervening elements may be present. In contrast when a feature or element is referred to as being directly connected directly attached or directly coupled to another element there are no intervening elements present. Although described or shown with respect to one embodiment the features so described or shown can apply to other embodiments.

Unless otherwise defined all terms including technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which this invention belongs. It will be further understood that terms such as those defined in commonly used dictionaries should be interpreted as having a meaning that is consistent with their meaning in the context of the relevant art and this application and should not be interpreted in an idealized or overly formal sense unless expressly so defined herein. As used herein the term and or includes any and all combinations of one or more of the associated listed items.

As used herein the singular forms a an and the are intended to include the plural forms as well unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. It will be further understood that the terms comprises and or comprising when used in this specification specify the presence of stated features integers steps operations elements and or components but do not preclude the presence or addition of one or more other features integers steps operations elements components and or groups thereof.

The term biosample includes whole blood plasma serum urine cerebral spinal fluid CSF lymph samples stool samples tissues and or body fluids in raw form and or in preparations. The biosamples can be from any target subject. Subjects according to the present invention can be any animal subject and are preferably mammalian subjects e.g. humans canines felines bovines caprines ovines equines rodents mice rats hamsters guinea pigs or others porcines primates monkeys and or lagomorphs . The animals can be laboratory animals or non laboratory animals whether naturally occurring genetically engineered or modified and o whether being laboratory altered lifestyle and or diet altered or drug treated animal variations.

The term clinical with respect to data measurements means qualitative and or quantitative measurements that can be used for therapeutic or diagnostic purposes and typically for diagnostic purposes and meets the appropriate regulatory guidelines for accuracy depending on the jurisdiction or test being performed. The term clinical with respect to NMR analyzer is described above in the Summary section of the specification.

The term automatic means that substantially all or all of the operations so described can be carried out without requiring active manual input of a human operator and typically means that the operation s can be programmatically directed and or carried out. The term electronic means that the system operation or device can communicate using any suitable electronic media and typically employs programmatically controlling the communication between a control system that may be remote and one or more local NMR analyzers using a computer network.

The term computer network includes one or more local area networks LAN wide area networks WAN and may in certain embodiments include a private intranet and or the public Internet also known as the World Wide Web or the web . The term networked system means that one or a plurality of local analyzers can communicate with at least one remote local and or offsite control system. The remote control system may be held in a local clean room that is separate from the NMR clinical analyzer and not subject to the same biohazard control requirements concerns as the NMR clinical analyzer.

As will be appreciated by one of skill in the art the present invention may be embodied as an apparatus a method a data or signal processing system and or a computer program product. Accordingly the present invention may take the form of an entirely software embodiment or an embodiment combining software and hardware aspects. Furthermore certain embodiments of the present invention may take the form of a computer program product on a computer usable storage medium having computer usable program code means embodied in the medium. Any suitable computer readable medium may be utilized including hard disks CD ROMs optical storage devices or magnetic storage devices.

The computer usable or computer readable medium may be but is not limited to an electronic magnetic optical superconducting magnetic infrared or semiconductor system apparatus device or propagation medium. More specific examples a nonexhaustive list of the computer readable medium would include the following an electrical connection having one or more wires a portable computer diskette a random access memory RAM a read only memory ROM an erasable programmable read only memory EPROM or Flash memory an optical fiber and a portable compact disc read only memory CD ROM . Note that the computer usable or computer readable medium could even be paper or another suitable medium upon which the program is printed as the program can be electronically captured via for instance optical scanning of the paper or other medium then compiled interpreted or otherwise processed in a suitable manner if necessary and then stored in a computer memory.

Computer program code for carrying out operations of the present invention may be written in an object oriented programming language such as Java Smalltalk Python Labview C or VisualBasic. However the computer program code for carrying out operations of the present invention may also be written in conventional procedural programming languages such as the C programming language or even assembly language. The program code may execute entirely on the user s computer partly on the user s computer as a stand alone software package partly on the user s computer and partly on a remote computer or entirely on the remote computer. In the latter scenario the remote computer may be connected to the user s computer through a local area network LAN or a wide area network WAN or the connection may be made to an external computer for example through the Internet using an Internet Service Provider .

The flowcharts and block diagrams of certain of the figures herein illustrate the architecture functionality and operation of possible implementations of analysis models and evaluation systems and or programs according to the present invention. In this regard each block in the flow charts or block diagrams represents a module segment operation or portion of code which comprises one or more executable instructions for implementing the specified logical function s . It should also be noted that in some alternative implementations the functions noted in the blocks may occur out of the order noted in the figures. For example two blocks shown in succession may in fact be executed substantially concurrently or the blocks may sometimes be executed in the reverse order depending upon the functionality involved.

Embodiments of the present invention may be used to analyze any in vitro biosample. The biosample may be in liquid solid and or semi solid form. The biosample may include tissue blood biofluids biosolids and the like. However as noted above the automated clinical NMR analyzer may be particularly suitable to analyze lipoprotein data in in vitro blood serum and or plasma samples. The small person to person variations in the lineshapes of the lipoprotein classes are caused by the subclass heterogeneity known to exist within each of these lipoprotein classes. shows the lineshapes and chemical shifts positions for a number of subclasses of lipoproteins. As shown in the chemical shifts and lineshape differences between the different subclasses are much smaller than those between the major lipoprotein classes but are completely reproducible. Thus differences among the NMR signals from the plasma of individuals are caused by differences in the amplitudes of the lipid resonances from the subclasses present in the plasma which in turn are proportional to their concentrations in the plasma. This is illustrated in in which the NMR chemical shift spectra of a blood plasma sample is shown. The spectral peak produced by methyl CH protons shown as a solid line is shown for the blood serum sample in . The spectral peak shown as a dotted line in is produced by the arithmetic sum of the NMR signals produced by the lipoprotein subclasses of the major classes VLDL LDL HDL proteins and chylomicrons as illustratively shown by certain of the subclasses in . It can be seen that the lineshape of the whole plasma spectrum is dependent on the relative amounts of the lipoprotein subclasses whose amplitudes change sometimes dramatically with their relative concentrations in the plasma sample.

Since the observed CHlineshapes of whole plasma samples are closely simulated by the appropriately weighted sum of lipid signals of their constituent lipoprotein classes it is possible to extract the concentrations of these constituents present in any sample. This is accomplished by calculating the weighting factors which give the best fit between observed blood plasma NMR spectra and the calculated blood plasma spectra. Generally speaking the process of NMR lipoprotein analysis can be carried out by the following steps 1 acquisition of an NMR reference spectrum for each of the pure individual constituent lipoprotein classes and or subclasses of plasma or serum of interest and or related groupings thereof 2 acquisition of a whole plasma or serum NMR spectrum for a sample using measurement conditions substantially identical to those used to obtain the reference spectra and 3 computer deconvolution of the NMR spectrum in terms of the constituent classes and or subclasses or related groupings thereof to give the concentration of each lipoprotein constituent expressed as a multiple of the concentration of the corresponding lipoprotein reference.

Although the procedure can be carried out on lipoprotein classes carrying out the process for subclasses of lipoproteins can decrease the error between the calculated lineshape and the NMR lineshape thus increasing the accuracy of the measurement while allowing for simultaneous determination of the subclass profile of each class. Because the differences in subclass lineshapes and chemical shifts are small for certain applications it may be important to correctly align the reference spectrum of each subclass with the plasma spectrum.

The alignment of these spectra can be accomplished by the alignment of control peaks in the spectra which are known to respond in the same manner to environmental variables such as temperature and sample composition as do the lipoprotein spectra. As is known one such suitable alignment peak is the peak produced by CaEDTA found in prepared diluted sample mixtures although other EDTA peaks or suitable peak may be utilized. By alignment of the spectra the small variations in the subclasses lineshapes and chemical shifts may be exploited to produce higher accuracy and subclass profiles.

Further description of these methods can be found in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 933 844 and 5 343 389 to Otvos. The mathematics used in the lineshape fitting process i.e. least squares fit of an unknown function in terms of a weighted sum of known functions is well known and is described in many textbooks of numerical analysis such as F. B. Hildebrand 2nd edition pp. 314 326 539 567 McGraw Hill 1975.

In the past as part of start up or periodic quality assessment at least two types levels of control material samples were introduced into the NMR spectrometer and multiple NMR derived lipoprotein parameters were assessed compared to stored values for conformance to expected results for quality control review.

In some embodiments of the present invention it is contemplated that the multiple variables previously reviewed can be reduced to a single variable by performing spectral deconvolution of the CHregion of the spectra or other suitable region for at least one validation control material sample. The analyte NMR lineshape can be deconvoluted using multivariate analysis with non negative constraints. See e.g. Lawson C. L. Hanson R. J. . Philadelphia Pa. SIAM 1995 pp. 160 165.

The analyte spectra array consists of m discrete data points denoted P where i 1 2 . . . m. The method for fitting the validated control spectrum P with a linear combination of n constituent spectra is based on the premise that there are a set of coefficients c corresponding to the contributions of component j and a coefficient c corresponding to the imaginary portion of the sample plasma spectrum such that for each data point P P where

The best fit can be obtained by minimizing the root mean square error in a manner analogous to that previously described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 617 167 except that Vrepresents only the single j 1 basis set of the validated control spectra array stored in the computer. The contents of this patent are hereby incorporated by reference as if recited in full herein.

The correlation coefficient r of the fit of control spectra of the CHregion as a function of the stored validated control spectra will be used along with coefficient cto determine the acceptability of status of the analyzer to acquire clinical data. In certain embodiments both r and ccan be as chosen to be as close to 1.0 as practicable and or possible. Acceptable limits for deviation from 1.0 can be established in consonant with standard clinical practices mandated by CLIA.

The phrase validation control material sample refers to a priori or known measurement values of a known reference sample the known sample corresponding to those types of samples that will be undergoing evaluation using the equipment and analysis software whatever biotype i.e. blood plasma or serum urine etc . The spectral deconvolution of the CHregion of the spectra of the control material can be carried out using the single basis set of the stored spectra of the validated known control samples. Thus a known validation sample can be analyzed and its associated values can be stored as known or control values. Periodically the validation control sample can be reanalyzed by the NMR system to confirm that the test values conform to the stored expected values . The NMR analyzer can be configured to flag or alert when there is undue departure from predetermined norms so that the system can be recalibrated.

The validation control sample and validation control protocol can typically be run at start up each shift or daily and at increased intervals as needed. The increased intervals may be based on signal degradation of the proton NMR spectrum lineshape width height when an unknown sample is quantified outside normal bounds and or upon other automatically detected and monitored parameters.

In certain embodiments the NMR clinical analyzers can be configured to analyze undiluted neat plasma and or serum. Unfortunately a CaEDTA peak may not appear when the sample is undiluted serum which can impede spectral referencing for deconvolution. Thus in certain embodiments as shown in a lactate doublet generally centered about 1.3 ppm in the proton NMR spectrum of serum can be used for spectral referencing and alignment for NMR derived quantification analysis such as lipoprotein quantification of serum samples . In other embodiments as shown in an anomeric proton signal from the glucose in serum can appear as a doublet at about 5.2 ppm and this doublet may also be used with or alone as an anchor point for spectral alignment.

As shown in certain embodiments of the invention are directed to a networked system of clinical NMR analyzers . The networked system includes at least one clinical NMR analyzer that communicates with at least one remote system . Typically a plurality of clinical NMR analyzers located at a common local use site communicate with a respective at least one remote service support system . The at least one remote system can be configured to monitor selected local operating parameters associated with each clinical NMR analyzer . In some embodiments each local site may include a plurality at least two NMR analyzers which may be configured to communicate with each other and or at least one remote control system . The at least one remote control system may be configured as a common local or offsite control station for a plurality of different local analyzers typically for all of the local analyzers at a use site . The at least one remote control system can be a plurality of generally independent stations configured to communicate with one or selected local analyzers . In other embodiments the at least one control system can be a plurality of remote control systems that may be in communication with another offsite control station as optionally shown in . Each respective local analyzer can communicate with a common remote control system or a plurality may communicate with different control systems and or sites. The local analyzers may also be configured to operate independently of the others and or not to communicate with each other. The broken line box R drawn around the remote control box in illustrates that the remote control system s can be located on site in the same facility but in a room R that is enclosed and away from the NMR Analyzers so as to not be under the same biohazard laboratory access cleanliness or operation restrictions as the NMR clinical analyzer itself .

In some embodiments some of the local analyzers may be configured to communicate with each other directly or indirectly using the control system such as but not limited to those at affiliated locations or a common local site. The communication can be electronic communication such as a wireless which may be carried out using mobile communications and or satellite systems b via an intranet c via a global computer network such as the Internet and or d use a POTS land based plain old telephone system . The system may use combinations of communications systems.

The local analyzers may be controlled by the remote system in a manner that allows for interactive adjustment during operation such as during the NMR analysis and or start up or calibration mode. As such the operational and or test analysis data can be relayed to the remote control system in substantially real time . The NMR analyzers can be configured to interactively communicate with the remote control system to allow smart monitoring status. For example the NMR analyzer can automatically send a signal alerting the control system when a test is complete for a subject allowing the control system to timely obtain the data therefrom and generate the test report using the data.

In some particular embodiments the system can include a data processing system which comprises a web server. In particular the data processing system may be an Internet Appliance such as a PICOSERVER appliance by Lightner Engineering located in San Diego Calif. see also www.picoweb.net or other such web servers including but not limited to those available from Axis Communications or PICOWEB RABBIT and the like. The data processing system can receive commands from the support site and controls certain operational parameters of the system . The data processing system can also include a TCP stack and Ethernet NIC to provide the communication link between the computer network and the test administration site .

The processing system can provide information about the local analyzers to the administration site as web pages which may be predefined and stored at the local device . Such web pages may also be dynamically generated to incorporate test specific information. The web pages may be Hypertext Markup Language HTML common gateway interface CGI web pages which allow for user input by a client such as a web browser of a user at the test administration site . The web pages may also be or include Java scripts Java applets or the like which may execute at the test administration site so as to control operations of an administration data processing system at the administration site . As will be appreciated by those of skill in the art other mechanisms for communicating between a web server and a client may also be utilized. For example other markup languages such as Wireless Markup Language WML or the like for communicating between the local device and the administration site may be utilized.

In certain embodiments operations of a web server and a web client can include a web browser as the administration site that requests an initial web page from the web server of the local device . Such a request may take the form of a Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP request to the IP address of the web server of the local device. The IP address may be pre assigned to the local device or may be dynamically assigned when the local device attaches to the network . Thus the web browser may know in advance the IP address of the local devices or may be notified of the IP address as part of a setup procedure.

When the local device receives the request for the initial web page it sends the initial web page and a Java applet which causes the web browser to periodically reload its current web page. Alternatively push technology could be employed by the server to push data to the web browser when status is to be updated. The rate at which the web page is reloaded may be based on the type of data relayed or detected and or the web page being displayed. Similarly the rate may also be based on the type of network connection utilized such that for slower connection types the refresh rate could be reduced. In some embodiments the Java applet could be generated once with the initial web page while in others the Java applet could be provided with each web page and the refresh rate could be based on the particular web page provided. For example a setup web page could be refreshed less often then a test status web page or not at all .

In any event after the initial web page is provided to the web browser the web server of the local devices waits for a subsequent request for a web page. When a request is received it may be determined if the request is for a response to an operational status inquiry such as lineshape width and or height of the last two samples which is to be included in the responsive web page. If so then the web page may be revised to indicate the information. In any event it may also be determined if the request specifies parameters for the inquiry by for example providing a CGI request which reflects user input to the web browser. If so the parameters are set based on the CGI specifications and the web page corresponding to the URL of the request is returned to the web browser. If the inquiry is terminated then operations may terminate. Otherwise the web server waits for the next request from the web browser.

In some embodiments the clinical NMR analyzers include a high field NMR superconducting magnet and the remote system automatically obtains data regarding homogeneity of the magnetic field generated by the superconducting magnet. The homogeneity data can include data regarding the lineshape characteristics of biosamples undergoing analysis which can indicate a degradation in homogeneity over time . In some embodiments the local NMR analyzer generates and stores an electronic history file of selected operational parameters. The local NMR analyzers can be configured to review and generate an automatic approval of each sample test results and or a retest reject decision.

The history file can be configured to be electronically accessible by the remote system . In some embodiments the local analyzers and or remote system are configured to automatically monitor process variables and statistically analyze data corresponding to measurements of the monitored process variables to thereby perform an automated quality control analysis. In particular embodiments the local systems are configured to automatically adjust operating equipment to keep the process variables within a predetermined statistical variation responsive to the monitored data. The local systems can be configured to automatically generate an alert when an abnormal operating condition is detected. In other embodiments the remote system is configured to automatically generate an alert when an abnormal operating condition is detected at the local NMR analyzer site s . The local analyzers can be configured to generate an electronic service log and or an electronic process history log that is electronically accessible by the remote system .

The local analyzers can be configured to automatically detect temporally relevant data of selected operational parameters at desired intervals and generate an electronic maintenance file thereof and the local NMR analyzers can be configured to electronically store their respective maintenance files for electronic interrogation by the remote system . The selected operational parameters can include the NMR signal lineshape and or scaling thereof of one or more patient samples. The maintenance file may include respective patient sample identifiers correlated to selected operational parameters measured at a time the NMR signal of the patient sample was obtained and may also include a time and or date stamp or data. The local NMR analyzers can be configured to generate an electronic maintenance file of selected operational parameters for each sample processed. The local NMR analyzers can electronically store at least temporarily sample data correlated to an accession patient identifier and or sample dilution factor.

In some embodiments the local analyzer can generate an electronic log of NMR sample data that is analyzed for one or more biosamples and the log can be configured to be accessible by the remote system . In certain embodiments an operator or service program at the remote system determines when to send and places the service order for technical support onsite to the local clinical analyzers .

In particular embodiments the remote system automatically controls selected features of the local clinical NMR analyzers . The local NMR analyzers can be configured with a user interface that accepts local user input to select a report format and or sample variables of interest for NMR analysis thereby allowing customizable report formats by site region. Patient reports generated by the analyzers at each local clinical NMR analyzer site can have a site identifier thereon and the report can be generated in electronic and or paper form.

To help monitor the number of tests performed the remote system can automatically obtain data regarding the number of patient samples analyzed over a desired interval on each clinical NMR analyzer . This monitoring can allow the remote control system to order consumables based on projected and or actual needs customized to a particular site.

In some embodiments each NMR analyzer can include an electronic library of predetermined computer program functions that refer to a NMR normalization factor used to carry out quantification measurements. The NMR analyzers can be configured to obtain NMR derived concentration measurements of lipoproteins in a blood plasma and or serum sample. In some embodiments the NMR analyzers can be configured to obtain NMR derived concentration measurements of one or more of LDL HDL and or VLDL subclass particles in a blood plasma and or serum sample and or configured to determine a a patient s risk of having and or developing CHD based on the lipoprotein measurements and or b a patient s risk of having and or developing Type II diabetes or other insulin resistance disorders.

In certain embodiments each clinical NMR analyzer can be configured to automatically execute a start up self diagnostic and or tuning calibration routine and relay abnormal data regarding same to the remote control system . The clinical NMR analyzers can be configured to automatically monitor the NMR signal lineshapes and or determine a height and or width thereof over time to monitor if adjustments to equipment are indicated. For example the clinical NMR analyzers include a high field superconducting magnet and the clinical NMR analyzers can be configured to automatically shim the NMR spectroscopic magnetic field to provide increased homogeneity if the line widths degrade beyond a desired amount.

In some embodiments the clinical NMR analyzers can be configured to automatically adjust scaling of the NMR lineshape of the proton NMR spectrum of the biosample when the height and or width thereof is outside a desired range.

In some embodiments one of the selected operational parameters monitored for can be RF excitation pulse power. The clinical NMR analyzers can be configured to automatically adjust the RF excitation pulse power increase or decrease the RF amplifier if the power is outside a desired operating range and or varies from pulse to pulse and or sample to sample by more than a predetermined amount and or percentage. The clinical NMR analyzers can be configured to disregard and or invalidate NMR signal data obtained when power variation of the RF pulses is greater than a predetermined amount. In some embodiments when large RF power changes are detected the analyzer can be configured to disregard flag as error prone and or invalidate the sample data. In some embodiments increased accurate control of RF power monitoring can be obtained by using a controlled sample introduced into the analyzer at desired intervals such as a standard solution containing TMA.

The networked system can be configured to monitor in substantially real time at least intermittently and or at desired intervals certain parameters associated with the operational status of the NMR analyzer during operation. The system may go into a standby mode during non active periods down shifts but monitor for certain major parameters such as cryogen level electronic circuitry over temperature and the like.

It is noted that although illustrated as a system that serially flows biosamples using a flow cell other sample handlers and biosample introduction means can be used. For example the biosample can be processed as it is held in a respective tube or other sample container not shown . In some embodiments each of the modular components of the NMR analyzer may be sized and configured to fit within a single housing or enclosure.

Field homogeneity of the detector can be adjusted by shimming on a sample of about 99.8 DO until the spectral linewidth of the HDO NMR signal is less than 0.6 Hz. The 90 RF excitation pulse width used for the DO measurement is typically about 6 7 microseconds. Other shimming techniques can also be used. For example the magnetic field can be automatically adjusted based on the signal lineshape and or a width or height thereof. The NMR detector may optionally include a gradient amplifier in communication with gradient coils held in the magnet bore as is well known to those of skill in the art and the gradient system may also be used to help shim the magnet.

During operation the flow probe is held inside the magnet bore . The flow probe is configured to locate the flow probe RF circuitry within the bore to within about 0.5 cm of a suitably homogeneous portion of the magnetic field B. The flow probe is also configured to receive the flow cell that forms part of the biosample enclosed flow path . The flow cell typically includes a larger holding portion that aligns with the RF circuitry of the flow probe . The flow cell is configured to remain in position with the holding portion in the magnet bore and serially flow biosamples to the holding portion with successive biosamples being separated by a fluid typically air gaps to inhibit cross contamination in a flowing stream. The samples may be introduced as a train of samples but are more typically introduced injected one at a time. The biosample is typically held in the holding portion for between about 1 5 minutes during which time a proton NMR spectrum is obtained and electronically correlated to the sample accession number or identifier i.e. a patient identifier . The flow cell can be formed of a non magnetic material that does not degrade the performance of the NMR detector . Typically the flow cell is formed of a suitable grade of silicate glass material however other magnetic friendly non porous materials may be used including ceramics polymers and the like.

A magnetically friendly optic viewing scope such as a fiber optic system may be used to allow a user and or the system to visually monitor conditions in the magnet bore i.e. position of the probe leaks or the like not shown . The viewing scope can be mounted to the bore or made integral to the flow cell or the flow probe . Similarly at least one leak sensor can be placed to automatically detect fluid leakage whether biosamples cleansers or cryogens. If the former a leak sensor can be used to detect leaks caused by flow path disruption if the latter a gas sniffer type sensor can be used. The gas sensor can be located away from the probe. Cryogen level sensors can also be used to monitor the level of the liquid helium and or nitrogen to allow for automated supply orders identification of an increased use rate which may indicate a magnet problem and the like.

In the embodiment shown the flow cell is in fluid communication with a waste receptacle at one end portion and a sample intake on the other end portion. In certain embodiments the analyzer is configured to flow the samples from top to bottom using a flow cell that has a major portion that is substantially straight i.e. without bends to reduce the length of the flow path and or to reduce the likelihood that the bends in a flow path will block the flow. In some embodiments the flow cell is entirely straight. In particular embodiments the entire flow path may be straight throughout its length including portions upstream and downstream of the flow cell from intake to discharge into the waste container . In other embodiments elastomeric typically polymeric conduit and or tubing which may comprise TEFLON can be used to connect the flow cell to the sample intake portion of the flow path and the conduit and or tubing may be bent to connect to mating components as desired. However it the conduit tubing extend into the magnet bore then that part of the flow path may also be configured to be straight as discussed with respect to the flow cell .

In some embodiments the flow cell has an inner diameter of between about 0.5 mm to about 0.8 mm upstream and downstream of the holding portion . The downstream portion is typically at least about 0.8 mm to inhibit clogs in the flow system. The holding portion may have a diameter that is between about 1.0 mm to about 4.0 mm.

The biosamples may be configured in appropriate sample volumes typically for blood plasma or serum about 0.5 ml. For whole plasma a reduced sample size of about 50 300 microliters typically about 60 200 microliters and more typically between about 60 100 microliters may be desired. In some embodiments the sample flow rate may be between about 2 6 ml min to flow the sample to the holding portion for the NMR data collection and associated analysis.

Still referring to the automated sample handler may be configured to hold a plurality of samples in suitable sample containers and present the samples in their respective container to an intake member that directs the sample into the enclosed flow path . The sample bed may hold about 50 100 samples in containers. In some embodiments the bed may optionally be configured to provide and or held in a refrigerated or cooled enclosed compartment. In other embodiments conventional small and or large racks of sample tubes can be used. Typically the intake member is configured to aspirate the sample into the flow path . As shown the intake member comprises a pipetter and or needle that withdraws the desired sample amount from the container and then directs the sample typically via injection through an injection port into a conduit that is in fluid communication with the flow cell . The pipette may rotate about 180 degrees to access tray samples or a lab automation system TLA workcell etc. . However other sample transfer means may also be used. In other embodiments the intake member can be in direct communication with the flow cell without the use of an intermediate conduit . In particular embodiments the samples may be directly aspirated from a source tube on the sample handler tray. The sample handler system can be configured to provide rapid flow cleaning and sample delivery. In particular embodiments the handler system can be configured to operate on about a 1 minute or less cycle excluding NMR data acquisition while reducing dilution and or carryover.

A multi port valve which may replace or be used with the injection port may be used to help reduce unwanted sample dilution due to flow cleaning carried out between samples. In certain embodiments the intake member includes an aspiration needle that can be quickly dried using a non contact means such as forced air or gas rather than conventional blotter paper to inhibit blockage of the needle. The flow cell may include chromatography connectors that connect the flow cell to tubing or plumbing associated with the flow path .

In some embodiments the analyzer can be configured to direct the aspiration to blow out the injection port immediately after injecting a first sample before pre fetching a next sample to maintain liquid air gaps between neighboring samples.

The sample containers can be held in beds that can be loaded and placed in queue for analysis. The samples are electronically assigned a patient identifier to allow electronic correlation to the test results. Conventionally the beds include bar codes that are automatically read and input into the computer as electronic records as a batch of samples thereby inhibiting adjusting test parameters for a particular sample. In some embodiments the NMR analyzer system is configured so that the point of identification of each sample is carried out automatically at the point of aspiration. Thus an optic or other suitable reader can be configured to define a patient identifier to a particular sample while the sample is being aspirated. In any event the system control software can be configured to create an archivable patient data file record that includes the patient identifier also known as an accession number as well as a dilution factor the NMR derived measurement values test date and time and common rack identifier where used and other process information that can be electronically searched as desired for service operational and or audit purposes. The electronic records can be relayed to a storage location such as a central collection site within each region or country and or stored locally.

In operation NMR derived quantitative measurement data for diagnostic clinical reports of patient biosamples can be generated by a automatically serially aspirating biosamples of interest into an enclosed flow path that serially flows the biosamples into an NMR analyzer having a NMR spectroscopy instrument with a magnet and a bore at a plurality of different clinical sites b automatically correlating a patient identifier to a respective patient biosample c and obtaining NMR derived quantitative measurements of the biosamples for diagnostic reports. In some particular embodiments the operation may also include d automatically monitoring the NMR analyzers at the different clinical sites from a remote system.

Referring again to the system includes a controller processor that is configured with computer program code that includes and or is in communication with instrument automation control software analytical software and or remote communication software . The control software can primarily direct the automated operational sequences and monitoring protocols of the system while the analytical software typically includes proprietary software that carries out the quantitative measurements of the biosamples undergoing analysis using the NMR spectrum thereof. For at least the analytical software the processor may include a digital signal processor capable of performing rapid Fourier transformations.

The remote communication software is configured to carry out and or facilitate the communication between the local analyzer s and remote control system respectively. The controller processor may be configured as a single processor or a plurality of processors that communicate with each other to provide the desired automated interfaces between the system components.

In certain embodiments it may be desired to maintain the temperature of the sample undergoing NMR evaluation at a desired temperature. For example for blood plasma and or serum samples it is typically desired to maintain the temperature of the sample at about 48 C.

In certain embodiments the system includes a plurality of spatially distributed temperature sensors along the flow path that monitor the temperature of the sample undergoing analysis not shown . The sample temperature can be determined at different times in the analysis including a prior to the sample entering the magnet bore b prior to initiating the RF pulse sequence and or c at the time and location of discharge from the probe without disturbing the NMR lineshape in a manner that would impede NMR data collection reliability. The temperature can be monitored during the NMR data acquisition such as at least every 2 5 seconds . The sample can be actively cooled and or heated during the evaluation to maintain a substantially constant homogeneous sample temperature without undue thermal gradients.

The system can include cooling and heating means that are configured to provide distributed heating and or cooling for reducing hot spots in the sample. One type of heater is a capillary heater that may be slipped over the outer surface of the flow cell . An example of a heater is described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 768 304 to Varian Inc. the contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference herein. It is contemplated that a longer capillary heater can be used that extends above the flow cell where the sample is flowed into the bore from the top and may have a length that is sufficient to extend about a major part of the flow path length. In some embodiments the system can include a heater that is highly conductive with a relatively large thermal mass similar to a heat sink that is above the probe where the flow is from top to bottom and or above the flow cell holding portion to thereby improve distributed heating while reducing the likelihood of overheating of the sample as it travels to the probe . The large thermal mass may be located outside the magnet bore

In some embodiments a circulating or forced supply of temperature controlled gas can be flowed into the magnet bore to maintain the sample at a desired temperature during the NMR analysis. The temperature of the forced air can be adjusted relatively quickly in response to in situ measured sample temperature s . To reduce moisture that may be inadvertently directed into sensitive electronics in the probe or spectrometer the gas can be filtered and or dried prior to introduction into the magnet bore

Typically the samples are preheated from a cooled storage temperature. The auto sample handler can hold the samples while in queue and gradually heat the sample in stages prior to the injection input port to provide a sample that is preheated to a desired temperature range such as about 45 47.9 C. . Alternatively the sample may not be heated until it is in the flow cell . In some particular embodiments the handler may also be configured to hold the samples in a refrigerated or cooled state. Combinations of both heating techniques may be used. Thus the system can include thermal sensors along the path the samples travel on in the handler and or flow path that detect the temperature thereof and provide real time feedback to allow the system to automatically adjust for any deviation from predicted or norm.

In any event the system can include a sensor module that electronically communicates with processor and accepts monitors electronic data output from sensors regarding the status of the sensors.

The flow path may be configured with a valved flow bypass channel not shown that bifurcates out of and into the flow path and or flow cell to allow selected samples to be redirected back into the flow path above the magnet bore after the sample exits the probe but before it reaches the waste container when a data corruption event is detected not shown . The bypass channel could be in fluid communication with a solvent cleaner that allows automatic flushing of the bypass channel after use. In other embodiments the sample s affected can be flushed into the waste receptacle and the analyzer and or remote control system can generate a retest notice or order for that subject.

In certain embodiments as shown in the automated clinical NMR analyzer can be configured with modular assemblies including an automated sample handling assembly an NMR spectrometer or detector with a modular NMR probe and a sample flow path with flow cell having a flow cell probe that resides in the NMR spectrometer magnet bore . Each modular assembly component can be configured to releasably operate with its mating modular components thereby allowing ease of repair and or field replacement. Further the analyzer is configured with interface software that allows the operational interchange between the different modular assemblies. The flow cell may be considered a part of the NMR detector or the sample handler for modularity purposes. Either way the NMR analyzer includes suitable interfaces software and or hardware between the automated sample handler and the NMR detector so as to allow the NMR detector module and the sample handler module to cooperate to automatically serially analyze biosamples in a high volume throughput.

Typically the NMR analyzer can diagnostically analyze at least about 400 and more typically at least about 600 samples per twenty four hours. The modular system can be configured so that it can operate in a laboratory environment by staff with little training in NMR support functions. The system may also operate with reduced maintenance and downtime over conventional NMR detectors and can have a simplified user interface.

In certain embodiments the NMR detector can include a flow probe that can be modularly replaced in the field and calibrated for operation within a relatively short time upon identification of a malfunction or contamination of the probe due to flow cell leaks and the like.

The system can be configured to store certain operating values of the flow probe being removed and those values can be can be pre calibrated to defined norms for the new or replacement flow probe . In particular embodiments the flow probe can include a memory card or chip that stores certain operational parameter values input upon installation and or automatically at desired intervals and can be used in a replacement flow probe . In other embodiments the capacitors and or other tunable circuit components can be programmatically tuned by an automated tuning routine carried out by the NMR analyzer and or control system .

The flow probe may be configured so that tuning capacitors are mounted underneath where the flow probe is inserted from the bottom into the bore or above where the flow probe is inserted from the top of the magnet bore the flow probe for easy external access. The flow probe can be a generally rigid member that is configured to releasably mount to the magnet without the use of permanent solder type connections.

As shown in the instrument automation module optionally communicates with the remote communications module a LIS Laboratory Information System interface . The LIS interface is in communication with the LIS system and a user interface module that accepts local user input into selection of certain operating features and or test report parameters. The LIS interface can be a common interface that communicates with other equipment or lab programs allowing a single common interface that a local user can use in the clinical laboratory. The LIS interface can be in communication with the analytical software module that includes the test quantification analysis or evaluation program code and may be proprietary and or customized to each type of analysis performed . The data raw and or in report form can be transmitted to the laboratory s LIS. As indicated by the broken line connections the analytical software module may optionally communicate directly with either the instrumentation automation module and or the remote communications module .

The term module refers to program code that is directed to carrying out and or directing particular operational communications and or monitoring functions. The term module is not meant to limit the program code to a bundled package or a successive portion of code as the module program code may be distributed code within a particular processor or processors that are in communication. As such the module may be a stand alone module on a respective single processor or may be configured with an architecture hierarchy that plugs into other program modules on one or more processors. Furthermore selected ones or each module noted in the figures may share common code or functionality with other modules.

The normalization factor is used to standardize the measurements of different NMR analyzers. Different NMR probes will have different typically instrument specific sensitivities based on the Q factor of the probe. Q is defined as the frequency of the resonant circuit divided by the half power bandwidth. A standard sample like for example trimethyl acetic acid TMA can be run on different NMR machines and with different probes and the integral of the CHproton can be measured to standardize it to a fixed value. The ratio between the predefined fixed value and the integral under then current conditions is termed the normalization factor and this can be used to standardize different NMR analyzers by multiplying any raw NMR intensity by the normalization factor. An extension of the same concept allows for adjusting for relatively small sensitivity differences from day to day for the same probe on a particular NMR analyzer by running the same standard sample and calculating the daily normalization factor in a similar manner. Hence the NMR normalization factor can be calculated in situ for each NMR analyzer for each probe and in some embodiments adjusted for each NMR analyzer at desired intervals such as after certain numbers of samples upon start up upon detection of a change in selected local operational conditions .

The instrument automation module can communicate with a data acquisition quality control module a LIS interface an instrument user interface an NMR Analyzer NMRA database and an NMRA filebase . The system can also include a test automation module that allows a selection of different diagnostic test options using the NMR platform. TestB and TestC modules respectively can be configured as separate modules that can be deployed as plug in modules. The test automation module can communicate with the LIS interface the instrument user interface and at least indirectly with the instrumentation automation module .

Certain blocks groups of blocks and or combinations of blocks from any or each of can be used in particular embodiments.

As shown in the memory may include several categories of software and data used in the data processing system the operating system the application programs the input output I O device drivers an automation module which might provide capabilities such as self adjusting calibration processing control or remote communications and data .

The data may include NMR signal constituent and or composite spectrum lineshape data which may be obtained from a data or signal acquisition system . The data can include values other operating or process parameters of interest such as leak sensors thermal sensors pressure sensors RF power sensors the number of successive irregular NMR signal scans service histories maintenance files sample history files and the like. As will be appreciated by those of skill in the art the operating system may be any operating system suitable for use with a data processing system such as OS 2 AIX or OS 390 from International Business Machines Corporation in Armonk N.Y. Windows CE Windows NT Windows 95 Windows 98 Windows 2000 or Windows XP from Microsoft Corporation Redmond Wash. Palm OS from PalmSource Inc. Sunnyvale Calif. Mac OS from Apple Computer Inc UNIX FreeBSD or Linux proprietary operating systems or dedicated operating systems for example for embedded data processing systems.

The I O device drivers typically include software routines accessed through the operation system by the application programs to communicate with devices such as I O data port s data storage and certain memory components and or the data acquisition system . The application programs are illustrative of the programs that implement the various features of the data processing system and preferably include at least one application that supports operations according to embodiments of the present invention. Finally the data represents the static and dynamic data used by the application programs the operating system the I O device drivers and other software programs that may reside in the memory .

While the present invention is illustrative for example with reference to the automation module being an application program in as will be appreciated by those of skill in the art other configurations may also be utilized while still benefiting from the teachings of the present invention. For example the automation module may also be incorporated into the operating system the I O device drivers or other such logical division of the data processing system . Thus the present invention should not be construed as limited to the configuration of which is intended to encompass any configuration capable of carrying out the operations described herein.

In certain embodiments the automation module may include computer program code for communicating with a remote control system local or offsite . The automation module can also include program code that provides automated multi parameter process monitoring and self correction adjustment a log of operational conditions that may be correlated to patient samples including time date data selectable test formats and selectable test analysis a log of data variability and or service history a log of the number of patient samples processed which may be parsed over desired intervals and archived process parameter information for remote interrogation diagnostics and other data as indicated above.

In particular embodiments the NMR analyzer can be configured to electronically monitor alone and or cooperating with a remote control system a plurality of components for selected operational variables and to carry out different testing methodologies according to the test desired of a particular biosample to facilitate automated function of the device automatically whereby the NMR analyzer operates without requiring undue amounts of manual input and or on site service support during normal operation. Examples of the components and variables were discussed above and are illustrated in the figures and can include for example one or more of the following 

The foregoing is illustrative of the present invention and is not to be construed as limiting thereof. Although a few exemplary embodiments of this invention have been described those skilled in the art will readily appreciate that many modifications are possible in the exemplary embodiments without materially departing from the novel teachings and advantages of this invention. Accordingly all such modifications are intended to be included within the scope of this invention as defined in the claims. In the claims means plus function clauses where used are intended to cover the structures described herein as performing the recited function and not only structural equivalents but also equivalent structures. Therefore it is to be understood that the foregoing is illustrative of the present invention and is not to be construed as limited to the specific embodiments disclosed and that modifications to the disclosed embodiments as well as other embodiments are intended to be included within the scope of the appended claims. The invention is defined by the following claims with equivalents of the claims to be included therein.

