---

title: Methods and systems for providing haptic messaging to handheld communication devices
abstract: Embodiments of the invention relate to methods and systems for providing customized “haptic messaging” to users of handheld communication devices in a variety of applications. In one embodiment, a method of providing haptic messaging to a hand communication device includes: associating an input signal with an event; determining a source of the event and selecting the control signal based on the determination; and outputting a control signal to an actuator coupled to the hand communication device. The control signal is configured to cause the actuator to output a haptic effect associated with the event. An event in the above may be a connection event.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08059088&OS=08059088&RS=08059088
owner: Immersion Corporation
number: 08059088
owner_city: San Jose
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050913
---
This application is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 538 160 in the names of inventors Danny Grant Jeffrey Eid and Shoichi Endo filed on Mar. 20 2007 now abandoned which was based on PCT Patent Application No. US03 038899 filed Dec. 8 2003 wherein PCT Patent Application No. US03 038899 claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 431 662 filed on Dec. 8 2002.

This invention relates generally to haptic feedback systems. More specifically embodiments of the present invention relate to using customized haptic effects in a variety of applications to convey information to users of handheld communication devices.

As handheld communication devices become part of everyday life device manufactures and service providers strive to enhance the versatility and performance of such devices.

Handheld communication devices in the art e.g. mobile phones pagers personal digital assistants PDAs and the like typically use auditory and visual cues to alert a user when incoming messages such as voice calls and emails are received. Such auditory and visual alerts however have the disadvantages of being distracting in some situations e.g. during driving or annoying in others e.g. during a meeting or a concert . Likewise they are insufficient in other situations such as a noisy environment e.g. at a pub or in a crowd or when a call is dropped and the user continues talking without realizing that nobody is still listening.

Although vibratory alerts are made available in some communication devices such as cellular phones such vibratory effects cannot in accordance with the known prior art be customized or personalized according to applications and thus are capable of conveying little information to the user. A need therefore exists in the art for a new sensory modality that delivers information to users of handheld communication devices in a personalized fashion.

Such sensory modality would help cut through communication clutter by prioritizing categorizing or highlighting messages and content as they are received. It would provide mobile phone users with better control over their handset and communications through greater flexibility accuracy and speed.

Moreover engaging the sense of touch would enhance the reality of user experience. Touch unifies the spatial senses those you use to navigate your way through the world sight sound and touch. Touch produces reflex rate response in milliseconds and supplies a completeness that sight and sound together can t replace. In short touch makes an experience truly personal.

Embodiments of the invention relate to methods and systems for providing customized haptic messaging to users of handheld communication devices in a variety of applications and contexts.

In one embodiment a method for providing haptic messaging to a handheld communication device includes associating an input signal with an event and outputting a control signal to an actuator coupled to the handheld communication device the control signal configured to cause the actuator to output a haptic effect associated with the event.

In another embodiment a method for providing haptic messaging to a handheld communication device includes receiving an input signal associated with a status event and outputting a control signal to an actuator coupled to the handheld communication device at a prescribed time after receiving the input signal the control signal configured to cause the actuator to output a haptic effect associated with the status event.

In yet another embodiment a method for mapping between an event of interest and a corresponding haptic effect includes providing a plurality of haptic effects to a user allowing a user to associate haptic effects with one or more events of interest and compiling the mappings made between various events of interest and corresponding haptic effects into a haptic lookup table storable in memory.

Embodiments described in the following description are provided by way of example to illustrate some general principles of the invention and should not be construed as limiting the scope of the invention in any manner. Those of ordinary skill in the art having the benefit of this disclosure will now also recognize that various changes and modifications can be made herein without departing from the principles and scope of the invention.

Device includes a device body including a housing and a user interface a processor at least one actuator in communication with processor and a memory in communication with processor . Device also includes an antenna and a transceiver in communication with processor . Device additionally includes a display module and an audio module in communication with processor . Display module may include for example a liquid crystal device. Audio means may include for example a speaker a microphone and the like.

For purpose of illustration in the embodiment of processor actuator and memory are shown to be enclosed within and coupled to the device body. Such an illustration however should not be construed as limiting the scope of the invention in any manner. In alternative embodiments actuator may for example be coupled to the outside of housing or embedded in housing via a suitable mechanism. Further user interface may include one or more user interface members. As used herein a user interface member includes without limitation a key pad having one or more keys one or more buttons a touch screen or touch pad a scroll wheel a direction pad a trackball a knob a miniature joystick or other user interface means known in the art.

Device further includes an API Application Program Interface working in conjunction with an operating system . A device driver not shown may optionally provide an interface between operating system and processor .

Memory of device stores a program code that includes instructions to cause processor to perform various tasks. The following description provides some examples.

Furthermore at step a collection of haptic effects is provided each haptic effect being associated with a control signal. For example memory of can store a program code that includes instructions to generate the control signals e.g. each characterized by a distinct waveform for rendering the corresponding haptic effects. Haptic effects along with associated control signals may also be downloaded or transmitted from a remote source such as a service provider a network resource a Web server a remote handheld communication device or computer. Such downloaded or transmitted haptic effects can be further edited or modified. It is envisioned that third party applications for handheld communication devices may enable users to purchase and download additional haptic effects as well as to edit and modify them. The haptic effects may also be provided in the form of a bundled package that also includes visual effects and audio effects which may or may not be configured to be synchronized with the haptic effects.

At step a mapping between an event of interest and one of the stored haptic effects is received. By way of example memory of may also store a program code that enables a user to map an event of interest to one of the haptic effects as provided e.g. via user interface through API where the event may be identified by its source. At step the one to one mappings made between various events of interest and the corresponding haptic effects are compiled into a haptic lookup table which can for example be stored in memory of .

In the embodiment of the term selecting includes without limitation looking up a predetermined mapping between the event of interest and a corresponding haptic effect based on the source determination and selecting or generating a control signal that is configured to render the desired haptic effect associated with the event e.g. upon being applied to an actuator . Selection can be made based upon the aforementioned haptic lookup table for example. In one embodiment the input signal may include a communication signal associated with a call event such as a voice call an e mail or a message in text or multimedia form which may be received via antenna and transceiver of for example. The source of a call event may be related to a characteristic that distinctly identifies or characterizes the call event such as the caller s phone number the sender s e mail address a graphical feature or an icon associated with the incoming message etc.

In accordance with another embodiment of the present invention the input signal may be associated with a service carrier event specific to a user s wireless service carrier or wireless service plan. Notifications of service carrier events are intended to help a user manage phone calls. Service carrier events include an entering of a service zone a weak carrier signal a passage of an increment of time allotted in accordance with a mobile service plan a roaming alert a powering on of a handheld communication device and a powering off of a handheld communication device.

Certain service carrier events may depend upon where a user is in relation to the geographical coverage of his service carrier s network. In accordance with one example of this embodiment a traveling user may feel a particular haptic effect when he enters the service zone of his service provider when he receives a signal of a certain strength or when he leaves the service zone of his service provider. Such a notification informs a user of when he can make or receive calls emails SMS messages etc. When outside the service carrier network a user may be roaming or using a visited network. Usage of a visited network may depend upon the roaming agreement between his service carrier provider and the visited network. With many service plans roaming phone calls incur additional charges and therefore a user may wish to receive haptic effects to notify him of such roaming. In accordance with another example of this embodiment a user may feel a particular haptic effect when he has used up a certain increment of time in accordance with his service plan. Such a notification helps the user keep track of his cell phone usage and the service charges he is incurring.

In accordance with yet another example of this embodiment a user may feel a particular haptic effect specific to the user s service carrier when the user is powering on the handheld communication device or powering off the handheld communication device.

The source of a service carrier event may be related to a user s service carrier or a graphical feature icon or logo associated with the service carrier.

In accordance with yet another embodiment of the present invention the input signal may be associated with a connection event such as a sending of an outgoing e mail a sending of an outgoing SMS message a dropped call a connected call a passage of an increment of time when connected to a call a push to talk ready alert a push to talk receiving alert and a push to talk when the line is busy alert. A connection event depends upon a user s connection status to a service network.

Push To Talk PTT is a two way communication service that works like a walkie talkie. A normal cell phone call is full duplex meaning both parties can hear each other at the same time. PTT is half duplex meaning communication can only travel in one direction at any given moment. To control which person can speak and be heard PTT requires the person speaking to press a button while talking and then release it when they are done. The listener then presses their button to respond. This way the system knows which direction the signal should be traveling in.

A push to talk ready alert notifies the user when the system is ready for him to speak. A push to talk receiving alert notifies the user of a received push to talk call. A push to talk busy alert notifies a user making a push to talk call that the recipient s line is busy.

The source of a connection event may be related to a characteristic that distinctly identifies or characterizes the connection event such as the other party s phone number or the recipient s e mail address.

In accordance with yet another embodiment of the present invention the input signal may be associated with a user interface navigation event for example scrolling reaching the bottom of a list wrapping around to the first item in a list selecting an item on a list selecting an item designated as a favorite or use of a dedicated key.

As an example of this embodiment in the User presses the down key to navigate to the next item in a list menu. The user feels a gentle single bump effect indicating simple movement across menu items. The user navigates to the bottom of the list and presses the down key. Since this is the last item the visual highlight does not change.

In the user feels a double bump effect notifying them that there are no more items in the list. The same effect should be felt at the top of the list. Table 2 Example of Typical User Interface Navigation Events and Associated Haptic Events.

In The last item in a list is highlighted and the user presses the down key to wrap around to the first item in the list. The user feels a strong single bump effect. The same effect should be felt when wrapping around in the other direction from the first to the last item .

In the user presses the OK button to select a highlighted item from a list. The user feels a quick pulse to indicate the item was successfully selected.

In the user presses the OK button to select a highlighted icon. The user feels a quick pulse to indicate the icon was successfully selected.

In certain items in a list may be accented by playing a unique haptic effect instead of the single bump when scrolling to them. In this example Kathy is the favorite. Since a unique haptic effect will be felt when highlighting Kathy the user is able to scroll and select this favorite without looking at the display.

In dedicated keys such as Send and End may have a specific haptic navigation effect associated with them that will confirm the button press. Keys that do not have a dedicated function should not directly trigger a VibeTonz navigation effect. Instead the navigation effect should be based on the context of the button press in the application to avoid interfering with other applications.

There are many possibilities for creating favorites including items that are manually marked by the user and items that an application may programmatically classify as a favorite. An example of programmatically created favorites could be an enhanced contact application wherein the first contact for every letter of the alphabet is marked as a favorite. In this way as a user scrolls through the alphabetized list he could feel that he has now reached the section beginning with B then C and so on.

The source of a user interface navigation event may be related to the medium that is navigated e.g. the type of menu or list the type of item being selected e.g. Mark v. Kathy or the consequence of using a dedicated key e.g. Send v. Save .

In accordance with another embodiment of the present invention the input signal may be associated with a reminder event which may be a self generated message on the handheld communication device serving as a reminder for a pre scheduled activity e.g. an appointment or a meeting . The source in this scenario may be associated with the type of a pre scheduled activity e.g. a business meeting vs. a restaurant reservation or the time at which the pre scheduled activity takes place.

In accordance with one embodiment of the present invention the input signal may include a communication signal associated with a handheld communication device power signature event.

In accordance with another embodiment of the present invention the input signal may include a communication signal associated with a status event for example received via antenna and transceiver of . Examples of a status event include but are not limited to an advertisement e.g. sale event a one to one marketing event a business transaction event a stock trading event a weather forecast event a sports or game event an entertainment event and an emergency e.g. 911 event. In this scenario the source may be associated with a characteristic that distinctly identifies the sender and or the nature of a status event such as the phone number of the handheld user s stock broker the e mail address of the user s favorite store the logo associated with the user s favorite TV or radio station and so on.

In accordance with yet another embodiment of the present invention an event of interest can be accompanied by a distinct haptic effect or overlapping haptic effects conveying to the user customized information such as who is calling what is happening and so on. The user can also be allowed to update the haptic lookup table e.g. to include new events and or to modify the mappings between the existing events of interest and the corresponding haptic effects.

Moreover a specific haptic effect can be assigned to any incoming signal event whose source is unknown so as to alert the user that the incoming message is from an un identifiable or sender.

As used herein the term handheld communication device includes without limitation a mobile phone such as a cellular phone or a satellite phone a personal digital assistant PDA a cordless telephone a pager a two way radio a handheld or portable computer a game console controller a personal gaming device an MP3 player or other personal electronic devices known in the art that are equipped with communication or networking capabilities.

In accordance with one embodiment of the present invention the aforementioned haptic effects can be used as haptic ringers e.g. counterparts to auditory ring tones that are customized or personalized to convey information to the user about various events of interest. By way of example a haptic ringer associated with a call from a loved one e.g. the user s spouse may comprise low amplitude and high frequency vibrations that impart gentle sensations to the user. In contrast a haptic ringer associated with an emergency event such as a 911 call may comprise jolt like pulses that impart pounding sensations to the user.

In contrast with conventional auditory ring tones the aforementioned haptic effects e.g. haptic ringers are more desirable in an environment where extraneous auditory signals are prohibited e.g. during a meeting or a concert and or where it is difficult to distinguish auditory signals e.g. in a loud environment such as an airport . The haptic ringers are also more suitable in distracting situations such as driving so that the user of a handheld communication device can keep eyes on the road without having to look at the device. Moreover such haptic ringers convey customized information to the user so that the user is aware of who is calling what is happening and so on as the following examples further illustrate.

A handheld communication device such as a mobile phone may be configured to allow a user to include haptic information or a haptic code in an outgoing communication signal e.g. carrying a voice call an e mail or a message. The encoding of a communication signal with haptic information may be based on an established scheme or protocol and or on a per system basis. The haptic code is configured to cause a haptic effect to be output when the communication signal is delivered to another handheld communication device. In one embodiment businesses and organizations may each be associated with a distinct haptic logo e.g. a particular vibration pattern and include their haptic logos in various messages sent to the handheld communication devices of their customers. Such haptic logos can serve as counterparts to conventional logos known in the art for example. Various status events mentioned above may also be transmitted in this manner. By way of example a merchant may include its haptic logo in various advertisement events and business transaction events to be transmitted to the handheld communication devices of its customers. Stock brokers or brokerage firms TV or radio stations and marketing advertising agencies may likewise include their haptic logos in various stock trading events weather forecast events sports events entertainment events and one to one marketing events to be transmitted to the handheld users.

In accordance with one embodiment of the present invention the extracted haptic code may be directly applied to the actuator for rendering the desired haptic effect. In another embodiment the haptic code may be configured according to a predetermined scheme or protocol that includes for example a table of haptic codes some of which may be associated with one or more haptic logos versus control signals for rendering the corresponding haptic effects. In this way a processor in the handheld communication device can look up the corresponding control signal from the table based on the extracted haptic code and output the selected control signal to the actuator for rendering the desired haptic effect.

In the embodiments illustrated in or the handheld communication device or the haptic code may be programmed such that the haptic effect is output immediately or at a prescribed time after receiving the input signal as desired in applications. The haptic effects can also be triggered by or synchronized with other occurrences.

A handheld communication device may be further configured such that some of its user interface members such as those described above are each associated with a haptic code e.g. according to a predetermined scheme or protocol. In one embodiment some of these haptic codes may be associated with haptic effects that emulate expressions or behaviors such as laugh giggle hug high five heartbeat pet purring etc. This allows haptic effects to be transmitted and experienced e.g. in an interactive conversation or a chat session by pressing or manipulating such members.

By way of example suppose that user A termed Alice herein is engaged in a chat session with user B termed Bob herein via their respective mobile phones. In one embodiment when Bob tells Alice a joke Alice can respond by sending a laugh sensation to Bob e.g. by pressing a key on her mobile phone that is assigned with a haptic code corresponding to a laugh sensation. This causes a signal to be transmitted from Alice s phone to Bob s phone and a corresponding haptic effect to be output to Bob s phone and thereby experienced by Bob . In accordance with alternative embodiments Alice can include a haptic code in an outgoing message which may also contain a video image such as a picture taken by her mobile phone and or a graphical feature such as an emoticon emulating a smiley face to be transmitted to Bob e.g. by pressing the corresponding user interface member. The haptic code causes a haptic effect to be output when the message is delivered to a remote device such as Bob s mobile phone. In accordance with one embodiment the haptic effect may be correlated or synchronized with the displaying of a video image contained in the message. In accordance with another embodiment the generation of the haptic effect based on the haptic code may be carried out in a manner similar to that described above with respect to the embodiment of .

A handheld communication device may also be configured such that a haptic effect along with a message is output upon a contact with a user interface member being made e.g. by a user or an input device . depicts a flowchart illustrating a method of haptic message that can be associated with this situation according to an embodiment of the invention. At step of the flowchart a handheld communication device receives an input signal. At step the handheld communication device outputs a request for a contact with a user interface member coupled to the handheld communication device. At step the handheld communication device provides a control signal associated with the contact to an actuator coupled to the handheld communication device. The control signal is configured to cause the actuator to output a haptic effect associated with the input signal. Step may include having a visual effect displayed an auditory effect played and or a distinctive haptic ringer output which requests a contact with the user interface member being made.

In accordance with one embodiment the input signal in may include a haptic code along with a message a video image and or a graphical feature etc. For example the haptic code may be configured to cause a hug sensation to be output when the video image contained in the input signal is displayed. The input signal may also contain a provision or protocol that specifies that the incoming message along with the corresponding haptic effect is output upon a contact with a particular user interface member e.g. the 5 key being made. Alternatively the handheld communication device may determine the user interface member to be contacted before outputting incoming message along with the corresponding haptic effect.

In accordance with another embodiment the input signal of may be associated with a virtual touch e.g. to mimic a handshake a high five a pat on the back a pulse or heartbeat sensation a pet purring sensation or other touch sensations associated with human and or human animal interactions. In one scenario the input signal at step may include a virtual touch indicator based on which the request for a contact with a particular user interface member is made. The virtual touch indicator may be in the form of a haptic code a message or other informative means. The control signal at step may be generated e.g. based on the virtual touch indicator a haptic code associated with the user interface member at play or other predetermined scheme. The input signal at step may also include a virtual touch indicator along with a virtual touch signal for rendering the desired haptic effect. In this case the control signal at step may be based on the virtual touch signal.

Referring back to the chat session between Alice and Bob by way of example at the end of their chat session Alice may wish to send Bob a high five. She sends to Bob s mobile phone a signal including a virtual touch indicator which in turn prompts a request that Bob be in contact with a user interface member coupled to his phone such as a direction pad e.g. by putting his fingers on the individual keys of the direction pad a key pad a touch screen a trackball a joystick or the like. The control signal for rendering a haptic effect that emulates a high five may be based on the haptic code associated with the user interface member transmitted with the input signal from Alice and or other predetermined scheme.

Interactive virtual touch can also be engaged between users of handheld communication devices where the manipulation of a user interface member on one handheld communication device is transmitted possibly in substantially real time to another handheld device and experienced by its user and vice versa. depicts a flowchart illustrating a method of providing interactive virtual touch in one embodiment of the present invention. In the embodiment shown a handheld communication device first receives an input signal including a virtual touch indicator at step . A distinctive haptic ringer may for example accompany the arrival of the virtual touch indicator identifying the sender and the nature of the input signal. The handheld communication device may then perform any necessary initialization to enable the communication at step which may also include requesting a contact with a particular user interface member coupled to the handheld communication device at step . The handheld communication device subsequently receives a virtual touch signal in the communication associated with the desired haptic effect at step . The handheld communication device provides the haptic effect at step e.g. by applying the virtual touch signal to an actuator coupled to the user interface member.

In accordance with one embodiment the virtual touch signal may be associated with the manipulation of a user interface member on a remote handheld device and transmitted in substantially real time. And the user on the receiving end may respond by acting in a similar fashion so as to emulate an interactive touch. Any schemes for delivering virtual touch to users of handheld communication devices may be used.

Haptic effects can also be used to enhance and complement the information content communicated between handheld communication devices. In accordance with one embodiment a plurality of handheld communication users may be engaged in a chat session via their handheld communication devices. The users may each have a graphical representation or avatar displayed on other handheld communication devices. Such avatars can also be haptically enabled for example whereby their expressions and or behaviors are accompanied and enhanced by corresponding haptic effects. is a flowchart depicting a method of carrying out a chat session using handheld communication devices according to an embodiment of the invention. In the embodiment shown a handheld communication device receives an input signal associated with a chat message at step . The handheld communication device displays an avatar associated with the chat message at step . The avatar may be shown on display of in one embodiment. At step the handheld communication device provides a haptic effect associated with the chat message. Step may include outputting a control signal to an actuator coupled to the handheld communication device where the control signal is configured to cause the actuator to output the haptic effect. In accordance with one embodiment the haptic effect may be correlated with an expression or behavior of the avatar such as a laugh or giggle a cry a pet purring or the like.

Handheld communication devices are increasingly equipped with navigation capability for example in communication with the Global Positioning System GPS or other navigation systems. Haptic effects can also be used to convey navigation information such as positional and or directional information to handheld users. By way of example shows a flowchart depicting a method of haptic navigation according to an embodiment of the present invention. The flowchart discloses receiving an input signal associated with a position of a handheld communication device at step determining the position of a handheld communication device relative to a predetermined location at step and providing a haptic effect associated with the determination at step . Step may include outputting a control signal associated with the determination to an actuator coupled to the handheld communication device the control signal being configured to cause the actuator to output the haptic effect. Further the input signal at step may be received from GPS a digital compass or other navigation systems known in the art.

In accordance with one embodiment the haptic effect may be associated with a distance between the position of the handheld communication device and a predetermined location termed destination herein . For example the haptic effect may include a vibration having a magnitude and a frequency where at least one of the magnitude and the frequency decreases as the distance from the destination diminishes. Additionally the haptic effect may be configured to convey a quantitative measure of the distance. By way of example the haptic effect may include one or more pulse or jolt sensations where the number of pulses is proportional to the number of miles between the position of the handheld device and the destination.

Processors described above including processor of can include for example one or more digital logical processors capable of processing input execute algorithms and generate output as necessary to perform various tasks such as those described above. Such processors controllers may include a microprocessor an Application Specific Integrated Circuit ASIC state machines and the like. Such processors include or may be in communication with media including memory of . Such media include for example computer readable media which stores program code that when executed by a processor cause the processor to perform the steps described herein. Embodiments of computer readable media include but are not limited to an electronic optical magnetic or other storage or transmission device capable of providing a processor such as the processor in a web server with computer readable instructions. Other examples of suitable media include but are not limited to a floppy disk CD ROM magnetic disk memory chip ROM RAM ASIC configured processor all optical media all magnetic tape or other magnetic media or any other medium from which a computer processor can read. Also various other forms of computer readable media may transmit or carry instructions to a computer including a router private or public network or other transmission device or channel.

Program code and associated application programs related to various applications may also reside on a remote source such as a network resource a Web server a remote handheld communication device or computer which can be transmitted or downloaded to a handheld communication device on a regular or predetermined basis. Haptic effects along with associated control signals can also be downloaded or transmitted from a remote source as described above.

Actuators described above including actuator shown in can include for example a pager motor an eccentric rotating motor a harmonic eccentric rotating motor a voice coil a solenoid a resistive actuator a piezoelectric actuator an electro active polymer actuator or other types of active passive actuators suitable for generating haptic effects. U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 429 846 and 6 424 333 disclose further details relating to some of these actuators both of which are incorporated in full herein by reference. In some embodiments one or more actuators may be implemented in a handheld communication device configured to deliver appropriate haptic effects. It will be appreciated that various control schemes can be devised accordingly for controlling the actuator s in a manner that best achieves the desired haptic effects.

Referring back to actuator may be coupled to housing thereby imparting haptic effects thus generated to the device body. Haptic ringers or alerts described above may be delivered in this manner for instance. In another embodiment actuator may be coupled to user interface of the device body. For instance an active and or resistive actuator can be coupled to user interface to deliver a virtual touch described above. One or more actuators can also be coupled to user interface for example to convey a virtual touch such to a user. In yet another embodiment a plurality of actuators can be coupled to housing as well as user interface . In addition one or more actuators may also be coupled to a headset a wristband or other accessory means associated with a handheld communication device.

In accordance with one embodiment of the present invention an individual or Bob can have a mobile phone according to the invention. The mobile phone also has an e mail capability for example including both receive and send . The mobile phone is configured to provide a plurality of haptic effects e.g. by including appropriate hardware such as actuators described above and program code. Bob can program the mobile phone for example via user interface through API shown in by inputting various events of interest and associating each with a distinct haptic effect. Thus when an event of interest is subsequently received the mobile phone provides the corresponding haptic effect.

In accordance with one embodiment of the present invention Bob s phone includes programming that provides a first haptic effect when an input signal is received from the mobile phone of Bob s wife or Alice . Bob s phone also includes programming that provides a second haptic effect that is different and distinct from the first haptic effect when an input signal is received from the mobile phone of Bob s supervisor at work termed Carol herein . Bob s phone is further be configured to provide a third haptic effect that is different from the two mentioned above e.g. when an e mail is received from the e mail address of Bob s stock broker where the e mail contains a smiley face emoticon for instance . The third haptic effect can be a vibration with high magnitude and short duration e.g. to emulate a high five. 

In accordance with another embodiment of the present invention Bob can be watching a movie in a theater with his mobile phone in his pocket. It is set to make no noise because Bob is in a theater. While Bob is watching the movie Bob s mobile phone vibrates with the second haptic effect mentioned above. Bob chooses to ignore the call because he does not wish to speak with his supervisor at a movie theater. Later Bob s mobile phone vibrates with the first haptic effect. Bob wants to speak with Alice for example to make plans to meet later. So Bob answers the phone and quickly exits the theater to talk with Alice.

Bob s mobile phone can also include a personal schedule calendar application. After speaking with Alice Bob can enter an entry in the calendar at the 7 00 PM time mark Meet Alice . Meet Alice . Bob can also choose a fourth haptic effect to associate with the calendar entry. The mobile phone can be programmed to output the fourth haptic effect fifteen minutes before the time entry of the calendar i.e. at 6 45 PM .

Bob s mobile phone can be equipped with GPS capability along with an associated application program for location determination. Bob can also store addresses of various locations of interest in the application program. In one embodiment Bob can be on the road. Bob s mobile phone vibrates with a distinct fifth haptic effect. Bob recognizes the fifth haptic effect being associated with the haptic logo of his favorite electronics store. He then checks with the application program and receives a sixth haptic effect associated with the distance between his current position and the store location. Bob then decides to make a stop at the store.

A haptically enabled handheld communication device of the invention may be further used as a two way haptic remote control for example for controlling a remote system such as a Television set or a multimedia system. In one embodiment the events as referred to above may be related to program channels shown on the remote system each identified by a channel number which may be used as the source for instance. The corresponding haptic effects may be customized on a per channel basis. Such haptic effects can serve to inform a user as to which channel is on as a user is channel surfing by way of this haptic remote control so that the user need not to look up the display screen.

The first haptic effect can be further customized according to the received feedback signal. In one embodiment the remote system provides information e.g. via the feedback signal to the remote control regarding the state of the display e.g. based on a predetermined scheme. The remote control may use the information to determine a corresponding haptic effect to provide at step . In alternative embodiments the remote system may determine the appropriate haptic effect to provide and include a corresponding haptic code in the feedback signal. The remote control provides the haptic effect at step based on this haptic code.

The foregoing description of the preferred embodiments of the invention has been presented only for the purpose of illustration and description and is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise forms disclosed. Numerous modifications and adaptations thereof will be apparent to those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention.

