---

title: Coronary stent
abstract: In an embodiment, a stent is provided for use in blood vessels with blockage near or in a bifurcation. The stent includes a side aperture. The stent is inserted into one of the daughter branches of the bifurcation and positioned with the use of markers. The stent is then expanded so as to support the wall of the blood vessel while allowing the blood to continue to flow to both daughter branches.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07632304&OS=07632304&RS=07632304
owner: RBKPark LLC
number: 07632304
owner_city: St. Charles
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050907
---
The present invention relates to the field of medical devices more specifically to the field of implantable coronary stents.

As is known the human heart circulates blood throughout the body. Depending on the individual the heart beats between 80 000 and 140 000 times per day. During normal function of the heart the left and right atria and the left and right ventricles contract causing blood to flow. The blood flows from the heart passes through a set of blood vessels known as arteries that feed the organs and tissue in the body and then returns to the heart through a set of blood vessels known as veins. This circulation provides nutrients and oxygen to the body so that it can continue to function.

As the heart is basically a continuously functioning muscle it also needs a steady supply of nutrients in order to function. For example a coronary artery supplies blood and the associated oxygen and nutrients to the cardiac muscle. In order for the heart to continue to function it is crucial that this artery continue to function properly.

Unfortunately the coronary artery can become partially or completely blocked. One cause is left main coronary artery disease LMCD . LMCD may be caused for example by the accumulation of fatty tissue on the wall of the left main artery. LMCD is generally defined as a greater than 50 reduction in the left main which results in insufficient blood flow to the heart tissue and eventually causes damage to the heart tissue.

While partial blockage can result in permanent damage to the heart muscle sudden complete blockage of the left main will result in the death of the individual. Therefore maintaining blood flow through the left main is crucial to an individual s ability to exist. Any symptomatic blockage must be immediately treated.

Two methods of treatment of a partially or completely blocked left main are 1 percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty PTCA also referred to as percutaneous coronary intervention PCI and commonly referred to as balloon angioplasty or angioplasty and 2 coronary artery bypass graft CABG commonly referred to as bypass surgery. Due to a number of factors the most common procedure to treat LMCD has been bypass surgery.

In essence bypass surgery uses section of veins or arteries sections from other parts of the body to connect the aorta to a point downstream of the blockage. This allows blood to flow around the blockage point through a separate passageway. Depending on the severity and location of the blockage as many as four to five grafts are necessary.

One downside to bypass surgery is that it takes a substantial time to perform. For a patient with a totally occlusion or a severely blocked left main the time it takes to perform bypass surgery may be too long. Therefore in emergencies balloon angioplasty has been performed on patients suffering from sudden LMCD.

Another problem is that bypass surgery is only effective for about 8 10 years at which point a patient generally requires additional treatment that is generally less effective. Given the potential long term health problems it is desirable to delay bypass surgery if possible.

Furthermore certain patients medical conditions are incompatible with the rigors of bypass surgery. For example some patients have severe co morbid conditions precluding open heart surgery such as malignancy with limited life expectancy no longer are a candidate for bypass surgery. Thus while bypass surgery is a useful medical procedure that has saved many lives it is best saved for situations where less complex procedures cannot be used effectively.

In addition some interventional cardiac catheterization labs are not backed up by surgical programs. This is problematic in situations where the LMCD must be treated immediately e.g. iatrogenic dissection of the left main .

Compared to bypass surgery angioplasty can be done relatively quickly and is generally less traumatic to the patient. Basically during angioplasty a wire is inserted into the artery. A flexible catheter is then guided along the wire. A balloon attached to the catheter is positioned in the left main at the point of blockage and the balloon is inflated to open the artery. To keep the artery open a stent may be placed in the left main. One common method of delivering the stent is to wrap it around the balloon. Thus the inflation of the balloon causes the stent to expand into position. The stent acts as a scaffolding to support the wall of the artery and when coated with anti restenotic agents can be an alternative means of treating certain types of LMCD.

While the expansion of blocked portions of arteries with angioplasty can be effective certain areas of the left main have proven difficult to treat with balloon angioplasty. Sometimes the blockage occurs at a point of junction between the left main and the left anterior descending artery and the left circumflex artery. In such a situation expansion and insertion of a stent into one of the secondary branches has the tendency to jeopardize the other branch.

Attempts have been made to provide a customized stent that can be used in a junction to support the main branch and the two secondary branches but such an approach has limitations. For one thing the secondary branches and angles between the different branches are varied from person to person as well as from junction to junction making it difficult to design a single stent that can work with all the potential variations. Furthermore such a design is difficult to install thus making it less attractive to locations such as the junction in the left main. Another major limitation is that much higher operator skill is required to position such a stent quickly thus making it more likely that such a stent will be improperly installed.

Therefore often the only choice is to attempt bypass surgery. However in the face of complete blockage it is possible that a patient will not survive the procedure. Clearly something more is needed to address such a life threatening emergency. In addition it would be beneficial to provide a stent that could be used in and near the left main junction during more routine medical situations as an alternative to bypass surgery.

A method and apparatus for treating coronary disease is disclosed. In an embodiment a stent with a side aperture is inserted into a junction of a left main coronary artery that includes a main branch and two secondary branches so that the side aperture aligns with one of the secondary branches while the stent extends into the other secondary branch. The stent is expanded so as to support a wall of the left main coronary artery while allowing blood to flow through the side aperture into one of the secondary branches. In an embodiment the stent may be coated with a pharmaceutical agent.

The description below will discuss various medical conditions and how a stent may be used to aid in the treatment these medical conditions. It is noted that the methods and apparatus disclosed are not limited to the treatment of the medical conditions disclosed but may be used to treat other medical conditions where appropriate.

Looking first at an embodiment of a heart is depicted. The heart is fed by a right coronary artery that branches out and provides blood to a portion of the heart. A left coronary artery is also shown and also branches out and provides blood to a portion of the heart. As can be appreciated a blockage at the beginning or proximal end of the left coronary artery would affect the flow of blood to all points downstream while a blockage at the distal end of the left coronary artery might have little or no discernable effect on the viability of the heart .

Turning to the left coronary artery is shown in an enlarged view that includes the left main artery or main branch that feeds a first branch which as depicted is the left anterior descending artery and a second branch which as depicted is the left circumflex artery .

As depicted the first branch shows a further enlarged view of the left coronary artery . The main branch forms a junction where it bifurcates into the first branch and the second branch . As can be further appreciated the main branch includes a wall . In order for blood to flow through the left coronary artery the wall forms a tube like shape that preferably is free from blockage.

Unfortunately as shown in a blockage may be formed by for example deposits of fatty tissue on the wall in the junction . In the blockage partially occludes the flow of blood into the second branch . depicts a similar situation except that the blockage partially occludes the first branch .

As can be appreciated by blockage in or near the junction tends to require a solution that allows blood to flow to both branches . It is noted that numerous other configurations of blockage near or in the junction are possible. In an embodiment the blockage will occlude the main branch in alternative embodiments the first branch or the second branch or a combination of two or more branches will be occluded by the blockage.

Turning to an illustration of the left coronary artery without any blockage depicted is provided the blockage being omitted for the sake of clarity. In an embodiment a guide wire may be inserted into the left coronary artery in a known manner. As depicted the guide wire is inserted into the junction and extends into the first branch . As can be appreciated the distance the guide wire extends into the junction may be adjusted depending on the location of the blockage.

Turning to after the guide wire is inserted the next step is to guide a catheter connected to an angioplasty balloon balloon along the guide wire into the desired position. Once the balloon is correctly positioned the balloon is inflated so as to open up the portion of the left coronary artery that was stenosed by the blockage. To help keep the left main open the balloon includes a stent mounted on the exterior of the balloon . When the balloon is expanded to open up the passageway the stent is also expanded. Once the passageway is opened the pressure inflating the balloon is removed and the balloon contracts. However the stent remains in position so as to provide support for the wall of the left coronary artery .

It should be noted that the balloon may be compliant or non compliant depending on the intended use. Generally speaking balloons that are non complaint have a fixed amount of expansion and do not effectively increase in diameter in response to increases in internal pressure. In contrast balloons that are compliant do effectively increase in diameter in response to increases in internal pressure. The balloon may also be semi compliant and thus provide some minimal amount of expansion in response to greater pressure. While different levels of compliance may be suitable for different situations a non compliant balloon may be useful to prevent the balloon from expanding in the area where the side aperture is provided.

One concern regarding the use of angioplasty is restenosis. Restenosis or the re narrowing of the arteries affects a percentage of patients receiving angioplasty. While the use of a stent in combination with the angioplasty has significantly reduced the occurrence restenosis is still an issue. To address this potential problem it may be desirable to coat the stent with a pharmaceutical agent. While different pharmaceutical agents work differently in an embodiment the drug coating may be configured to provide an anti restenotic or anti neointimal proliferation effect. In an embodiment the coating may be RAPAMYCIN or SIROLIMUS.

As can be appreciated from using a standard stent in the junction would be problematic. For example in if a standard stent was used when the stent was expanded the passageway to the second branch would be as least partially blocked.

Looking at an alternative to the normal stent is depicted as stent . The stent has a proximal end a distal end and includes a side aperture a first marker and a second marker . The use of the markers will be discussed below. illustrates a side view of the stent . As can be appreciated from the side aperture is circular.

In an embodiment it may be desirable to provide a side aperture that is elongated on one side. illustrates an embodiment of a side aperture that includes a center line and is elongated on one side of the centerline .

Looking ahead to an alternative embodiment of a stent is depicted. The stent includes a proximal end and a distal end . A cylinder wall that opens at the proximal end and the distal end includes a side aperture . It should be noted that the cylinder wall of the stent is configured to allow the stent to expand. Thus the cylinder wall may comprise any of the known wall designs used for expanding stents. As can be appreciated the side aperture is shown with a center line . It is noted that in practice the center line would not be visible and is thus being provided as a reference for purpose of discussion. As depicted the side aperture is elongated on one side of the center line thus making it more difficult to define the true center. For purpose of discussion however the center line as used herein refers to an imaginary reference line on the side aperture that the operator should attempt to align with the center of the second branch . As can be appreciated as the center line is an imaginary reference line that is not visible to the operator the markers that may be provided on the stent can aid the operator in performing the alignment process. Thus the markers may aid the operator in effectively aligning the center line with the side branch . It is noted that in an embodiment the first marker may be aligned with the center line .

It should be noted that as depicted the side aperture provides a relatively smooth edge in the cylinder wall . While not required this allows a second stent to be inserted through the side aperture with less likelihood of snagging the stent and moving it out of location or breaking off a piece of the stent . As can be appreciated the occurrence of such events is difficult to detect but generally requires emergency surgery if detected in time and therefore is undesirable. It should be noted that in an embodiment the size of the side aperture may be substantially the same as the openings in the stent at the proximal and distal ends so as to provide substantially the same effective lumen for each branch.

Referring to a first marker partially provided in dotted line extends around a portion of the circumference of the stent . As can be appreciated this configuration while not required is helpful in positioning the stent. As can be further appreciated the stent includes a second marker that has a first half on one side of top of the stent and a second half on the bottom of the stent . This allows the second marker to effectively extend the length of the stent while providing additional information to the operator during implantation of the stent. For example if the viewing angle is properly aligned the second marker will appear to be a continuous line. Of course in an alternative embodiment the second marker may be a continuous line.

In an embodiment the second marker may be aligned with the longitudinal axis of the stent . In an alternative embodiment the second marker may be aligned parallel to the longitudinal axis of the stent . As can be appreciated a parallel configuration may provide more precise feedback to the operator during implantation but requires additional manufacturing precision.

It should be noted that the first marker may be positioned so as to be perpendicular to the second marker . While such a position is not required if the second marker is parallel to the longitudinal axis and the first marker is perpendicular to the second marker the position of the stent can be more accurately determined prior to expansion of the stent .

In this regard it should be noted that when the stent is in the non expanded state it is difficult to discern the location of the side aperture . Thus the use of one or more markers that are visible while the stent is still in the compressed state will tend to prevent the stent from being expanded in an incorrect position. For example as depicted in a non expanded stent is shown in two views and at least one of the first marker and the second marker is are visible on the compressed stent in either view.

Returning to a left coronary artery is depicted with the stent supporting the wall from the main branch to the first branch . However to avoid blocking the second branch the side aperture is aligned so as to allow blood to flow through the stent into the second branch . As can be appreciated when installed the wall will be in contact with most of the stent thus the stent will act as a support structure to help ensure that blood flow to the branches remains non obstructed.

While in many situations it may be sufficient to implant the stent in other circumstances such as depicted in it may be beneficial to provide additional support for the wall . One way of doing so is to install a second stent. For example a second stent extending from the side aperture would provide a Y shaped support structure that could help ensure the blood continues to flow from the main branch to the branches .

To provide the Y shaped structure first as depicted in a guide wire is inserted into the left coronary artery and guided through the side aperture . This may be a different guide wire than the guide wire or it may be the same guide wire. One potential issue with inserting a guide wire into the left coronary artery after the stent is implanted is that the guide wire has a limited ability to bend and go around tight curves and could possibly catch on the stent . As previously discussed in an embodiment the side aperture may be elongated on one side. While not required the elongated side aperture allows the guide wire to be inserted into the second branch while reducing the possibility that the guide wire might catch on the stent . In an alternative embodiment the side aperture could simply be made larger.

Once the guide wire is inserted a catheter is inserted along the guide wire until the balloon is positioned as desired. In an embodiment as depicted in the balloon extends out of the side aperture and includes a stent mounted to the outside of the balloon . In an embodiment the side aperture is elongated so that the balloon and stent pass through the side aperture without catching on the stent . In an embodiment when the stent is expanded the stent and stent will have some overlap. In an alternative embodiment the stent will not overlap with the stent but will be positioned via the side aperture . In another alternative embodiment the stent may be positioned first and then the stent may be positioned so that the side aperture aligns with the stent . To provide maximum support however it may be beneficial to have some overlap between the stent and the stent .

In an alternative embodiment as depicted in a guide wire will be inserted past the proximal end of the stent and a catheter with a balloon will be inserted so that a portion of a stent overlaps with the stent . The balloon may then be inflated so that the stent and stent provide a more complex support structure. It should be noted that it may be useful to use a balloon with a lesser degree of compliance so that the stent is expanded in a uniform manner.

As illustrated in the stents are positioned and expanded to form a Y shaped support structure or an expanded tubular shaped support structure respectively. In an embodiment both the stent and the stent may be added to the stent to maximize support of the left coronary artery . As can be appreciated combinations of one or more stents and may be used in an overlapping fashion thus a complex support structure is possible. It is expected however that one or two stents will typically be sufficient.

It should be noted that in an alternative embodiment the stent may be a self expanding stent. In such an embodiment the stent would be positioned and then allowed to expand. In an embodiment the self expanding stent would include one or more markers to allow the operator to more accurately determine where the proximal and or distal ends are located.

As can be appreciated the size of stent may be adjusted as desired and used in other junction locations in different blood vessels. For example the distance between the distal end and the side aperture may vary as desired. In addition different locations may require an outer diameter of the stent to be adjusted so as to provide proper support for the wall of the blood vessel.

It should be noted that in an embodiment a stent may be inserted after the balloon is expanded a first time. In such an embodiment a first balloon would be expanded and then contracted. The first balloon would then be removed. Next the stent would be installed. In such a scenario the stent could be a self expanding stent or a balloon expanded stent as discussed above. Thus expanding a stent includes using a balloon to expand the stent or allowing the stent to self expand. As the general procedure for inserting and expanding a stent in an artery is known to persons of skill in the art additional details are not provided herein.

As can be appreciated care must be used when positioning the stent and the side aperture and the optional stents or the support structure will not work as intended. For example it is beneficial to align the side aperture with the second branch so as to avoid occlusion of the second branch .

In an embodiment the stent may be made of a stainless steel alloy although other materials may be used. It is noted that the type of stent is not crucial thus for example but without limitation a coiled spring design a slotted tube design or mesh design may be used. However one potential issue with the insertion of stents is that under certain known viewing methodologies the stent will not be visible e.g. the stent will be radiolucent . Even if the stent is not radiolucent seeing the stent without being able to determine its orientation can make aligning the side aperture more difficult.

To allow for improved orientation of the stent radio opaque markers may be included on the stent. In an embodiment the markers may include a gold coating however other coatings may also be used. Looking at a stent includes a first marker a second marker a third marker and a fourth marker . In an embodiment as depicted the first marker and the second marker may be perpendicular in orientation. The third and fourth markers may be positioned on proximal end and distal end of the stent . In an embodiment a stent may have one or more of the markers as is appropriate. As can be appreciated other shapes of markers other than lines may also be used.

It should also be noted the first marker may include several distinct symbols that together form the first marker . Thus the term marker refers to a set of one or more symbols and may be for example and without limitation a set of dots a geometric shape or some other configurations that allows the operator to determine aspects of the orientation of the stent . An advantage of using a line however is the ease of viewing such a marker during implantation of the stent.

In an embodiment the first marker may extend around a radial portion of the stent as depicted in . In an embodiment the first marker may extend around about half of the stent . While not required the advantage of having the first marker extend around about half of the stent can be appreciated in light of . If the orientation of the stent is aligned with the angle of viewing the first marker will look like a straight line as illustrated in . If the orientation of the stent is not aligned with the viewing angle the first marker will resemble the appearance of the first marker in . As can be appreciated this allows the operator positioning the stent in the blood vessel to determine and or verify the angular orientation of the stent .

In addition to allowing the determination of angular orientation configuring the stent to include the first marker with the first marker being C shaped can also allow the operator to determine whether the rotational orientation of the stent is correct as illustrated by . Thus the angular and rotational orientation may be determined with the first marker so that the stent is properly positioned before being expanded.

In an embodiment the first marker may be directly aligned with the centerline of the side aperture . Thus the operator positioning the stent can line up the first marker with the middle of the second branch so as to maximize blood flow to the second branch . As can be appreciated however the first marker may also be aligned with some other part of the side aperture .

In an embodiment the first marker may extend the length of the stent . While not required such a configuration aids in the implantation of additional stents. For example in an embodiment a support structure as depicted in may be desired. To provide the depicted support first the stent with the side aperture may be installed. The first and second markers allow the stent to be properly orientated with respect to the second branch before the stent is expanded . In an embodiment the stent may include the third and fourth markers which may be aligned with the proximal and distal ends of the stent thus allowing the stent to be aligned with respect to first and second markers . Therefore a stent with the third and fourth markers may be positioned so as to partially extend from the side aperture .

If the support structure as depicted in is desired in an embodiment where the first marker extended the length of the stent the fourth marker on the stent could be positioned with respect to the first marker on the stent . Thus in an embodiment it could be determined when there was an overlap because the two markers would cross in a two dimensional view. It should be noted that the same stent may be used in either configurations shown in . In an alternative embodiment however a different stent may be used. The advantage of using the same stent to obtain either the structure in or is a reduced number of parts thus reducing the chance that the wrong stent will be used. However having a variety of different sized stents may allow for a more precise fit if such a fit is found to be useful for a particular patient. For example the secondary branch might be much smaller than the main branch and thus would benefit from a stent with a smaller outer diameter.

The present invention has been described in terms of preferred and exemplary embodiments thereof. Numerous other embodiments modifications and variations within the scope and spirit of the appended claims will occur to persons of ordinary skill in the art from a review of this disclosure.

