---

title: Interactive dialog-based training method
abstract: A computer readable medium stores a computer program for interactive training based on a simulated customer interaction. The computer readable medium includes a dialog code segment that provides a predetermined customer portion of a dialog segment from the simulated customer interaction to a trainee. The dialog segment includes the customer portion and at least one predetermined keyword associated with the customer portion. The computer readable medium further includes a response code segment, which receives a response to the customer portion from the trainee, and a determining code segment, which determines whether the response includes the at least one keyword.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08023636&OS=08023636&RS=08023636
owner: Sivox Partners, LLC
number: 08023636
owner_city: Eagleville
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050331
---
This application is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 078 429 filed Feb. 21 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 914 975 the disclosure of which is expressly incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The present invention relates to the field of interactive computer based training. More particularly the present invention relates to training call center agents at remote terminals networked to a database based on verbal and or textual interaction with simulated customers in dynamic scenarios.

Customer service agents working in call centers are typically required to learn and internalize significant amounts of information including various policies procedures products and systems in order to competently perform their duties. In addition to the large amount of information many modern service industries such as the telecommunications industry involve a high rate of change as a result of evolving technology regulations and consumer appeal further increasing the difficulty for the customer service agents to remain current. Moreover customer service call centers historically suffer high turnover of personnel. The combination of these factors requires the expenditure of significant resources to continually train customer service agents to reach and maintain acceptable levels of performance.

The conventional approach to training call center agents includes providing the necessary substantive information regarding products services corporate policies and the like teaching the appropriate customer communication techniques and implementing practice sessions to replicate to the extent possible actual conversations with customers. The typical practice sessions are conducted by trainer instructor teams in person. The training may include standard policies and parameters but these are not consistently enforced or measured in an automated fashion. The consistency of training and measure of progress from one trainee or group of trainees to another is largely unknown. To simulate realistic customer interactions many call center training operations use face to face role playing which involves fellow trainees or trainers acting as customers. The interactions as well as the accompanying feedback are therefore inconsistent in quality and content. Such variance in training and feedback may result in disparate training results. Furthermore statistical tracking of training results is not particularly useful because of the potential for inconsistency in the underlying training methodology.

The present invention relates to an interactive computer based training CBT program directed to improving the performance of personnel interacting with the public especially telephone based customer service call center agents. The training program enables the trainees to practice business conversations with virtual customers in an e Learning environment that provides immediate remediation for errors depth learning for tone and style and the ability for trainers and managers to efficiently monitor progress. The training program further enables training developers to create scenarios and trainers and managers to change scenarios for the trainees to focus the training on specific areas for example to address a trainee s demonstrated weaknesses and to implement the new or modified scenario in real time.

The invention incorporates core CBT and web based training WBT standards integrating leading edge voice technology to create realistic on the job experiences. In response to the dynamic nature of typical telecommunications environments and the need for service representative training to keep pace the training program delivers a customizable interactive learning experience and can be controlled by trainers having no special level of technical skills or computer programming knowledge. Also the voice interaction is speaker independent such that the users do not have to train the system prior to participating in the training.

An objective of the training program is to improve on job performance of call center agents. This requires standardizing trainee interactions capturing data regarding trainee behavior relative to the objectives of specific business scenarios and measuring gaps in experience. Vocal responses are solicited from the trainees through speech recognition technology and measured for analysis. A further objective of the training program is to enable reporting statistical analysis and other administrative capabilities to enhance management of customer service representative training.

An aspect of the present invention provides a method for interactively training call center personnel using a computer based system the training including at least one call scenario involving simulated customer interactions. The call scenario includes multiple dialog segments each of which includes a preprogrammed customer portion and at least one keyword. The dialog segments are sequentially executed by providing the customer portion of each dialog segment to a terminal of a trainee and receiving a trainee response to the customer portion of each dialog segment. It is determined whether the trainee response includes the keywords corresponding to each dialog segment. The trainee response associated with each of the dialog segments may be recorded as a sound file which may be played in response to a request received from the trainee terminal.

When each dialog segment has been sequentially executed a summary of the trainee s performance with respect to the call scenarios may be displayed at the trainee terminal. The summary includes the number of trainee responses that included the keywords corresponding to each dialog segment. Also the keyword associated with a selected dialog segment may be replaced with an updated keyword which is different from the replaced keyword. It is then determined whether the trainee response includes the updated keyword.

Another aspect of the present invention provides a method for providing computer based interactive call center training that includes storing at least one call scenario in a database. Each call scenario includes multiple dialog segments which include a customer portion and at least one keyword. A selection of a call scenario is received through a trainee terminal. A customer interaction is simulated between a trainee at the trainee terminal and a simulated customer according to the call scenario. The simulation includes sequentially executing the dialog segments by providing the customer portion of each dialog segment to the trainee through the trainee terminal and receiving a corresponding text and or voice trainee response. The dialog segments may be sequentially executed only when the trainee response includes the at least one keyword corresponding to each dialog segment. It is determined whether the trainee response includes the at least one keyword. A selected dialog segment of the call scenario may be edited on line which includes adding deleting or changing at least one of the customer portion and keywords corresponding to the dialog segment.

Another aspect of the present invention provides a method for interactively training call center personnel using an automated customer interaction between a trainee and a simulated customer. The method includes retrieving a call scenario from a database including at least one dialog segment and providing a customer portion of each dialog segment by displaying text or generating speech at a trainee terminal. A trainee portion of each dialog segment is received from the trainee terminal and includes at least one of text and voice entered by the trainee. It is determined whether the trainee portion of the dialog segment includes a predetermined keyword associated with the dialog segment. When the trainee portion does not include the predetermined keyword a predetermined level of instruction is provided to the trainee relating to the dialog segment. The predetermined level of instruction is set according to a skill level of the trainee.

When the trainee portion includes the predetermined keyword it may be determined whether the scenario includes at least a second dialog segment. When the second dialog segment exists a customer portion of the second dialog segment is provided to the trainee terminal by at least one of displaying text and generating speech at the trainee terminal. A trainee portion of the second dialog segment is received which is at least one of text and voice. It is then determined whether the trainee portion of the second dialog segment includes a second predetermined keyword associated with the second dialog segment. When the trainee portion does not include the second predetermined keyword the predetermined level of instruction is provided to the trainee relating to the second dialog segment.

With respect to setting the predetermined level of instruction the skill level of the trainee may be determined automatically based on the number of times the trainee has performed the call scenario. Also the skill level of the trainee may be determined based on input by a trainer setting the skill level with respect to the trainee and the call scenario. Determining the skill level may occur during the interaction between the trainee and the simulated customer.

The results of the interaction between the trainee and the simulated customer may be stored in a database. The results include an indication of whether the trainee portion of the dialog included the predetermined keyword and an indication of the level of instruction provided to the trainee if any. The results of the interaction between the trainee and the simulated customer may be compared with results of at least a second interaction between a second trainee and the simulated customer. A report is generated analyzing the comparison.

Another aspect of the present invention provides a computer readable medium for storing a computer program that interactively trains call center personnel. The computer readable medium includes a memory segment that stores at least one call scenario including multiple dialog segments and a training source code segment that enables selection of a call scenario. Each dialog segment includes a customer portion and at least one keyword. The computer readable medium further includes a simulator source code segment which simulates an interaction between a trainee and a simulated customer according to the call scenario and an administration source code segment which enables administrative functions with respect to the computer program. The simulator source code segment includes a business rules source code segment that sequentially executes the dialog segments by providing the customer portion corresponding to each dialog segment to the trainee and receiving a corresponding trainee response. The trainee response is text and or voice entered by the trainee. The administration source code segment includes a call scenario editor source code segment that enables an addition deletion and or edit of the call scenario.

The simulator source code segment may further include a coach source code segment that determines whether the trainee portion of each dialog segment includes the at least one keyword corresponding to each dialog segment. The business rules source code segment sequentially executes another dialog segment when the keyword is included. The coach source code segment provides a predetermined level of instruction to the trainee when the keyword is not included.

The administration source code segment may further include a reporter source code segment that generates a progress report of the trainee. The progress report includes a performance assessment based on the trainee including the keywords in the trainee responses corresponding to the dialog segments and a comparison of statistical data stored in the memory segment. The simulator source code segment may further include a software emulation source code segment that provides an emulation of actual call center software to the trainee through a graphical user interface GUI . The simulator source code segment may also include a voice playback source code segment that records the voice entered trainee portion corresponding to each dialog segment and replays the recorded trainee portion upon instruction received from a GUI.

Yet another aspect of the present invention provides a computer readable medium for storing a computer program that interactively trains call center personnel using an automated customer interaction between a trainee and a simulated customer. The computer readable medium includes a retrieving source code segment a simulator source code segment and a coaching source code segment. The retrieving source code segment retrieves a call scenario from a memory the call scenario including at least one dialog segment. The simulator source code segment executes the dialog segments by providing a customer portion of each dialog segment to a trainee at a trainee terminal and receiving a trainee portion of the dialog segment. The coaching source code segment determines whether the trainee portion of the dialog segment includes a predetermined keyword associated with the dialog segment. The coaching source code segment also provides a predetermined level of instruction to the trainee relating to the dialog segment when the trainee portion does not include the predetermined keyword. The predetermined level of instruction is set according to a skill level of the trainee.

Furthermore the simulator source code segment may determine whether the scenario includes at least a second dialog segment when the trainee portion includes the predetermined keyword. When a second dialog segment exists the simulator source code segment provides a customer portion of the second dialog segment to the trainee at the trainee terminal and receives a trainee portion of the second dialog segment. The coaching source code segment then determines whether the trainee portion of the second dialog segment includes a second predetermined keyword associated with the second dialog segment. When the trainee portion of the second dialog segment does not include the second predetermined keyword the coaching source code segment provides the predetermined level of instruction to the trainee relating to the second dialog segment.

The coaching source code segment may determine the skill level of the trainee automatically based on a number of times the trainee has performed the call scenario. The coaching source code segment may determine the skill level of the trainee based on an input by a trainer setting the skill level with respect to the trainee and the call scenario. Determining the skill level may occur during the interaction between the trainee and the simulated customer.

The computer readable medium may further include a storing source code segment that stores results of the interaction between the trainee and the simulated customer in the memory. The results include an indication of whether the trainee portion of the dialog segment included the predetermined keyword and an indication of the level of instruction provided to the trainee if any. Also the computer readable medium may include a comparing source code segment and a reporting source code segment. The comparing source code segment compares the results of the interaction between the trainee and the simulated customer with results of at least a second interaction between a second trainee and the simulated customer. The reporting source code segment generates a report analyzing the comparison.

The web server may be an Internet Information Server IIS developed by Microsoft Corporation for example running Microsoft IIS 4.0 software. The database may be a standard relational database for example serviced by the database server such as a Microsoft structured query language SQL server 7.0 running Microsoft SQL server 7.0 software. In an embodiment of the invention the database has self administering tools and collects and stores data in tables. Each table represents a class of objects representing features of the invention such as scenarios dialog segments and keywords as discussed below. The application database may be accessible by Microsoft s open database connectivity ODBC and object linking and embedding database OLE DB interfaces. Of course any compatible databases and servers having sufficient capability to implement the invention may be incorporated.

The training program involves three categories of users i trainees ii trainers and iii managers. In an embodiment of the invention each of the user categories accesses the training program from a remote computer terminal or GUI e.g. the trainee terminal the trainer terminal and the manager terminal networked with the web server and the database through the intranet . The remote computer terminals may be for example IBM Pentium based personal computers PCs running the Microsoft Windows 98 or Windows NT operating systems with standard sound cards and Microsoft Visual Basic 6.0. Each PC further includes a web browser such as Microsoft Internet Explorer or Netscape Navigator available from Netscape Communications Corporation. Alternative embodiments of the invention include any number and combination of trainee trainer and manager terminals connectable to the intranet including for example users from all three categories accessing the training program from a single terminal or any user category having multiple terminals configured to access the training program simultaneously.

The trainees interact with the training program from the trainee terminal by voice or text in order to train and practice call simulations. The voice interaction is enabled by a headset with a microphone such as a Plantronics Model LS1 stereo PC headset connected to the trainee terminal . The trainee responds to simulated customer input by speaking into the microphone or typing on a keyboard connected to the computer terminal.

The trainers and managers communicate with the training program primarily by text interaction from the trainer terminal and the manager terminal respectively. The trainers manage the training simulations coach the trainees and report on the various scenarios. The trainers are able to alter scenarios to particularly address areas of weakness demonstrated by a trainee. Altering the scenarios may be performed in real time when desired by the trainer. The trainers are also able to adjust the level of automated feedback available to the trainees also known as coaching.

The managers maintain the training program create and control simulations and manage access to the training program. Depending on the implementation of the training program the managers may be divided into administrators and developers. The administrators perform purely administrative functions such as maintaining the training program and data controlling access to the system generating and analyzing reports and monitoring the overall performance of the program as well as the trainees. The specific functionality of each administrative function is discussed in detail below. The developers who may also be administrators focus on the content of the training program which includes writing and updating scenarios as well as the scope and substance of the automated feedback. Like the trainers the developers are able to alter scenarios to address areas of importance or concern for the training program to particularly address.

The interactive training program software is modular. In other words the training content is segmented among various call scenarios along with the supporting knowledge and skill bases. The modular nature of the training program has several advantages. For example the training scenarios may be assembled to fit specific short term and long term training targets. Also in the event of a change in content such as a change in policy or technology of the calling center for which the trainees are training the affected scenarios may be easily isolated and modified as needed. The modular design is scalable and flexible allowing parallel development of the various modules as well as customization and iteration of the overlying interfaces without affecting the underlying training program logic. The modular design enables the training program to efficiently adjust to business needs caused by rapid and dramatic changes within the relevant industry.

In an embodiment of the invention the interactive training program includes four basic modules each including various applications and or dynamic data as depicted in the block diagram of . The modules include the database the training module the simulator module and the administration module each of which includes multiple applications related to the various features of the present invention. The database is accessible to the other modules through an interface e.g. application programming interfaces APIs enabling the applications access to the associated data. The APIs provide consistent yet flexible interfaces that enable changes or additions to be made within one module without requiring corresponding changes in the database or the other modules. In an embodiment of the invention the applications are correlated with objects implemented in object oriented programming.

The processing of the training program may be centralized such that each module is stored and implemented by a central server or other processing unit. Alternatively the training program may be distributed across a combination of integrated processors. For example the database may be located in a centralized database such as the database of accessible by numerous users over a broad geographic area through a packet switched data network such as the intranet . The training module and the administration module may be web based applications. The engine that drives the training module and or the administration module may reside on the database server or the web server having logic implemented using Java or JavaScript. The simulator module may be a client based application executed for example by the trainee terminal . Regardless of the distribution of the processing the functionality of the database and each application module remains essentially the same.

The database interfaces with all modules of the training program in order to drive the respective application with dynamic data. The data stored in the database includes the various scenarios created to provide the trainee with a realistic yet controlled interaction with a simulated caller. Each scenario includes a series of dialog segments which are the sets of customer lines or inputs and the corresponding trainee responses. The dialog segments are designed to represent categorical customer inputs that a call center agent would expect to hear on the job at an actual call center. For example a scenario may be designed around a sophisticated customer an angry customer a non communicative customer a confused customer a new customer and the like.

Each dialog segment includes a set of keywords. The keywords are the words determined by the trainers and or managers to be critical to the customer interaction and must be spoken by the trainee in order to progress within the scenario as determined by the call flow business rules and the coach application discussed below. In an embodiment of the invention the keywords are classified into multiple levels such as mandatory words which must be spoken or typed and are crucial to acceptable performance under the training scenario forbidden words which cannot be used by the trainee under the circumstances of the scenario and optional words which are recognized alternatives to the mandatory words but are scored separately. Each type of keyword also has respective aliases which are essentially synonyms of keywords. For example aliases of the mandatory keywords may be identified at the time a scenario is created and stored along with the associated mandatory keywords in the database . The aliases are interchangeable with the mandatory keywords from a scoring perspective. Also because of the flexibility of the training program the trainers may add aliases words through the scenario editor of the administration module discussed below at any time. For example when it becomes apparent that another word is used frequently and is just as effective as the associated mandatory keyword the trainer may decide to include the alternative word as an acceptable alias.

The keywords may be required for each dialog segment of the scenario or more generally for the overall scenario. In other words depending on the design of the training program the trainee may receive credit for including keywords in the conversation when the keyword is said during a particular dialog segment in which the use or non use of the keyword is determined to be most critical. In a less stringent version the trainee may receive credit for keywords used anytime during the scenario. The keywords also include criteria levels which enable the simulator module to identify the success level of each spoken dialog. The managers may classify the importance levels of each keyword while building the scenarios. The importance levels may likewise be updated through the scenario editor .

The simulator module simulates a typical telephone call to a customer service call center to solicit responses from the trainee. The simulator module contains the training logic and controls the GUI that the trainee uses to practice a simulation. The simulator module may be a client server application for example residing on the individual workstations such as the trainee terminal . The trainee initiates the simulator module from the training module which may be web based by selecting a particular training scenario. In response the simulator module loads simulation information from the database including keywords dialog segments and sound files.

The simulator module creates a realistic training environment in two respects. First through the business rules application the simulator module initiates a real time spoken conversation with the trainee at a GUI e.g. trainee terminal incorporating the pre established dialog segments from the selected scenario. Second the software emulation of the simulator module is programmed to mimic the software actually running a customer service center for which the trainee is training. For example the screenshots caller data format options keyboard configuration and the like are identical to that of the actual call center so the trainee is trained on system operation at the same time the trainee is learning to communicate with customers.

The business rules application also identifies data to be loaded from and stored to the database as well as starts and stops a voice recognizer which may be client based on the trainee terminal for example and which is integrated with the simulator module . The voice recognizer listens to human speech and extracts keywords provided by the business rules application . When appropriate according to the pre established rules governing the training session a computerized coach application is activated to assess the trainee s actions and voice responses based on the keywords associated with the dialog segments which are uploaded to the simulator module from the database in an embodiment of the invention. Upon completion of the selected scenario the business rules application also determines and displays the performance statistics or score at the trainee terminal enabling immediate self assessment by the trainee.

The coach application is a virtual instructor. It receives the trainee s statements by way of the voice recognizer and provides measured feedback such as hints tips learning units and other assistance based on the trainee s success relative to the selected level of coaching. The coach application monitors the trainee s performance based on keywords evaluates the use of each keyword and provides feedback to the trainee regarding the level of performance at the end of each dialog segment or scenario. The coach application also provides the trainee the opportunity to type responses to computer generated customer input in the event the trainee feels or the business rules application determines that the voice recognition was inaccurate. When performance is unacceptable the coach application may provide feedback and require the trainee to repeat the particular dialog as discussed below. Furthermore in an embodiment of the invention the coach application may enable performance support tools external to the training program. For example the coach application may hyperlink to another training system or data feed more specifically directed to a shortcoming repeatedly demonstrated by the trainee.

The simulator module also includes software emulation that includes interactive screen shots designed to represent actual call center desktop software. Because different companies or different regions within the same company may vary with respect to call center design and implementation the software emulation may include multiple screen shot emulations representing the software of the respective regional call centers. The software emulation may reside in a regional database for example. The software emulation duplicates regional software behavior to the degree required by a particular call simulation or training goal and thus provides functionality needed to complete the scenario in a realistic manner suitable to the performance and learning need.

In an embodiment of the invention the software emulation is enabled by corresponding region specific data which may likewise be stored in a regional database and updated through a network e.g. intranet interface enabling efficient modification. For example when a region changes an offered product or service the call service representatives must be retrained. Data describing the new product or service is stored in the regional database replacing data describing the old product or service. The software emulation for the affected region may then proceed as always drawing on the newly stored regional data as represented in simulated screens mimicking the new desktop application supporting the new product.

The regional database may also include customer data which likewise populates the software emulation so that the trainee receives pop up caller data during simulated calls as would be the case in an actual call center interaction. The customer data includes for example the customer name address account balance current product service information and the like. The customer data may also be updated by a web interface.

The various users interact with the training system by way of the training module . For example the trainees access the training portion of the training program through the training module while the trainers and managers likewise interface with both the training portion of the training program and the administration module through the training module . For the trainee the training module displays a home page on a GUI such as the trainee terminal enabling the trainee to login customize the interface view and select authorized training scenarios and the like. The training module includes for example a scenario catalog a user statistics application and a profile editor discussed below.

A trainee enters the training program by logging onto the system from a home page displayed at the trainee terminal at step s of . The log in process is enabled by pre assigned identification data specific to the trainee such as an account number or user name and a password. The account number and password are determined by the manager and assigned to the trainee at the beginning of the training process. Data specific to the particular trainee may also be stored in association with the account number such as the experience level of the trainee e.g. new training refresher course continuing education on new systems etc. . The log in is performed in response to a typical introductory screen and is entered through the terminal keyboard or in an alternative embodiment through voice commands. The training system authenticates the user by retrieving the account number and password from the corresponding file in the database and determining the validity of the same as well as determining and implementing any restrictions to system access that may be associated with the trainee.

After allowing the trainee to log in the simulator module causes options to be provided to the training terminal at step s. The options may be provided textually or audibly. The options include viewing scenarios statistics or profile data changing the log in data associated with the account number and logging out. As shown in the scenarios are viewed and ultimately executed by way of a scenario catalog which may include scenario catalogs directed to the specific trainee or to the class or region to which the trainee belongs. Viewing statistical data is enabled through a user statistics application and viewing and editing profiles is enabled through a profile editor . The initial log in screenshot may include additional information relating to the trainee such as the trainee s name the associated trainer s name the number of scenarios the trainee completed the number of scenarios for which the trainee is registered and the like.

When the trainee elects to view the scenarios at step s a list of scenarios is displayed on the screen of the trainee terminal . The scenarios include practice scenarios which may be performed by the trainee at will to hone skills without affecting the trainee s overall score. Performance of the practice scenarios may be limited depending on the parameters established by the trainers or managers. Similarly the trainee may select a registered scenario the availability of which is predetermined by the trainers or managers. Unlike the practice scenarios the results of the registered scenarios are stored for performance evaluation. The scenario display may include the name and a brief description of the scenario together with an indication of whether the scenario is a practice scenario or a registered scenario. To select a training scenario the user clicks on the designated portion of the display such as specific text or an icon representing the desired scenario which activates the simulator module .

In an embodiment of the invention the trainee accesses a catalog of scenarios from the scenario catalog and specifically requests permission to enter and execute scenarios the trainee deems helpful. An example scenario catalog is depicted in box of web page shown in . Each scenario may include parenthetical information to guide the trainee such as a description of its purpose or the state or service to which the scenario applies.

At step s the scenario selection is received from the trainee terminal and authorized at step s. As stated above the trainers and or managers authorize the practice and registered scenarios that a trainee or group of trainees is permitted to execute. The access information is created and updated through the registration system and stored in the database . In an embodiment of the invention only the scenarios for which a trainee is pre approved are displayed to the trainee in response to step s eliminating the need for authorization at step s.

When the selected scenario is authorized the simulator module initiates the scenario at step s. In an embodiment of the invention the data relating to the scenario including the audio files and or voice generation files for customer simulation are uploaded from the database to the simulator . The relevant dialog segments may then be stored on a local hard drive for example of the trainee terminal or alternatively in some other virtual digital resource.

With respect to the voice interaction the trainee receives prerecorded audio files or alternatively audio signals from a voice simulator interfaced with the database which simulate a conversation from the customer s perspective. For example extended mark up language XML strings of text may be received via a voice simulator API in the APIs using hypertext transfer language protocol HTTP . In an embodiment of the invention the voice simulator is based on RealSpeak for Windows text to speech software developed by Lernout Hauspie Speech Products USA Inc. which is capable of providing about 16 hours of speech for every one hour of system operation.

The received data specifies a phrase to be spoken by the computer a unique identification number associated with the phrase and various control parameters such as speech rate and volume. Upon receipt of the text data the voice simulator. API responds by acknowledging the request and storing the phrase in a processing queue table. At pre determined time intervals a voice simulator operating with the simulator module checks the processing queue table for new entries. When a new entry is identified the voice simulator sends the phrase to a text to speech application to transform the text data into audio files which are stored for example in .WAV format developed by Microsoft and IBM or MP3 format. The audio files may be stored at the web sever and thus retrievable by a universal resource locator URL or universal naming convention UNC path.

Each audio file is assigned a unique name based on a dialog segment identification in a dialog table. Once the audio file is processed either successfully or unsuccessfully the status code of the dialog table is updated. The status code together with the file name is provided to the scenario editor in order to show the trainers or managers which audio files have been completed. The voice simulator API may enable deletion of selected audio files as well as responses to requests for default values and available parameter values. More than one voice simulator may be implemented depending on the system capacity to deliver the desired number of hours of speech in one hour.

In an embodiment of the invention sound files may be generated using sources other than the voice simulator. For example actual voice recordings may be made and stored as .WAV or MP3 files. Like the generated voice files each sound file is assigned a name and location and stored in the web server . The stored voice strings and associated file names and locations are passed to the simulator module for implementation.

In response to the scenario initiation the business rules application receives input from the trainee at step s. The trainee s input includes speaking into the headset microphone or alternatively typing on a keyboard interfaced with the trainee terminal . Note that the initial dialog segment of the scenario includes an incoming customer call and the trainee s response e.g. answering the call and greeting the customer. For example the software emulation may provide an indication of a queued call that mimics the same indication received by an agent at the actual call center such as a beeping call initiation sound indicating that the scenario is ready. The trainee receives the call e.g. by a particular keystroke as provided by the software emulation and responds with a greeting.

In an embodiment of the invention the current dialog segment is displayed on the screen contemporaneously with execution of the trainee s portion of the dialog segment. For example in the web page of the dialog counter indicates 1 i.e. the first dialog segment. A short description of the dialog segment number 1 is indicated in the call flow block as greet the customer. The entire dialog segment is captured as a customer statement followed by the trainee response . Because depicts the initial trainee interaction the customer statement merely states indication of incoming call eliciting the trainee response Thank you for calling Ameritech. My name is Adam. How can I provide you with excellent service today 

The voice recognizer integrated with the simulator module receives the trainee s voice input. In an embodiment of the invention the voice recognizer is implemented as a Microsoft ActiveX control compatible with Microsoft Visual Basic Version 6.0 as a component object model layer on top of ASR 1600 software for example developed by Lernout Hauspie. Furthermore the voice recognizer is preferably speaker independent. In other words it does not need to be trained based on each individual user s voice. The voice recognizer listens to human speech captured for example at the trainee terminal by a headset microphone.

The spoken responses are converted into text by the voice recognizer which text is compared through the coach application to the pre established keywords retrieved from the database relating to the current dialog segment at step s. The original keywords are received for example via a keyword API over HTTP having XML format. At step s the coach application determines whether coaching is to be provided to the trainee. As stated above the coach application is programmed to provide hints tips and learning units in direct correlation with the trainee s performance and displays the performance statistics or score at the trainee terminal . The determination of the coach application is two fold. The coach application determines the trainee s performance results e.g. the number of keywords successfully included or not included in the trainee s input and whether the performance results warrant coaching remediation in view of the intervention level set for example by the trainers.

The intervention level is the threshold that governs the amount of coaching to be provided to a particular trainee or class of trainees. A new trainee may warrant a high level of coaching while a trainee nearing the end of the training program may warrant little to no coaching. For example when the intervention level of coaching is set to fifty percent the coach application interrupts the scenario between dialogs and provides guidance whenever the trainee fails to match half of the required keywords. Similarly an intervention level of zero percent means that the coach application does not interrupt the scenario at all regardless of the trainee s performance. The intervention level is set by the trainer through the administration module . However in an embodiment of the invention the trainer may adjust the intervention level through the training module for individual trainees at their terminals.

When the coach application determines that coaching is required it provides substantive feedback at step s. The content of the substantive feedback may likewise be set to correspond to the significance of the errors or the skill of the trainee prior to or during the training session. In particular the coach application may be programmed to provide a hint whenever the trainee omits a keyword while responding to the call initiation or the customer input of the current dialog segment. For example as shown in the hint block of when the trainee neglects to include his or her name in the greeting the coach application provides a hint relevant to the omission without actually giving the answer e.g. You need to greet the customer and introduce yourself. 

Similarly the coach application may provide a tip based on additional predetermined criteria such as when the trainee has repeated a mistake. The coach application may be programmed to provide tips based on other criteria as well such as inexperience of the trainee or participation in a practice scenario as opposed to a registered scenario . A tip is more definitive than a hint and provides limited substantive guidance. The tip block of provides such additional guidance to the trainee e.g. Make sure you identify your company make sure you tell the caller your name make sure you offer to provide excellent service. 

The coach application may also provide the actual keyword for which it was looking in the dialog segment as indicated for example in the keyword block of . In an embodiment of the invention the keyword block includes mandatory keywords and associated aliases to further assist the trainee. As discussed above aliases are determined by the trainers and or managers prior to scenario execution in order to provide the trainee controlled flexibility. For example the keyword block informs the trainee that assist and help are acceptable substitutes for the keyword service. The trainers and or managers create and implement the aliases through the scenario editor . Due to the ease with which the scenarios are edited a trainer may add aliases via the scenario editor and reissue the scenario for use when the trainer determines that particular words are being used repeatedly and appear to be equally acceptable in the context of the scenario.

The highest substantive coaching level is provided in the form of learning units. Learning units are displayed to the trainee whenever more significant or repetitive errors occur during a dialog segment or scenario. They provide more than simply identifying a particular omission or mistake. Learning units are actual lessons providing background and explanation regarding the subject matter with which the trainee is having difficulty. For example the learning units may provide actual course materials to facilitate further learning by the trainee. In an embodiment of the invention the learning units include prerecorded video files that enhance the trainee s learning experience by visual explanation and or demonstration.

At step s the coach application in conjunction with the business rules application determines whether the dialog segment that has resulted in feedback to the trainee should be repeated. In an embodiment of the invention whether to repeat a dialog segment is based on the type of substantive feedback provided. For example when the training program provides a hint to the trainee repeating the scenario is necessary so that the trainee has an opportunity to correct an error with minimal coaching intervention. Providing a learning unit however results in the trainee proceeding to the next dialogue segment because it is likely the trainee will be required to repeat the entire scenario regardless. Alternatively though the dialog segment may be repeated following a learning unit in order to underscore the subject matter in the practical application. When the dialog segment is repeated the training program returns to step s to receive the trainee s input. When the segment is not to be repeated the training program advances to step s.

In another embodiment of the invention the trainee is able to navigate through each scenario repeating the various dialog segments as desired. The trainee may navigate or be barred from navigating depending on how the trainer sets up the parameters of the scenario. The trainer or manager enables the navigation ability from the registration system discussed below. The trainee may then determine the problematic dialog segments in conjunction with the automated coaching and repeat the dialog segments at will. The trainee would not be able to navigate within registered scenarios which are scored for performance evaluation and therefore must be standardized among the trainees.

At step s the business rules application determines whether the simulated call includes another customer line in the scenario script. When there are no further customer lines the business rules application determines that the scenario has ended. The trainee s performance results are then displayed on the trainee terminal at step s for the trainee to assess his or her own performance. The display of performance results may operate independently from the coaching function. For example when a trainee s coaching level is set to zero the trainee receives no coaching during the scenario but still receives performance results upon completion of the scenario.

The performance results include for example an overall score the number of keywords in the scenario the number of keywords successfully included by the trainee identification of strengths and weaknesses and the like. The performance results may further include statistical analysis such as comparisons of the trainee s scenario performance against industry training standards company wide or region wide training standards other trainees and the like which requires access to additional information stored in the database .

In addition to the summary performance results displayed at step s the trainee s performance progress may be tracked on the client side and displayed during execution of the scenario e.g. between dialog segments before being uploaded to the web based scoring application in an embodiment of the invention. As shown in exemplary web page of a performance progress block is displayed along the left side of the trainee s screen throughout the scenario interaction. A dialog table indicates the number of keywords recognized in each dialog segment. The dialog table includes a vertical progress bar showing the number of keywords per dialog segment recognized by the voice recognizer and coach application . The exemplary dialog table provides for five keywords per dialog segment. For a perfect scenario score the progress bar for each of the dialog segments extends vertically through all five keyword indicators.

Below the dialog table is a dialog segment overview section which includes a dialog segment identifier and corresponding dialog segment data. The dialog segment identifier indicates that the current dialog segment is the first of 10 dialog segments that comprise the scenario. The dialog segment data includes the date and time of the dialog segment the score the comparable average of all trainees the elapsed time used to execute the dialog segment and the total coaching time provided to the trainee. Additional alternative embodiments may include any data that the trainers and or managers deem appropriate for display during the scenario.

Also the trainee may hear his or her spoken response to a customer s portion of the displayed dialog segment by clicking on the speaker icon . The recording enables the trainee to hear the actual verbal reply including tone volume inflection and other basic communication factors critical to the trainee s success as a call center agent. The recordings may be stored locally at the trainee terminal for example and accessed repeatedly to gauge progress.

Referring again to when the business rules application determines at step s that additional customer lines are pending the business rule application instructs the voice simulator to provide the next sequential customer portion of the conversation at step s. As described above the customer portion of the dialog segment is either a prerecorded voice or computer generated text to speech statement. Alternatively the customer portion may be a textual statement.

The customer portion of the conversation initiates the next consecutive dialog segment of the scenario necessitating an appropriate response from the trainee at step s. Steps s through s as described above are then repeated in relation to the next dialog segment. In particular the simulator module receives the trainee s response through the voice recognizer at step s. The coach application then identifies keywords at step s determines whether coaching is needed at step s provides feedback at step s when required and determines if repeating the dialog is necessary at step s when required . The business rules application then determines whether another customer interaction is to be played at step s and provides the next customer interaction at step s until the scenario is completed.

Returning to step s when the viewing scenarios option is not selected the trainee may elect to activate the user statistics application at step s. When the user statistics application is selected the corresponding options are displayed at the trainee terminal at step s. Because the user statistics application is also available to the trainers and managers they may also be displayed at the trainer terminal and the manager terminal .

The user statistics application provides training simulation statistics at step s which may include the trainee s scored performances for the executed scenarios in the context of the training requirements and goals depending on the selection made from the displayed options at step s. The data is standardized and may include additional information for the trainee to conduct an informed evaluation of his or her performance in comparison to other trainees in the trainee s group or throughout the company. The data displayed by the user statistics application is similar in content to the data displayed for example in the exemplary web page of discussed above. However the data is formatted to incorporate multiple scenarios and students.

The training program managers may customize the data presentation and emphasize particular areas of performance. For example when the managers detect a trend toward excessive average time spent with callers either through evaluation of the training program results or actual call center data the user statistics application may be modified to highlight the total time per call entry and specifically note whether the time is too high. The user statistics application may similarly be customized by trainers to focus the trainee or group of trainees on a particular area of importance or weakness.

The trainee may alternatively elect to enter the profile editor at step s. When the profile editor is selected the authorized functionality for the trainee is displayed at step s based on the authorized level of access pre established by the registration system and or the user manager . The trainee s level of access is normally very limited. For example the trainee may access the pre approved scenarios and user statistics data as well as change the trainee s password. In an embodiment of the invention the profile editor may be used to observe the various restrictions and privileges specific to the trainee as determined through the registration system discussed below.

Note that other user types are able to access and initiate changes to trainee authorized functionality by way of the profile editor . For example a trainer is able to selectively block trainee access to learning units. When a user is able to perform edits such as changing a password or altering authorized functionality the changes are received by the profile editor at step s. The database is updated accordingly at step s.

The administration module of the interactive training program enables trainers and managers to retrieve and analyze scenario trainee company and region specific data as well as to edit existing scenarios. Furthermore the managers are able to control the operation replication and distribution of the overall training program as well as add and delete scenarios e.g. the developers in particular . The administrator module includes a scenario editor a registration system a user manager and a reporter system . In an embodiment of the invention the administrator module may be a server application for example residing on a network server such as the web sever . The user may initiate the administrator module from the training module by selecting the desired administrative function.

The scenario editor provides a common interface enabling modifications and maintenance required for each training scenario. The scenario editor may be a web based Java or JavaScript application that generally enables upper level users such as trainers and managers to read edit and delete the scenarios implemented by the business rules application including the dialog segments and the keywords. For example existing objects may be edited and new objects may be created.

Interaction with the scenarios must follow an appropriate order. For example the user must first select a scenario before being able to view or edit a particular dialog within the scenario. Similarly the user must first select the dialog before being able to view or edit the keywords associated with that dialog. The customer data and the software emulation which enable aspects of the training program may also be viewed and edited by way of the scenario editor .

Also the developers may add entirely new scenarios by way of the scenario editor . In an embodiment of the invention the developer logs onto the training program system from the manager terminal which receives XML web pages via the intranet from the web server . The web pages include fields for the customer lines of multiple dialog segments. The developer types the desired customer line and further provides the associated keywords that need to be in the trainee s response. Alternatively the developer may reference voice files prerecorded and stored or produced on line by the developer for each of the desired customer lines in a dialog segment. The data for the new scenario is then stored in the database as text. However in an embodiment of the invention the customer lines are converted to speech unless they are already recorded speech and also stored as audio files in .WAV or MP3 format for example.

In an embodiment of the invention the scenario editor likewise enables the trainers and managers to edit read and delete the content of the coaching application . The editing functionality includes changing the substantive content of the hints tips and learning units administered via the coach application .

The registration system tracks and manages the registration status of trainees to the various scenarios. The functionality of the registration system enables registering and un registering trainees for scenarios as well as allowing and listing all registered and practice scenarios for each trainee. The trainee may be able to observe his or her registration status through the profile editor discussed above.

As shown in the exemplary web page of the registration system may display the registration status of the trainees with respect to the available scenarios. In the depicted embodiment of the invention all of the scenarios are listed in the scenario display as headers through . The web page is configured to scroll horizontally to show the additional scenarios if needed. The individual trainees are listed in the associate column .

Each trainee is specifically designated as registered or not registered for each scenario. In an embodiment of the invention a scenario may be designated all or none with respect to each registration which relieves the trainer or manager from having to individually indicate every trainee with respect to particular scenarios. There is also an indication of whether practice scenarios are permitted for each scenario. For example in row representing Jane User blocks and respectively indicate that she is registered for the first scenario with no practice allowed which means that the results of Jane User s performance of the first scenario will be scored and stored in the database . In the row representing Kelly User blocks and respectively indicate that she is registered for the first scenario for purposes of practicing the scenario. In other words Kelly User s results will not be stored. A trainee may not be registered for the same scenario more than once. This provides control over the integrity of the training process and is especially important for accurately comparing performance among multiple trainees or groups of trainees.

The registration system may also be used to customize the nature of each trainee s interaction with the training program including setting the level of coaching the level of software emulation and the ability to navigate among dialog segments in scenarios. Exemplary web page of contains an exemplary individual trainee registration table. Entry of the registration table is the mandatory keyword intervention level which indicates the percentage of mandatory keywords the trainee must miss before the coach application intervenes to provide assistance in the form of hints tips and learning units as discussed above. Entry indicates that the mandatory intervention level is set at 50 which means that coaching intervention begins when the matched keyword count is less than or equal to 50 percent. When entry is set at 100 coaching intervention begins when the matched keyword count is less than or equal to 100 percent. When entry is set at zero there is not coaching intervention regardless of keyword matches.

As discussed above alternative embodiments of the invention include additional types of keywords that the training program will track and score. For example entries and are the optional keyword and forbidden keyword intervention levels respectively. The optional keyword intervention level is the percentage of optional keywords the trainee must match before receiving coaching related to the use of optional key words. Note that the optional keywords are recognized as being similar to the corresponding mandatory keywords indicating the trainee s basic understanding of the scenario requirements but are otherwise not acceptable for purposes of passing the scenario. The forbidden keyword intervention level is the percentage of forbidden keywords the trainee must use before receiving coaching related to the use of forbidden key words. Both entries and indicate that the optional keyword intervention level and the forbidden keyword intervention level have been set at zero meaning that the trainee will receive the corresponding coaching whenever an optional keyword or a forbidden keyword is used.

Entries and relate to whether software emulation is to be explained and activated respectively. Entry indicates by the checkmark that intervention explaining call center software specific interactions is available to the trainee upon request. Entry indicates that the software emulation is turned ON for the trainee. When the software emulation is OFF the trainee is presented the scenario on a generic software application which operates at a simplistic level with very limited service and customer data options.

Entry enables coaching to be turned OFF entirely. For example the trainer may want to test an advanced trainee without access to coaching to get an accurate demonstration of the trainee s unassisted performance. Entry indicates that the coaching application has been enabled for the trainee. Entry enables navigation by the trainee within the scenario. Again the trainer may want to eliminate the trainee s ability to move to repeat dialog segments to observe a uninterrupted scenario performance. Entry indicates that the trainee is able to navigate if desired. The registration setting are stored in conjunction with the trainee s scores for the registered scenarios. The various settings will be reflected in the reports generated by the reporter system discussed below.

The user manager of the administration module enables users with administrative privileges to perform administrative functions through a common interface. For example by way of the user manager a manager is able to add new user records edit user information remove user records and read user information. Moreover the manager may assign multiple levels of permissive access to the training program individually or by category. For example the manager determines the level of access available to all trainers.

In an embodiment of the invention the various levels available to each user are as follows Trainees level 1 are able to take training simulations for scores view their statistical information and performance results and change their passwords. The trainees possess no administrative rights and cannot change substantive data including scenario registration coaching intervention levels and the like. Trainers level 2 are able to assign training scenarios to trainees practice training simulations and access the scenario editor the registration system and the reporter system . The administrators level 3 are able to access to the scenario editor and the user manager but cannot view reports from the reporter system or assign training scenarios. The developers level 4 are able to access all systems as well as create new scenarios and coaching applications.

The reporter system provides access to a trainee s simulation results generated by the simulator module and stored in the database and executes statistical analyses on that data. The reporter system enables a trainee to review his or her performance on a particular simulation review his or her performance on all simulations over time and view aggregate performances of trainee groups to compare and contrast the trainee s progress. For example in an embodiment of the invention the trainee is able to view percentile rankings for the trainee s statistics for a particular simulation view aggregate statistics for all users on selected scenario view aggregate statistics for the trainee s team or group view the trainee s statistics on all simulations over time view the team s statistics on one scenario over time view the team s statistics on all simulations over time and view and edit notes attached to particular simulation results.

The reporter system includes various result records such as the scenario result records the dialog result records and the iteration result records. The scenario result records include the result of a single trainee taking a single scenario on a particular occasion. Multiple scenario result records exist when a trainee takes a particular scenario multiple times. The scenario result record contains data about the trainee s performance relative to the entire scenario including the date the scenario was taken notes amended by the trainer the trainee s overall statistics and the amount of time spent in the scenario. The dialog result record is a component of a scenario result record and stores information about a trainee s performance on a particular dialog segment of a scenario. The iteration result record is a component of a dialog result record and includes performance information about a particular iteration of a dialog segment of a scenario for a trainee.

The reporter system is flexibly integrated with the various dynamic aspects of the training program to assure proper context and accuracy of the reports. For example the level of coaching can be adjusted by the trainer on an individual trainee basis as discussed with respect to above. In other words two trainees participating in the same scenario may have different levels of coaching. It is therefore possible that a more advanced trainee who has little to no coaching performs the same as an inferior trainee who has the highest level of coaching. The dynamic nature of the reporter system factors in that the score of the more advanced trainee was obtained without the full benefit of coaching and reports accordingly. The reporter system therefore provides an accurate picture of the training results customized to the trainee s individual training experience.

Although the invention has been described with reference to several exemplary embodiments it is understood that the words that have been used are words of description and illustration rather than words of limitation. Changes may be made within the purview of the appended claims as presently stated and as amended without departing from the scope and spirit of the invention in its aspects. Although the invention has been described with reference to particular means materials and embodiments the invention is not intended to be limited to the particulars disclosed rather the invention extends to all functionally equivalent structures methods and uses such as are within the scope of the appended claims.

In accordance with various embodiments of the present invention the methods described herein are intended for operation as software programs running on a computer processor. Dedicated hardware implementations including but not limited to application specific integrated circuits programmable logic arrays and other hardware devices can likewise be constructed to implement the methods described herein. Furthermore alternative software implementations including but not limited to distributed processing or component object distributed processing parallel processing or virtual machine processing can also be constructed to implement the methods described herein.

It should also be noted that the software implementations of the present invention as described herein are optionally stored on a tangible storage medium such as a magnetic medium such as a disk or tape a magneto optical or optical medium such as a disk or a solid state medium such as a memory card or other package that houses one or more read only non volatile memories random access memories or other re writable volatile memories. A digital file attachment to e mail or other self contained information archive or set of archives is considered a distribution medium equivalent to a tangible storage medium. Accordingly the invention is considered to include a tangible storage medium or distribution medium as listed herein and including art recognized equivalents and successor media in which the software implementations herein are stored.

Although the present specification describes components and functions implemented in the embodiments with reference to particular standards and protocols the invention is not limited to such standards and protocols. Each of the standards for Internet and other packet switched network transmission e.g. TCP IP UDP IP HTTP represent examples of the state of the art. Such standards are periodically superseded by faster or more efficient equivalents having essentially the same functions. Accordingly replacement standards and protocols having the same functions are considered equivalents.

