---

title: Creating a mixed-initiative grammar from directed dialog grammars
abstract: A method of building a mixed-initiative grammar can include receiving one or more conjoin phrases, wherein each conjoin phrase is associated with a selected one of the plurality of directed dialog grammars, and receiving a user input specifying a selected grammar generation technique. The mixed-initiative grammar can be automatically generated, in accordance with the selected grammar generation technique, such that the mixed-initiative grammar specifies an allowable ordering of sets when interpreting a user spoken utterance and whether duplicative phrases are allowable within the user spoken utterance.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08229745&OS=08229745&RS=08229745
owner: Nuance Communications, Inc.
number: 08229745
owner_city: Burlington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051021
---
A portion of the disclosure of this patent document contains material which is subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office patent file or records but otherwise reserves all copyright rights whatsoever.

The present invention relates to mixed initiative speech based systems and more particularly to creating grammars for use with such systems.

Many robust voice applications utilize a form of human computer interaction referred to as mixed initiative interaction. Mixed initiative interaction is a flexible interaction strategy between a user and a computer system in which each party can take a turn at any time to steer or alter the flow of interaction. Mixed initiative systems provide a more natural and generally preferred manner for a user to interact with a computer system.

Within a mixed initiative speech system a user can provide different pieces of information in varying order without first being prompted for each individual item of information. The computer system can extract needed items of information from a user spoken utterance and use the items of information to fill in appropriate fields of an electronic form for example. In illustration a user can say I want to fly from Boston to New York La Guardia on June 23 . A mixed initiative system can extract needed items of information such as the departure city the arrival airport and the date of the flight from that single spoken utterance. By comparison a directed dialog system would prompt the user for each individual piece of information one at a time and perform the data collection in a particular order. In this manner a directed dialog system effectively directs the flow of interaction or dialog without providing the user any opportunity to deviate from the specified flow.

One aspect of developing a mixed initiative system is the development of a mixed initiative grammar that will be used for processing user spoken utterances. While modern technologies such as Voice Extensible Markup Language VoiceXML support mixed initiative dialogs creating a mixed initiative grammar within VoiceXML remains a complex undertaking. Typically a mixed initiative grammar is harder and more complex to develop and maintain than a directed dialog grammar. Such is the case as mixed initiative grammars typically are built using directed dialog grammars as components. Further complicating mixed initiative grammar development is the reality that these grammars are developed manually. As such the creation of a mixed initiative grammar can be a time consuming and error prone process.

It would be beneficial to provide a more effective technique for creating mixed initiative grammars which overcomes the deficiencies described above.

The present invention provides a method and apparatus for constructing mixed initiative grammars and further enables the reuse of directed dialog grammars. One embodiment of the present invention can include a method of building a mixed initiative grammar. The method can include responsive to receiving a user input creating a plurality of sets wherein each set comprises an association of at least one conjoin phrase and at least one directed dialog grammar. The conjoin phrase when recognized within a user spoken utterance indicates that the directed dialog grammar associated with the conjoin phrase is to be used to process speech recognized text adjacent to the conjoin phrase within the user spoken utterance. The method also can include prompting the user to select one of a plurality of grammar generation techniques receiving a user input specifying a selected grammar generation technique and automatically generating the mixed initiative grammar. The mixed initiative grammar can specify an allowable ordering of sets corresponding to an allowable ordering of phrases within the user spoken utterance and whether duplicative phrases are allowable within the user spoken utterance in accordance with the selected grammar generation technique.

Another embodiment of the present invention can include a method of automatically constructing a mixed initiative grammar from a plurality of directed dialog grammars. The method can include presenting a graphical user interface including a first section that receives a user input specifying a prefix type of conjoin phrase a second section that receives a user input specifying a directed dialog grammar that is associated with the prefix type of conjoin phrase and a third section that receives a user input specifying a suffix type of conjoin phrase that is associated with the directed dialog grammar. The method can include receiving within the graphical user interface at least one user input that creates associations between conjoin phrases and directed dialog grammars thereby generating a plurality of sets wherein each set includes at least one of a prefix or a suffix type of conjoin phrase and at least one directed dialog grammar. The conjoin phrase when recognized within a user spoken utterance indicates that the directed dialog grammar associated with the conjoin phrase is to be used to process speech recognized text adjacent to the conjoin phrase within the user spoken utterance. The user can be prompted to select one of a plurality of grammar generation techniques. A user input specifying a selected grammar generation technique can be received. The method further can include automatically generating the mixed initiative grammar wherein the mixed initiative grammar specifies an allowable ordering of the plurality of sets corresponding to an allowable ordering of phrases within the user spoken utterance and whether duplicative phrases are allowed within the user spoken utterance according to the selected grammar generation technique.

Another embodiment of the present invention can include a machine readable storage having stored thereon a computer program having a plurality of code sections executable by a machine for causing the machine to perform the various steps and methods disclosed herein.

While the specification concludes with claims defining the features of the invention that are regarded as novel it is believed that the invention will be better understood from a consideration of the description in conjunction with the drawings. As required detailed embodiments of the present invention are disclosed herein however it is to be understood that the disclosed embodiments are merely exemplary of the invention which can be embodied in various forms. Therefore specific structural and functional details disclosed herein are not to be interpreted as limiting but merely as a basis for the claims and as a representative basis for teaching one skilled in the art to variously employ the present invention in virtually any appropriately detailed structure. Further the terms and phrases used herein are not intended to be limiting but rather to provide an understandable description of the invention.

The present invention provides a solution for developing a grammar for use by a mixed initiative computing system. In accordance with the inventive arrangements disclosed herein directed dialog grammars can be used and or reused to create a mixed initiative system. The present invention can elicit different items of information needed to create a mixed initiative grammar from a user or software developer. In one embodiment for example one or more directed dialog grammars can be identified as well as various conjoin phrases. The conjoin phrases can be used to link selected ones of the directed dialog grammars. Using one of a plurality of different grammar generation techniques a mixed initiative grammar can be generated automatically from the user specified information thereby reducing and or eliminating many of the complexities typically associated with the manual creation of a mixed initiative grammar.

In one embodiment the inventive arrangements disclosed herein can be implemented within or as part of a software based development system. For example the various embodiments disclosed herein can be implemented as part of a software development system such as WebSphere Voice Toolkit V6.0 hereafter Voice Toolkit . Voice Toolkit is a software development platform that is available from International Business Machines Corporation of Armonk N.Y. IBM which provides support for developing voice enabled applications. Voice Toolkit provides a graphical grammar builder for visual composition of a grammar file for speech recognition a communication flow builder that supports reusable dialog components support for Voice Extensible Markup Language VoiceXML and or other functions.

It should be appreciated that while the embodiments disclosed herein can be implemented as part of Voice Toolkit such is but one embodiment. The present invention is not intended to be limited by the particular host application used as the embodiments disclosed herein can be provided as part of any suitable software development system and or environment. Moreover it should be appreciated that the embodiments disclosed herein can be implemented as a standalone software development system or application.

In any case referring again to fields and a conjoin phrase can serve as a queue indicating that a particular directed dialog grammar be used or alternatively to link two or more directed dialog grammars. A conjoin phrase can include one or more words symbols or textual elements as the case may be. Accordingly when recognized within a user spoken utterance a conjoin phrase indicates that a particular directed dialog grammar is to be used to process a given word or portion of the user spoken utterance. As noted a conjoin phrase also can function to effectively link or establish an association or relationship between two or more directed dialog grammars. Accordingly a conjoin phrase can establish an ordering between the directed dialog grammars that the conjoin phrase is used to link.

GUI illustrates that the conjoin phrase depart from where the word depart has been denoted as optional has been associated with the directed dialog grammar named departGrammar . This grammar can specify a listing of departure cities. Similarly the conjoin phrase depart on where the word depart again is optional has been associated with the directed dialog grammar named departDate . This grammar can specify a listing of dates. Thus if a user says depart from West Palm Beach on Wednesday for example the conjoin phrase depart from indicates that the directed dialog grammar named departGrammar is to be used to recognized the next several word s i.e. West Palm Beach from the utterance. When the conjoin phrase on is recognized the speech enabled system would determine that the departDate grammar is to be used to recognize the next several words i.e. Wednesday from the utterance.

In this example both conjoin phrases are classified as prefix phrases. Prefix conjoin phrases indicate that words following after the conjoin phrase within a user spoken utterance are to be processed using a particular directed dialog grammar. Accordingly the word Wednesday is recognized using the departGrammar . A suffix conjoin phrase indicates that words preceding the conjoin phrase within a user spoken utterance are to be processed using a particular directed dialog grammar. As shown with GUI directed dialog grammars can be associated with a prefix phrase a suffix phrase both a prefix and a suffix phrase or neither type of conjoin phrase.

In one embodiment directed dialog grammars can be specified by typing the names of the grammars into fields of GUI . In another embodiment drag and drop functionality can be used allowing a portion of code or a directed dialog grammar file to be selected and dropped over any one of fields . In yet another embodiment a file selection navigation window can be opened to allow a user to select the directed dialog grammar s . Such techniques also can be used to specify conjoin phrases.

GUI further can include a field which can receive a user provided input that specifies the initial prompt to be used to solicit information from an end user of the mixed initiative system being developed. The initial prompt will be used to solicit the end user spoken utterance that will be processed using the mixed initiative grammar being created. In an embodiment of the present invention using VoiceXML for example the prompt can be used with the initial tag. The initial tag is used within VoiceXML mixed initiative dialogs to allow the user to fill in form wide information. The initial tag permits the user to skip over a plurality of field prompts with one utterance. Usually the first prompt in a mixed initiative dialog queries the user for all information. Typically fields are executed only after it is determined that all field variables have not been filled. The initial element does not contain any grammars or filled events of its own rather it relies on the grammars and filled elements of each individual field.

The fixed order grammar generation technique is illustrated in view of GUI . Using fixed order a user can specify the particular order in which sets of a conjoin phrase and an associated directed dialog grammar as specified or created in GUI are ordered within the mixed initiative grammar being generated. The user can select a particular conjoin phrase directed dialog grammar set and move it up or down in the ordering using arrows . Using this technique the mixed initiative grammar will be created in a flat list of component directed dialog grammars.

The wide combination grammar generation technique allows what can be referred to as unintentional words or unintentional phrases as the case may be. As can be seen in an syntax is used at the close of the mixed initiative grammar. The is a standard form of notation within various types of grammars such as Java Application Programming Interface Speech Grammar Format OSGF W3C Speech Recognition Grammar Specification SRGS Augmented Backus Naur form ABNF or the like which indicates that an expansion of the grammar can be spoken zero or more times. The term phrase as used herein can include one or more words symbols portions of text or the like.

In illustration the grammar illustrated in would allow the user to speak the following phrases from Boston to Miami on May 1 and on May 1to Miami from Boston . The grammar also would allow the user to say the phrase from Boston to Miami on May 1from Orlando . This last user spoken utterance includes two instances of the departure city from Boston and from Orlando . The grammar of would permit such an utterance. The duplication of the departure city is referred to as an unintentional phrase and is permissible since the expansion of the grammar is allowed to be spoken zero or more times.

For example assuming that a mixed initiative grammar is to be made and that conjoin phrases and directed dialog grammars A B and C have been identified the resulting mixed initiative grammar would allow the following directed dialog orderings A B C AB CA BC ABC BAC CAB etc. Orderings such as AABC AA BCC and the like would not however be acceptable. In this example A represents the entire statement depart from B represents the statement to arrive at and C represents depart on . Since unintentional phrases are not permissible the entire utterance can be rejected if noncompliant or the unintentional phrase s can be ignored such that the remaining portion of the utterance can be processed. Notably either the particular instance of any repeated phrase can be selected for processing based upon developer preference.

In step the user can select one or more of the directed dialog grammars to be used in generating the mixed initiative grammar. Since step was optional in nature the directed dialog grammars identified in step need not have been created by the user but may have been created by other developers. Accordingly in step the user can select one or more directed dialog grammars that are in existence whether or not the user created the directed dialog grammars.

In step the user can be prompted for one or more conjoin phrases. In step a user input specifying one or more conjoin phrases can be received. It should be appreciated that the user input can be provided in such a way that not only are one or more conjoin phrases specified but the conjoin phrases further can be associated with user specified directed dialog grammars i.e. selected ones of those identified in step . In any case steps and can be optional in nature as conjoin phrases may be excluded from a mixed initiative grammar depending upon the particular grammar generation technique selected.

In step the grammar generation tool can prompt the user for a specific grammar generation technique. In step the user specified grammar generation technique can be received from the user as an input. In step the grammar generation tool can prompt the user for an initial prompt to be used to solicit information from an end user. In step the user specified initial prompt can be obtained or received from the user. In step the grammar generation tool can generate the mixed initiative grammar based upon the inputs and or selections provided by the user. As noted the order in which users are allowed to speak particular phrases as dictated by the ordering of directed dialog grammars specified by the mixed initiative grammar can be dictated according to the grammar generation technique selected by the user.

It should be appreciated that the various GUI s flow charts and example portions of code disclosed herein have been provided for purposes of illustration only and as such are not intended to limit the scope of the present invention in any way. With respect to the GUI s for example different controls visual indicators and the like can be used in lieu of those shown and or discussed. Similarly with respect to the flow chart various steps can be omitted or performed in a different order than described without departing from the spirit of the invention.

The present invention can be realized in hardware software or a combination of hardware and software. The present invention can be realized in a centralized fashion in one computer system or in a distributed fashion where different elements are spread across several interconnected computer systems. Any kind of computer system or other apparatus adapted for carrying out the methods described herein is suited. A typical combination of hardware and software can be a general purpose computer system with a computer program that when being loaded and executed controls the computer system such that it carries out the methods described herein. The present invention also can be embedded in a computer program product which comprises all the features enabling the implementation of the methods described herein and which when loaded in a computer system is able to carry out these methods.

The terms computer program software application variants and or combinations thereof in the present context mean any expression in any language code or notation of a set of instructions intended to cause a system having an information processing capability to perform a particular function either directly or after either or both of the following a conversion to another language code or notation b reproduction in a different material form. For example a computer program can include but is not limited to a subroutine a function a procedure an object method an object implementation an executable application an applet a servlet a source code an object code a shared library dynamic load library and or other sequence of instructions designed for execution on a computer system.

The terms a and an as used herein are defined as one or more than one. The term plurality as used herein is defined as two or more than two. The term another as used herein is defined as at least a second or more. The terms including and or having as used herein are defined as comprising i.e. open language . The term coupled as used herein is defined as connected although not necessarily directly and not necessarily mechanically i.e. communicatively linked through a communication channel or pathway.

This invention can be embodied in other forms without departing from the spirit or essential attributes thereof. Accordingly reference should be made to the following claims rather than to the foregoing specification as indicating the scope of the invention.

