---

title: Method and computer-readable medium for providing spreadsheet-driven key performance indicators
abstract: A method, system, apparatus, and computer-readable medium for providing spreadsheet-driven key performance indicators are disclosed. According to the method, a spreadsheet-driven key performance indicator is created that includes a location of a spreadsheet, a location of a cell within the spreadsheet to be utilized as an indicator value, and a goal value. The key performance indicator may be evaluated by retrieving the indicator value from cell of the spreadsheet, comparing the indicator value to the goal value, and providing a visual indication based on the result of the comparison. The goal value may also be expressed as a location within a spreadsheet. The spreadsheet locations may contain references to databases containing the data that should be utilized as the indicator and goal values. A warning value may also be specified, compared to the indicator, and a visual indication may be provided based upon the result of the comparison.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07587665&OS=07587665&RS=07587665
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07587665
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050315
---
Key performance indicators also referred to herein as KPIs or indicators help organizations define and measure progress toward organizational goals. In particular KPIs are quantifiable measurements that reflect progress toward an agreed upon numerical goal. KPIs can differ significantly based upon the organization. For instance a business may have as one of its KPIs the percentage of income that comes from repeat customers. A customer service department within the business may have as one of its KPIs the percentage of customer telephone calls that are answered within the first minute. Other types of organizations and groups within those organizations may define and utilize other types of KPIs.

In order to make KPIs accessible to executives and other employees of an organization software components are typically constructed that extract the required data from complex databases evaluate the KPI and present the results in the form of a balanced scorecard that shows the values of one or more KPIs. Creation of these types of complex software components requires programming skills beyond those of the average computer user. Therefore it is typically necessary to utilize the services of a professional programmer which can be very expensive. Moreover data that is created in applications utilized by many computer users has not been previously available for use in KPIs. For instance although millions of users utilize spreadsheet application programs for a wide range of financial and business purposes the data created and stored in spreadsheets has been previously unavailable for use within KPIs.

It is with respect to these considerations and others that the various embodiments of the present invention have been made.

In accordance with the present invention the above and other problems are solved by a method system apparatus and computer readable medium for providing spreadsheet based key performance indicators. Through the use of the embodiments of the invention computer users familiar only with a web browser application program and a spreadsheet application program can create KPIs that incorporate data from common sources such as spreadsheets. The KPIs can then be evaluated utilizing the data from the spreadsheet and viewed by users utilizing a web browser application program.

According to one embodiment of the invention a method is provided for creating and evaluating spreadsheet based KPIs. According to the method a user interface is provided for easily creating a spreadsheet driven KPI. Through the user interface a user can provide the location of a spreadsheet the location of a cell within the spreadsheet to be utilized as an indicator value for the KPI and a goal value. The goal value may be specified as a value or as the location of a cell within the same or another spreadsheet. The user may also be permitted to provide a warning value or the location of a cell within a spreadsheet to be utilized as the warning value. Once the user has provided this information a KPI definition may be saved that includes the data.

In order to evaluate the defined KPI the indicator value is retrieved from the defined spreadsheet cell. In order to perform this process the spreadsheet is loaded and calculated. It should be appreciated that the spreadsheet cell may refer to other external data sources such as a database. If the user specified values for the goal and warning values these numbers are utilized directly. If the user specified spreadsheet cells for the goal and warning values the spreadsheets containing the cells are loaded calculated and the appropriate values are retrieved including querying an external database if specified.

Once the indicator value goal value and warning value have been obtained the KPI is evaluated by comparing the indicator value to the goal and warning values. A visual indicator is then displayed based on the results of the comparison. In particular one visual indicator may be displayed if the goal value is greater than the indicator value and another visual indicator may be displayed if the goal value is less than or equal to the indicator value. Similarly one visual indicator may be displayed if the warning value is greater than the indicator value and another visual indicator may be displayed if the warning value is less than or equal to the indicator value. The visual icon may comprise a computer icon a text message or other type of visual or audible indicator configured to indicate that the goal and warning values are less than greater than or equal to the goal value.

The invention may be implemented as a computer process a computing system or as an article of manufacture such as a computer program product or computer readable media. The computer program product may be a computer storage media readable by a computer system and encoding a computer program of instructions for executing a computer process. The computer program product may also be a propagated signal on a carrier readable by a computing system and encoding a computer program of instructions for executing a computer process.

These and various other features as well as advantages which characterize the present invention will be apparent from a reading of the following detailed description and a review of the associated drawings.

Referring now to the drawings in which like numerals represent like elements various aspects of the present invention will be described. In particular and the corresponding discussion are intended to provide a brief general description of a suitable computing environment in which embodiments of the invention may be implemented. While the invention will be described in the general context of program modules that execute on server and personal computer systems those skilled in the art will recognize that the invention may also be implemented in combination with other types of computer systems and program modules.

Generally program modules include routines programs components data structures and other types of structures that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Moreover those skilled in the art will appreciate that the invention may be practiced with other computer system configurations including hand held devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

Referring now to an illustrative computer architecture for a computer utilized in the various embodiments of the invention will be described. The computer architecture shown in illustrates a conventional desktop or laptop computer including a central processing unit CPU a system memory including a random access memory RAM and a read only memory ROM and a system bus that couples the memory to the CPU . A basic input output system containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within the computer such as during startup is stored in the ROM . The computer further includes a mass storage device for storing an operating system application programs and other program modules which will be described in greater detail below.

The mass storage device is connected to the CPU through a mass storage controller not shown connected to the bus . The mass storage device and its associated computer readable media provide non volatile storage for the computer . Although the description of computer readable media contained herein refers to a mass storage device such as a hard disk or CD ROM drive it should be appreciated by those skilled in the art that computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by the computer .

By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes volatile and non volatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EPROM EEPROM flash memory or other solid state memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by the computer .

According to various embodiments of the invention the computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to remote computers through a network such as the Internet. The computer may connect to the network through a network interface unit connected to the bus . It should be appreciated that the network interface unit may also be utilized to connect to other types of networks and remote computer systems. The computer may also include an input output controller for receiving and processing input from a number of other devices including a keyboard mouse or electronic stylus not shown in . Similarly an input output controller may provide output to a display screen a printer or other type of output device.

As mentioned briefly above a number of program modules and data files may be stored in the mass storage device and RAM of the computer including an operating system suitable for controlling the operation of a networked personal computer such as the WINDOWS XP operating system from MICROSOFT CORPORATION of Redmond Wash. The mass storage device and RAM may also store one or more program modules. In particular the mass storage device and the RAM may store a web browser application program . As known to those skilled in the art the web browser application program is operative to request receive render and provide interactivity with electronic documents such as the web pages that have been formatted for use with the web browser . Moreover the web browser application program may be operative to execute scripts contained in the web pages such as scripts expressed utilizing the JAVASCRIPT language from SUN MICROSYSTEMS INC. According to one embodiment of the invention the web browser application program comprises the INTERNET EXPLORER web browser application program from MICROSOFT CORPORATION. It should be appreciated however that other web browser application programs from other manufacturers may be utilized to embody the various aspects of the present invention such as the FIREFOX web browser application from the MOZILLA FOUNDATION.

As will be described in greater detail below the web pages may comprise pages for creating and viewing KPIs. In particular the web pages may include HTML and scripts which when displayed by the web browser application provide a user interface for creating spreadsheet based KPIs and for displaying spreadsheet based KPIs. Additional details will be provided below regarding the format construction and use of the web pages .

Referring now to a network architecture diagram will be described that illustrates an operating environment for the various embodiments of the invention. As shown in the computer is connected to a network . Also connected to the network is a web server computer . The web server comprises a server computer which may contain some or all the conventional computing components described above with respect to . Additionally the web server computer is operative to execute a web server application for receiving and responding to requests for documents stored at or accessible to the web server computer . Moreover the web server is operative to receive and respond to requests for web pages generated by a web application . It should be appreciated that the web application may comprise code executable at the web server executable code for communicating with other computers and may include templates graphics audio files and other content known to those skilled in the art.

According to one aspect of the invention the web application is operative to provide an interface to a user of the computer to create spreadsheet based KPIs and to view pages showing the results of evaluated KPIs. In particular the web application may receive a request from the client computer to create a new spreadsheet based KPI. In response to the request the web application will return a web page containing fields for creating a new spreadsheet based KPI. An illustrative web page for creating a new KPI will be described below with respect to . Once the user has provided the information necessary to create a new KPI a KPI definition may be stored with the provided information. As will be described in greater detail below the KPI definition is utilized when the KPI is evaluated.

A user of the computer may also request to view a balanced dashboard including one or more KPIs. When such a request is received the web application retrieves the appropriate KPI definitions and evaluates the KPIs. In order to evaluate the KPI the web application utilizes a server application programming interface API . The server API is operative to enable communication with a spreadsheet calculation server computer . The spreadsheet calculation server computer is operative to execute a spreadsheet calculation server program . The spreadsheet calculation server program comprises an executable program for retrieving and calculating spreadsheets such as the spreadsheet stored in the database . It should be appreciated that in the embodiments of the invention described herein the spreadsheet calculation server program comprises the EXCEL CALCULATION SERVER program from MICROSOFT CORPORATION. However other programs for calculating a spreadsheet on a server computer may be utilized. It should also be appreciated that the calculation server computer may include many of the conventional hardware and software components discussed above with respect to .

It should be appreciated that the cells of the spreadsheet may contain references to external data sources such as a database. In particular one or more of the cells of the spreadsheet may contain a reference to a database connected to a database server computer . In order to retrieve the data referenced by such a spreadsheet cell the spreadsheet calculation server may transmit a request for the data to a database server application executing on the database server computer . The database server application is then operative to retrieve the requested data from the database and return the data to the spreadsheet calculation server . It should also be appreciated that the particular data returned by both the spreadsheet calculation server and the database server application is dependent upon the credentials supplied by the user of the computer . As a result the value of a KPI may also be different depending upon the particular user and their credentials.

Referring now to an illustrative screen display A provided by an embodiment of the invention will be described. In particular shows several KPIs generated by one embodiment of the invention along with user interface items for editing the KPIs for adding additional KPIs to the list and for performing other functions. As shown in each KPI includes a visual indicator and explanatory text for each KPI. The text identifies each KPI and the goal and indicator values for each KPI. Both the goal value and the indicator value may be retrieved from a spreadsheet.

The visual indicators provide a quick indication of the relationship between the goal and indicator values and may comprise any type of computer icon text or other type of visual indicator from which the relationship between the goal and indicator values may be quickly determined. For instance the visual indicator for a KPI may be displayed in one color if the goal value is greater than the indicator value green for instance and another color if the goal value is less than the indicator value red for instance . Alternatively different icons may be utilized if the goal value is less than or greater than the indicator value. As will be described in greater detail below a warning value may also be specified. The visual indicator for a particular KPI may also be displayed differently depending upon whether the indicator value is less than greater than or equal to the warning value.

As shown in user interface objects are provided for editing a KPI and for adding new KPIs to the list. In particular the button allows a user to create a new KPI or edit the parameters for an existing KPI. An illustrative user interface will be described below with respect to for adding a new KPI. Additional details regarding the definition evaluation and selection of the appropriate visual indicator are described below with reference to .

Referring now to an illustrative user interface will be described for creating a new spreadsheet based KPI. The user interface is displayed in response to the selection of the button shown in . As illustrated in a number of fields are provided through which a user can enter information related to the new indicator. In particular the field A is utilized for providing a name for the new indicator and the field B is utilized to provide a description for the new indicator that indicates the purpose or goal of the indicator. The field C may be utilized to provide comments for the new indicator that help explain the current value or status of the indicator.

In the field D the user provides the location of a spreadsheet also referred to as a workbook to be utilized to retrieve the indicator value. In the field E a cell address is provided that indicates the cell within the spreadsheet identified in the field D from which the indicator value should be retrieved. In the fields F and G the user specifies values for the goal value and the warning value respectively. Alternatively the fields F and G may be utilized to specify cell addresses within the spreadsheet from which the goal and warning values should be retrieved. According to one embodiment the user may be provided with a user interface for visually selecting the cells from a spreadsheet to be utilized as the goal warning and indicator values. An illustrative user interface B for performing this function is shown in . The user may also specify whether the new indicator should be calculated once only or should be calculated each time a user views the list of indicators. Once the user has provided all of the required information the KPI may be saved by the web application as a KPI definition .

Referring now to an illustrative routine will be described illustrating a process for creating a new spreadsheet based KPI. It should be appreciated that although the embodiments of the invention described herein are presented in the context of a web browser application program the invention may be utilized in other types of application programs.

When reading the discussion of the routines presented herein it should be appreciated that the logical operations of various embodiments of the present invention are implemented 1 as a sequence of computer implemented acts or program modules running on a computing system and or 2 as interconnected machine logic circuits or circuit modules within the computing system. The implementation is a matter of choice dependent on the performance requirements of the computing system implementing the invention. Accordingly the logical operations illustrated in and making up the embodiments of the present invention described herein are referred to variously as operations structural devices acts or modules. It will be recognized by one skilled in the art that these operations structural devices acts and modules may be implemented in software in firmware in special purpose digital logic and any combination thereof without deviating from the spirit and scope of the present invention as recited within the claims attached hereto.

The routine begins at operation where the web server computer receives the name and the description of the new indicator. As described above with respect to this information may be provided in the fields A and B respectively. The routine then continues to operation where the web server computer receives the location of the spreadsheet from which the indicator value should be retrieved. This information is provided in the field C. The routine then continues to operation where the web server computer receives the cell address within the spreadsheet for the indicator value. This information is provided in the field D. From operation the routine continues to operation .

At operation the web server computer receives a numerical value for the goal value or a cell address within the spreadsheet from which the goal value should be retrieved. This information may be provided in the fields E or G respectively. The routine then continues to operation where a numerical value for the warning value or a cell address within the spreadsheet from which the warning value should be retrieved. This information may be provided in the fields F or H respectively. The routine then continues to operation where the user may specify options regarding whether the KPI should be calculated only once or each time a request is made to view the KPI. The routine then continues to operation where the data received at operations is stored as a KPI definition . The routine then continues to operation where it ends.

Turning now to an illustrative routine will be described for processing a request from the computer for a web page that includes a spreadsheet based KPI. The routine begins at operation where the web server computer receives a request for a web page that includes a spreadsheet based indicator such as the page described above with respect to . In response to the request the web server computer retrieves the KPI definition corresponding to each of the indicators on the page. The routine then continues to operation where the web server computer transmits a request to the spreadsheet calculation server for the value of the cell in the spreadsheet that is to be utilized as the indicator value. In response to the request the spreadsheet calculation server loads and recalculates the spreadsheet . This may include retrieving data from the database server application if the spreadsheet references external data contained in the database . The spreadsheet calculation server then returns the calculated indicator value to the web server computer .

From operation the routine continues to operation where the web server computer determines if the goal and warning values were expressed as cell references. If the goal and warning values were not expressed as cell references the routine continues to operation where the goal and warning values are retrieved from the KPI definition . If the goal and warning values were expressed as cell references the routine continues to operation where a query is transmitted to the spreadsheet calculation server for the values of the cells specified for the goal and warning values. In response to the request the spreadsheet calculation server returns the values of the identified cells. The routine then continues from operations and to operation .

At operation the web server computer compares the indicator value to the goal value and the warning value to determine whether the indicator value is greater than less than or equal to the goal and warning values. Once the comparison has been made the routine continues to operation where the visual indicator for the KPI is selected based upon whether the indicator value is less than greater than or equal to the goal and warning values. The routine then continues to operation where a web page is created with the selected visual indicator such as the web page described above with reference to . The routine then continues to operation where the web page is returned to the client computer in response to the initial request to view the KPI. The routine then continues to operation where it ends.

It should be appreciated that according to embodiments of the invention any number of values may be specified and compared to the indicator value. Additionally any number of different visual or audible indicators may be provided to indicate the relationship between the specified values and the indicator value. In this manner any level of granularity may be provided for comparing the value of the indicator to other specified values.

Based on the foregoing it should be appreciated that the various embodiments of the invention include a method system apparatus and computer readable medium for providing spreadsheet based key performance indicators. The above specification examples and data provide a complete description of the manufacture and use of the composition of the invention. Since many embodiments of the invention can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention the invention resides in the claims hereinafter appended.

