---

title: Adjustable drill guide
abstract: An intervertebral disc space preparation guide comprises a first member and a second member. The first member includes a first spacer portion adapted for insertion in an intervertebral disc space and a first cutting block portion through which a first bore extends. The second member includes a second spacer portion adapted for insertion in an intervertebral disc space and a second cutting block portion through which a second bore extends. The first member is movably connected to the second member.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07766914&OS=07766914&RS=07766914
owner: Warsaw Orthopedic, Inc.
number: 07766914
owner_city: Warsaw
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050118
---
This application is a continuation in part application of application Ser. No. 10 894 557 filed Jul. 20 2004 and entitled ARTIFICIAL SPINAL DISCS AND ASSOCIATED IMPLEMENTATION INSTRUMENTS AND METHODS which claims priority from U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 501 929 filed on Sep. 10 2003 and entitled ARTIFICIAL SPINAL DISCS AND ASSOCIATED IMPLEMENTATION INSTRUMENTS AND METHODS. 

The present invention relates to artificial spinal discs and instruments and methods associated with the implantation of such artificial spinal discs.

Current spinal therapies for treating problematic spinal discs are moving from rigid fixation of adjacent vertebrae across the problematic disc space such as with rods or plates to maintaining the relative motion of the adjacent vertebrae such as with artificial spinal discs. For instance an artificial spinal disc may be utilized to treat degenerative disc disease including a herniated nucleus pulposus and or posterior osteophytes which causes radiculopathy and or myelopathy. Radiculopathy is compression of a spinal nerve root while myelopathy is compression of the spinal cord. Both are conditions that may result in an individual experiencing pain or tingling in the arms legs back and or neck.

Current artificial spinal discs have drawbacks relating to their fixation to the adjacent vertebrae and their ability to be revised or removed after their implantation. For instance current artificial discs may have special contours that need to be machined into the endplates of the adjacent vertebrae. Further current artificial discs may require special machining of the vertebrae and or implantation instrumentation to accommodate spikes fins or other structures extending into the adjacent vertebrae that are used to fixate the disc to the vertebrae. Additionally current artificial discs may include bone in growth surfaces across the entire vertebrae contacting surface. This makes it difficult to remove the artificial disc as is sometimes required once the artificial disc is implanted.

Similarly the associated implantation instruments and methods have a number of drawbacks relating to their complexity or to their suitability for use in more sensitive areas of the spine such as in the cervical spine. For instance some implantation systems require the use of many different instruments and devices to prepare the disc space and properly insert the artificial disc. Further some implantation systems rely on impacting or hammering features into the bone to accommodate the artificial disc. Such impaction techniques may be suitable in certain areas of the spine like in the lumbar spine but are not as desirable in other areas of the spine like the cervical spine where the proximity of the spinal cord and nerve roots would favor more delicate procedures.

In one embodiment an intervertebral disc space preparation guide comprises a first member and a second member. The first member includes a first spacer portion adapted for insertion in an intervertebral disc space and a first cutting block portion through which a first bore extends. The second member includes a second spacer portion adapted for insertion in an intervertebral disc space and a second cutting block portion through which a second bore extends. The first member is movably connected to the second member.

In another embodiment a method of preparing an intervertebral disc space to receive an implant the method comprises the step of creating a non parallel angle between first and second vertebral endplates and inserting at least a portion of a cutting guide between the first and second vertebral endplates. The cutting guide includes a first member movably connected to a second member. The method further comprises the step of moving the first member with respect to the second member to place the first member in contact with the first vertebral endplate and to place the second member in contact with the second vertebral endplate and the step of inserting a cutting device through a portion of the first member to cut a first formation parallel to the first vertebral endplate.

The present invention relates to artificial disc systems and methods and devices associated with implanting these disc systems into a spine. One example of an artificial disc system is the system described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 113 637 which is hereby incorporated by reference. The artificial disc systems provide predetermined bone in growth areas that allow for revising or removing the artificial disc after implantation and bony in growth. Further the artificial disc systems include structural features that improve instrument accessibility in performing such a revision. Additionally the artificial disc systems include structures for stabilizing the disc within the associated vertebrae. And the associated instruments and devices simplify the implantation of the artificial disc systems as well as providing less traumatic insertion of the systems into the disc space.

Referring to one embodiment of an artificial spinal disc system includes a first member movable relative to a second member via an articulation component . Each of first and second members include at least one bone contacting surface for placement against a portion of an adjacent vertebral bone. Each bone contacting surface may include at least one bone in growth surface of a predetermined size and shape and in a predetermined position and orientation on the respective surface . The predetermined size shape positioning and orientation of bone in growth surface allows for a calculated amount of bone growth into the disc members for secure fixation to the adjacent bone while allowing for easy removal of the disc member from the adjacent bone after bone in growth occurs if such removal is required at a later date by changing medical needs. Further the top surface of bone in growth surface may have a predetermined spacing above the remaining portion of bone contacting surface to allow for increased penetration and or compression of the adjacent vertebral bone into bone in growth surface upon implantation of artificial disc system . Additionally each member may include at least one bone in growth area indicator that identifies the location of the bone in growth surface . For instance after artificial disc system is implanted bone in growth area indicator provides a visual marker that can be seen by the naked eye such as through an incision that exposes a surface of the system or by medical diagnostic equipment such as x ray ultrasound magnetic resonance computed tomography positron emission technology and other such diagnostic techniques. Further bone in growth area indicator may further include an instrument access guide that cooperates with a medical instrument such as an osteotome used in removing artificial disc system . Instrument access guide directs the instrument to the exact position of bone in growth surface thereby avoiding unnecessary work in non bone in growth areas of bone contacting surface and without interfering with other structures that may be present on surfaces . Thus artificial disc system provides features for secure fixation to adjacent vertebral bone while allowing for easy removal of all or a portion of the system if later required by changing medical needs.

Bone in growth surface generally has a size that is substantially less than the overall size of the respective bone contacting surface . Further bone in growth surface may be positioned on respective bone contacting surface such that after implantation bone in growth surface is located proximal to cancellous bone portions rather than cortical bone portions of the adjacent vertebral bone. Such positioning for example may be at the center of member for a disc system that substantially spans the disc space or vertebral endplate. Alternatively such positioning may be off center with respect to member if the disc system only spans a portion of the disc space or vertebral end plate. Additionally bone in growth surface may be positioned at a predetermined spacing from an edge of member that is exposed after implantation of the system such as an edge that is not within the disc space between the adjacent vertebrae. Predetermined spacing allows for easier entry of an instrument such as an osteotome that is used to separate member from the vertebral bone after bony in growth has occurred. Furthermore bone in growth surface may lie in a single plane or may lie in one or more planes which may be intersecting planes if more secure fixation and bony in growth is desired. Suitable examples of bone in growth surface may include surfaces that are chemically etched machined sprayed layered fused coated or textured in any manner or with any material that allows for the growth and attachment of bone.

Bone in growth indicator may include any type of marker such as an indentation an embedded marker coatings projections etc. on any surface of member . Further instrument access guide may include any surface or combination of surfaces that work in cooperation with a surface or portion of a medical instrument used from separating member from bone. Alternatively instrument access guide may comprise a marker to indicate a position in computer and or image guided surgery.

Further referring to securing of the artificial disc system to bone may be enhanced by applying a bone growth promoting substance to a bone contacting surface of the artificial disc system. In particular bone growth promoting substance may be applied to one or more bone in growth surfaces to encourage bone to growth into this area. Suitable examples of bone growth promoting substances include bone morphogenic protein BMP LIM mineralization protein LMP demineralized bone matrix DBM mesenchymal stem cells blood platelet gel and other similar materials.

Articulation component may be a structure integral with or separable from one or both of first member and the second member . Referring to for example in one embodiment articulation component includes a joint defined by at least a partly convex or curvilinear surface such as a substantially spherical ball projecting from first member movable in at least a partly concave or curvilinear surface such as an elongated socket formed within second member . Alternatively articulation component may be an entirely separate member or combination of members such as a ball disc nucleus flexible and or elastic component etc. positionable in combination with first and second members to allow relative rotational and or translational motion between the first and second members. Furthermore first and second member and articulation member may be interconnected to form a single assembly.

Additionally artificial disc system may include at least one fin or rail member projecting out of bone contacting surface on at least one of first or second member . Fin or rail member provides surfaces positioned substantially normal to bone contacting surface that oppose translational or rotational movement of member within adjacent vertebral bone in a plane parallel to the surfaces . It should be noted however that the particular orientation of surfaces may be adjusted to resist relative motion in any desired plane or direction. Additionally fin or rail member may include a top engagement surface such as may be formed by teeth knurling texturing etc. that further resists movement of member within bone. For example for an artificial spinal disc system inserted into the disc space from the anterior side top engagement surface may resist movement of the implanted disc in the anterior direction by allowing bone to grow or be positioned in the medial lateral direction between portions of the top engagement surface. Surface may be oriented to resist relative motion between member and bone in a different direction but in the same plane as surfaces . It should be noted however that surfaces and may be oriented in a manner to resist any combination of directions of relative motion. Additionally top engagement surface as well as surface may be formed with angled or other biased surfaces that have a greater resistance to motion in one or more desired directions. For example top engagement surface may include a plurality of teeth defined by at least two surfaces where at least one surface is substantially normal to bone contacting surface and the other wall is substantially non orthogonally angled relative to bone contacting surface .

Further fin or rail member may lie along a line oriented parallel to an insertion direction where the insertion direction is a direction in which artificial spinal disc system or either individual member is inserted into position between adjacent vertebrae. It should be understood however that fin or rail member may lie along a curvilinear line and may be angled with respect to the insertion direction. Additionally fin or rail member may be of any predetermined length. For example fin or rail member may be of a length greater than or less than the overall edge to edge length of artificial spinal disc system . For instance fin or rail member may be of a length such that it is spaced apart from any edge of the disc system or one or both ends of the fin or rail member may be substantially parallel with an edge of the disc system. When an end of fin or rail member is parallel with an edge of disc system such as exposed edge then the fin or rail member may act as bone in growth indicator and or instrument access guide .

Additionally artificial spinal disc system may include tabs or other longitudinally extending members that allow the disc system to be held with an insertion instrument. For instance tabs may include one or more connector structures such as an internal wall that defines a cavity or hole that correspond with engaging features on an insertion instrument that is utilized to hold and or insert one or both members . Alternatively connector structure may include projections that extend into corresponding holes or cavities in the insertion instrument. Further tabs or extending members may prevent movement of member relative to the overlapping bone after implantation. For example for a disc system that is inserted between adjacent vertebrae from the anterior side tabs or extending members project away from the disc space and over the anterior portion of the vertebral body thereby preventing relative movement of the member in the posterior direction.

First member second member and articulation component each may be formed from any combination of one or more different biocompatible materials. Suitable materials include stainless steel cobalt chrome titanium rubber elastomer polymers etc. including all alloys and variations of these materials.

Referring to in another embodiment artificial spinal disc system may include a first member movable relative to a second member where such movement has a predetermined range of motion in at least one direction greater than the natural range of motion of the natural disc being replaced. For instance in an embodiment where articulation component comprises a convex surface interacting with a concave surface the concave surface may have a predetermined range of motion corresponding to an anterior to posterior translation greater than that of the natural range of anterior to posterior translation of the natural disc being replaced. For example for a spinal disc anterior to posterior translation typically corresponds to flexion and extension movements of the spinal motion segment which movements would typically be constrained by natural tissue including muscle tendons annulus fibrosus and or facet joints. Thus it may not be necessary to provide physical constraints within disc system that limit the movement of first member and second member and hence articulation component as the natural structure of the tissue adjacent the implanted artificial spinal disc system may naturally limit the relative motion of the disc system. It should be noted that the predetermined range of motion may be in any combination of one or more directions or planes and may complete overlap the natural range of motion be biased toward one side of the natural range of motion or be within one side but extend beyond the other side of the natural range of motion. Additionally although not required artificial spinal disc system may include a safety stop positioned outside of the natural range of motion to ultimately limit the movement of first member relative to second member . Safety stop may be formed in first member second member or in articulation component .

Referring to embodiments of a method of implanting an artificial spinal disc system includes performing pre operative planning Block removing the existing natural disc Block preparing the intervertebral space for receiving the artificial disc system Block and inserting and securing the artificial disc system Block . The action of pre operative planning may include examining the patient taking x rays or performing other diagnostic procedures to analyze the natural disc at issue analyzing and or calculating the existing or natural range of motion of the spinal motion segment and or measuring the natural disc space at issue to determine an appropriate size artificial disc system. The action of removing the natural disc may include a procedure such as a discectomy or partial discectomy or any other procedure that removes all or a portion of the natural disc nucleus pulposus. The action of preparing the intervertebral space for receiving the artificial disc system may include contouring the end plates of the adjacent vertebrae. Such contouring may include forming parallel surfaces forming concave surfaces or forming any other shape in the end plate to receive the artificial disc system. In particular as will be discussed in more detail below the action of contouring the end plates may further include machining at least one fin or rail opening to receive a corresponding at least one fin or rail member associated with the artificial disc system. The action of machining may include removing a channel of bone from the end plate using tool having a surface adapted for removing bone where the tool is capable of rotating vibrating reciprocating or otherwise acting on the end plate to remove bone. Further the action of inserting and securing the artificial disc system may include holding a single component or the entire assembled artificial disc system and moving it into the prepared intervertebral disc space until it reaches a predetermined desired position. Securing the artificial disc system may occur naturally due to the compressive forces acting across the implanted artificial disc system or may occur due to the contouring of the end plates or may occur due to supplemental fixation techniques such as applying a screw or other component to hold a component of the system to the vertebral bone or may occur as some combination of these techniques. Further securing of the artificial disc system may be further achieved by applying a bone growth promoting substance to a bone contacting surface of the artificial disc system. Suitable examples of bone growth promoting substances include bone morphogenic protein BMP LIM mineralization protein LMP demineralized bone matrix DBM mesenchymal stem cells blood platelet gel and other similar materials. It should be noted that the above method may be achieved through an open surgical site or in a minimally invasive manner such as through a tube or channel that allows from a relatively small opening in the skin and tissue of the patient compared to the open procedure.

Referring to an embodiment of a method of implanting an artificial spinal disc system in the cervical portion of the spine includes positioning the patient for surgery performing a discectomy and decompressing the disc space preparing the adjacent vertebral endplates and inserting the artificial spinal disc. Referring to the patient may be positioned such that their neck is in a neutral position corresponding to the natural lordosis of the cervical spine. After making an incision an access channel to the natural spinal disc and or adjacent vertebrae may be maintained by an opener mechanism such as one or more retractor blades or an endoscopic port or channel respective examples including a TRIMLINE retractor blade or an X TUBE endoscopic port both manufactured by Medtronic Sofamor Danek USA Memphis Tenn. . Then referring to the natural spinal disc is removed using a disc removal instrument such as a curette osteotome or any instrument specifically designed for removal of all or a portion of the natural disc. After removal of all or a portion of the natural spinal disc the disc space is decompressed such as by using the Smith Robinson decompression technique.

Referring to after removal of the natural disc referred to as a discectomy and decompression at least one contouring device may be utilized to form a predetermined contour which may generally correspond to the bone contacting surface of the artificial disc into one of both of the adjacent vertebral bodies . For example in one embodiment the vertebral end plates are machined to be flat and parallel such as by using a cylindrical burr. It should be noted however that other contouring devices such as mills cutters saws etc. and other predetermined shape forming devices may be used to remove bone from the end plates. In order to avoid subsidence of the artificial disc system into the end plates the machining process may be performed to preserve as much cortical bone as possible. Additionally referring specifically to it should be noted that a reference device such as a frame or such as markers may be used in conjunction with contouring device to control or guide the movements of the contouring device. For instance reference device may be attached to one or both adjacent vertebrae so as to provide geometric guidance to contouring device . After end plate contouring is complete then the prepared disc space may be ready for disc insertion and all external distraction may be removed.

Referring to in order to determine the proper size artificial disc to use an implant trial may be inserted determine the size of the prepared disc space . In some embodiments that desire to avoid excessive compressive forces on the artificial disc system the properly sized implant trial fits snug in the prepared disc space but does not distract the adjacent vertebrae . Additionally the fit of implant trial may be confirmed diagnostically such as with fluoroscopy. Referring to once the appropriate sized implant trial is determined the correspondingly sized rail cutter guide is selected and used to prepare one or more fin or rail channels in the endplates in correspondence with the fin or rail member on the artificial disc system.

Referring to one embodiment of a rail cutter guide includes at least one machining guide positioned on guide body and having a size to provide a reference to a bone cutting device to form a fin or rail member channel in one or both adjacent vertebrae corresponding in position and size to the fin or rail guide member on the artificial spinal disc system. In embodiments having more than one machining guide referring specifically to each machining guide may have a predetermined longitudinal spacing and or a predetermined lateral spacing with respect one or more of the other machining guides. Such predetermined spacing is advantageous for insuring formation of at least two fin or rail member channels either in one vertebral end plate or in adjacent end plates that are in alignment with the predetermined spacing of at least two or more fin or rail members on an artificial spinal disc selected to be implanted. Further rail cutter guide may include a spacer portion sized and having a thickness corresponding to a desired disc spacing such as the natural neutral disc spacing of the prepared disc space . Additionally guide body or spacer portion may include predetermined recesses sized to accommodate at least a portion of a bone removal device. Rail cutter guide may further include a permanent or removably attachable handle for manipulating the position of the guide. Referring specifically to rail cutter guide may further include an engagement structure such as a protrusion or an extension that interacts with urging mechanism such as a hammer like or moving weight type device for moving the guide into proper position. Rather than or in addition to being referenced to the prepared disc space and or the adjacent vertebrae via spacer portion rail cutter guide may include one or more reference markers so as to insure a desired positioning with respect to the adjacent vertebrae. The desired positioning for example may include a cephalad caudal positioning a lateral positioning a depth within the prepared disc space positioning and any combination thereof. For example reference marker may include a limiting structure projecting from guide body so as to limit the depth of penetration of the guide body into prepared disc space . Further one or more reference markers may be associated with any other structure having a known position relative to one or both vertebrae and or prepared disc space .

Referring back to to position the rail cutter guide relative to the adjacent vertebral bodies urging mechanism may be utilized to move the rail cutter guide into a desired position. For instance in one embodiment rail cutter guide is impacted until all limiting structures touch the anterior surface of the adjacent vertebrae . Referring to after removing urging mechanism a bone removal mechanism may be movable relative to machining guide to create fin or rail member channel . In one embodiment for example bone removal mechanism may include a drill bit attachable to either an actuation mechanism such as a power source or a manual drill bit handle. In this embodiment drill bit is inserted into one port formed within machining guide on rail cutter guide and operates to form one channel in the endplate. Referring specifically to it may be desired to secure the relative position of rail cutter guide and the first formed channel not shown in order to insure proper geometric alignment of successive channels. In such a situation a temporary fixation mechanism such as a pin or screw may be secured to rail cutter guide such as to machining guide . Then the successive channels may be formed and additional temporary fixation mechanisms may be applied. Referring specifically to after removing any temporary fixation mechanisms and rail cutter guide one or both endplates should have one or more properly positioned channels .

Referring to an artificial spinal disc system or such as the PRESTIGE Cervical Disc manufactured by Medtronic Sofamor Danek USA Memphis Tenn. may be attached onto an implant inserter . In one embodiment for example the implant inserter includes four inserter prongs only 3 are visible in attached to legs positioned within outer sheath that fit into holes within tabs . Outer sheath is advanced to apply a force across the prongs to hold the disc system or . The one or more fin or rail members are aligned with one or more channels on the endplates of the adjacent vertebrae and the disc system or is inserted into the prepared disc space . Insertion may be aided by urging mechanism and disc system or is advanced until the anteriorly positioned tabs come into contact with the anterior surface of the adjacent vertebral bodies . Disc system or may then be released by implant inserter for example by sliding back outer sheath and gently removing implant inserter . Final placement of disc system or between adjacent vertebrae may be verified using medical diagnostic equipment such as by using fluoroscopy. The surgery may be completed using standard closure procedures.

Thus the present invention includes various embodiments of artificial spinal discs having predetermined bone in growth areas and additional features to aid in the removal or revision of the implanted artificial disc. Additionally the present invention includes various embodiments of fin or guide rail channel forming mechanisms and of methods of implanting artificial discs having at least one fin or guide rail member.

Referring now to a cutting guide may be used to create tracks or holes in adjacent vertebral bodies. These tracks or holes may correspond in size and position to rails fins bone screws fasteners or other features included in an artificial disc system. The cutting guide may include an upper member and a lower member . The upper member may include a spacer portion and the lower member may include a spacer portion . The upper member may also include a cutting block and the lower member may include a cutting block . The cutting blocks may serve as penetration limiting extensions. The cutting block may include bores sized to accept an instrument not shown such as a drill bit . A predetermined spacing may separate the bores to permit formation of two tracks or holes. In this embodiment the spacing between the bores is generally constant along the length of the bores resulting in generally parallel tracks or holes. It is understood that the predetermined spacing may vary along the length of the bores to create nonparallel tracks or holes as the profile of the artificial disc may warrant. Similar bores may be located in the cutting block . The cutting guide may further include a permanent or removably attachable handle extending from the upper member and a similar handle extending from the lower member .

In an alternative embodiment slots or recesses similar to recesses may be formed in the spacer portion to accommodate the passage of at least a portion of drill bit when forming rails in the adjacent vertebral bodies. In another alternative embodiment the upper members and the lower members may include reference markers to insure a desired positioning with respect to the adjacent vertebral bodies. The desired positioning for example may include a cephalad caudal positioning a lateral positioning a depth anterior posterior within the disc space and any combination thereof.

Referring now to the upper and lower members may be movably connected to each other by a pivot mechanism . In this embodiment the pivot mechanism is a ball and socket type joint formed by a domed recess formed in the upper member and a domed cap protruding from the lower member . Tabs and may extend from the domed recess . The domed cap may include an indention sized to allow pass through of the tab . A second indention may be located opposite the indention and may be sized to allow pass through of the tab . The upper member may be connected to the lower member by aligning the tabs with the indentions and inserting the domed cap into the domed recess . After the domed cap has been inserted into the domed recess the lower member may be turned relative to the upper member to lock the cap within the recess and align the upper member with the lower member .

The spacer portions may be provided in a variety of thicknesses to accommodate the distraction and lordotic angle used for a particular patient and different thicknesses may be used for the upper and lower spacer portions. In the embodiment of the spacer portion has a thickness that is greater than a thickness of the spacer portion .

The preferences of the surgeon and or the condition of the patient may determine whether during surgery the patient s spine will be held in a more natural position with the targeted vertebral endplates generally parallel or whether the patient will be placed in lordosis with the targeted vertebral endplates angled relative to one another. When a patient is placed in lordosis the cutting guide may be used to form the tracks or holes generally parallel to the respective vertebral endplates. For instance in one embodiment as shown in the adjacent vertebral bodies may be positioned relative to each other at an anterior posterior angle which may range from approximately 0 to 10 degrees. Additionally or alternatively the vertebral bodies may be angled in a lateral direction. With the patient positioned at the desired lordotic angle the cutting guide may be inserted between adjacent vertebrae . As the cutting guide is inserted the pivoting mechanism formed by the domed cap within the domed recess may adjust to the angle . The spacer portions may be inserted until the protruding cutting blocks limit further insertion by touching the anterior surface of the vertebral bodies respectively.

The cutting guide may be manually held in position with the spacer portions firmly against the endplates of the vertebral bodies. Alternatively as shown in the embodiment of a separation device may be introduced to hold the upper member and the lower member in place. The separation device may include a through bore an angled leg and an alignment leg . The handle may be inserted through the bore and the angled leg may be positioned on a surface of the handle facing the handle . The angled leg may move along a flat surface of the handle along a groove in the handle or by any other moving connection means contemplated by one skilled in the art. The alignment leg may prevent any unwanted lateral pivoting of the upper member with respect to the lower member . The separation device may slide along the handle as far as possible until the device pushes apart the arms and correspondingly pushes the upper and lower members against the endplates of vertebral bodies respectively.

After the cutting guide is positioned the drill bit may be inserted through bore to drill a hole in the vertebral body parallel to the endplate. The drill bit may then be inserted into bore to drill a hole in the vertebral body parallel to the hole and parallel to the endplate of vertebral body . The drill bit may then be used with lower member in a similar manner to drill holes in vertebral body . It is understood that the holes may be drilled in any sequence chosen by the surgeon. It is also understood that with alternative configurations of the upper and lower members the drill bit may be used to create rails or tracks rather than holes.

Referring now to in another embodiment a cutting guide may be used to create formations such as tracks or holes in adjacent vertebral bodies. These tracks or holes may correspond in size and position to rails fins fasteners or other features found on an artificial disc system. The cutting guide may include an upper member and a lower member . The upper member may include a spacer portion and the lower member may include a spacer portion . The upper member may also include a cutting block and the lower member may include a cutting block . The cutting block may include bores not visible sized to accept an instrument such as a drill bit . A predetermined spacing may separate the bores to permit formation of two tracks or holes. Similar bores may be located in the cutting block . The cutting guide may further include a permanent or removably attachable handle extending from the upper member and a similar handle extending from the lower member .

The upper and lower members may be movably connected to each other by a pivot mechanism . In this embodiment the pivot mechanism is formed by an upper hinge component extending from the upper member coupled to a lower hinge component protruding from the lower member . The lower hinge component may include a U or J shaped latch which may be coupled to a shaft portion of the upper hinge component . A J shaped latch may allow the lower hinge component to become more easily separated from the upper hinge portion. A coil spring may be attached between the upper member and lower member and may exert a force to push apart the upper and lower members to create an angle therebetween. It is understood that the coil spring is only one example and that other types of mechanisms such as screws jacks and inflatable bodies may be used to hold the upper and lower members against the respective vertebral endplates.

Although only a few exemplary embodiments of this invention have been described in detail above those skilled in the art will readily appreciate that many modifications are possible in the exemplary embodiments without materially departing from the novel teachings and advantages of this invention. For instance all or predetermined portions of the bone contacting surfaces of the artificial disc systems may comprise bone in growth surfaces. Accordingly all such modifications and alternative are intended to be included within the scope of this invention as defined in the following claims. Those skilled in the art should also realize that such modifications and equivalent constructions or methods do not depart from the spirit and scope of the present disclosure and that they may make various changes substitutions and alterations herein without departing from the spirit and scope of the present disclosure. It is understood that all spatial references such as horizontal vertical top upper lower bottom left and right are for illustrative purposes only and can be varied within the scope of the disclosure. In the claims means plus function clauses are intended to cover the structures described herein as performing the recited function and not only structural equivalents but also equivalent structures.

