---

title: Magnetic porous particles and method of making
abstract: The invention provides porous particles that produce a predetermined optical response and that may be manipulated magnetically. A preferred particle of the invention has a porous structure that produces a predetermined optical response and magnetic material adhered to the particle. Another preferred particle is amphiphilic. The optical response provided by a particle of the invention enables particles of the invention to be used in sensing, labeling, signaling, display and many other applications. The magnetic nature of the present magnetic particles permits the particles themselves to be manipulated, e.g., vibrated, moved and re-oriented. The porous particles can also be used to control, move, and/or deliver small volumes of liquids and solids associated with the particles.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08097173&OS=08097173&RS=08097173
owner: The Regents of the University of California
number: 08097173
owner_city: Oakland
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050718
---
Applicants claim priority benefits under 35 U.S.C. 119 on the basis of Patent Application No. 60 589 171 filed Jul. 19 2004.

The invention was made with Government support under NIH Grant Number N01 CO 37117 awarded by the National Institutes of Health and under Air Force Office of Scientific Research Grant Number F49620 02 1 0288. The Government has certain rights in this invention.

A field of the invention is optoelectronics. Another exemplary field of the invention is optical structure fabrication. Another exemplary field of the invention is encoding. Additional exemplary fields of the invention include the life sciences security product marking food processing agriculture and chemical detection. Still another field of the invention is microfluidics. Yet another exemplary field of the invention is transport of liquids and solids using magnetic fields.

Porous particles constructed from electrochemically etched porous materials such as silicon have widespread application in optoelectronics chemical and biological sensors high throughput screening and drug delivery applications. These porous particles are especially advantageous because of the relative ease with which the optical properties pore size and surface chemistry can be manipulated. Moreover position width and intensity of spectral reflectivity peaks may be controlled by the current density waveform and solution composition used in the electrochemical etch thus rendering possible the preparation of films of porous particles that display any color within the visible light band with high color saturation which is a desirable feature for information displays.

A well appreciated need for labeling exists in society. Labeling is a fundamental basis for tracking and identifying. Encoding can be used as a form of labeling understood by persons or equipment as in the case of bar coding. At the microscale however labeling encoding itself becomes difficult.

Porous particles and films constructed from electrochemically etched porous materials have provided powerful methods for labeling and encoding. Porous particles and films and methods using such are disclosed in 1 U.S. Published Patent Application 20050042764 entitled Optically encoded particles to Sailor et al. published Feb. 24 2005 2 U.S. Published Patent Application 20050009374 entitled Direct patterning of silicon by photoelectrochemical etching to Gao et al. published Jan. 13 2005 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 433 811 issued Oct. 7 2008 3 U.S. Published Patent Application 20030146109 entitled Porous thin film time varying reflectivity analysis of samples to Sailor et al. published Aug. 7 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 042 570 issued May 9 2006 4 PCT Application PCT US04 043001 entitled Optically encoded particles system and high throughput screening to Sailor et al filed Dec. 21 2004 now U.S. Publication No. US 2007 0148695 A1 published Jun. 28 2007 5 PCT Application PCT US04 042997 entitled Optically encoded particles with grey scale spectra to Sailor et al filed Dec. 21 2004 now U.S. Publication No. US 2007 0051815 A1 published Mar. 8 2007 and 6 PCT Application PCT US04 26572 entitled Photonic Sensor Particles and Fabrication Methods to Sailor et al filed Aug. 13 2004 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 167 605 issued Jan. 23 2007.

The invention provides particles that produce a predetermined optical response and that may be manipulated magnetically. A preferred particle of the invention has a porous structure that produces a predetermined optical response and magnetic material adhered to the particle. Another preferred particle is amphiphilic. The optical response provided by a particle of the invention enables particles of the invention to be used in sensing labeling signaling display and many other applications. An exemplary porous surface is a photonic crystal surface. The magnetic nature of the present magnetic particles permits the particles themselves to be manipulated e.g. vibrated moved and re oriented. The particles can also be used to control move and or deliver small volumes of liquids and solids associated with the particles.

The invention provides magnetic porous particles. Particles of the invention have a porous surface and a magnetic surface. The surface has a predetermined optical response characteristic of a porosity in the material e.g. silicon or another semiconductor. An exemplary porous surface is a photonic crystal surface. The optical response provided by a particle of the invention enables particles of the invention to be used in sensing labeling signaling display and many other applications. The magnetic surface enhances the known uses for porous structures and also provides for additional uses that will be recognized by artisans with reference to the detailed description herein. Generally the magnetic nature of the present magnetic porous particles permits the particles themselves to be manipulated e.g. vibrated moved and re oriented. The magnetic porous particles can also be used to control move and or deliver small volumes of liquids and solids associated with the particles.

Magnetic porous particles of the invention can be fabricated from substrates of semiconductor or other suitable solid state materials. Preferably the substrate is a single crystal material. A silicon Si crystal is a preferred substrate. Single crystal materials are preferred materials.

Embodiments of the invention provide magnetically switchable micron sized porous particles and a method for fabrication of the same. More specifically embodiments of the invention include porous particles having magnetic nanoparticles adhered thereto.

Particles of the invention are applicable to a variety of industries including but not limited to drug discovery biological screening chemical screening biological labeling chemical labeling in vivo labeling security identification signaling displays microfluidics and product marking. Various attributes of the particles and methods of the invention enable a wide range of applications in various industries. The small size of the particles facilitates ready incorporation into various hosts e.g. products. test kits assays powders such as explosives for identification pastes liquids glass paper and any other host or system that can accept small particles. In vivo detection is enabled by biocompatible particles of the invention such as silicon particles which may then be queried for example through tissues using near infrared and infrared wavelengths that penetrate tissues.

Additionally the particles of the invention have application to optical signaling and display applications. Particles of the invention provide a switchable optical display capability. The porous surface of a particle of the invention provides a strong predetermined optical response characteristic of the porosity of the material and the magnetic surface does not. This is the basis for display or signaling. The optical response of an individual particle of the invention may be tailored to have a particular optical characteristic e.g. to provide an optical response of a certain wavelength. Thus for example under control of a magnetic field a particle or group of particles can be caused to produce an optical response of a particular color. Other particles having a different photonic structure may produce an optical response of a different color. The optical response of a particle may change in the presence of an analyte permitting analyte detection.

Embodiments of the invention enable manipulation of liquids at the microscale without necessitating the addition of ions or other impurities to the bulk liquid in order to induce transport. Liquids may also be manipulated outside of traditional microfludic structures as well as within such structures .

In a preferred embodiment magnetic porous particle of the invention superparamagnetic nanoparticles e.g. magnetite FeO can be incorporated into the porous nanostructure. Preferred embodiment separate affinity particles have a first surface having a first affinity e.g. a hydrophilic surface and a second surface having a second affinity e.g. a hydrophobic surface allowing the materials to chaperone microliter scale liquid droplets by application of an external magnetic field. The optical reflectivity spectrum response of the displays a peak that serves to identify the particle and the particle liquid interaction. Other exemplary affinities can be created by for example incorporating a specific antibody oligonucleotide or ligand to provide affinity for a specific antigen oligonucleotide or receptor.

In a preferred embodiment photonic crystals particles are made from porous Si are with amphiphilic properties. Magnetic nanoparticles of FeOcan be incorporated into the porous nanostructure. When placed in a two phase liquid such as dichloromethane water these materials will accumulate and spontaneously align at the interface. If one of the liquids exists as small droplets in the other liquid the particles can encapsulate the droplets allowing the materials to chaperone microliter scale liquid droplets by application of an external magnetic field. The optical reflectivity spectrum of the porous particle displays a peak that serves to identify the particle and the particle liquid interaction.

In a preferred magnetic porous particle fabrication method of the invention a multilayered porous dielectric mirror rugate filter is first etched into a single crystal Si substrate. The film is then hydrosilylated to generate a chemically stable hydrophobic mirror. A second rugate filter with a different periodicity is etched into the substrate immediately beneath the first rugate filter. The porous crystal film is released from the substrate. The porous crystal film is then divided into micron sized particles by ultrasonication. Magnetic particles are infused into the second filter and impart a hydrophilic character to the second layer.

A particle formed by creating a particular porosity in a material e.g. silicon is a foundation for a method of fabrication of a magnetic porous particle of the invention. The particular porosity will govern the nature of the optical response of a magnetic porous particle of the invention. Particles may be encoded with different optical structures. Different optical structures can be etched prior to the adhering of the magnetic nanoparticles. Processes for creating different optical structures through creating porosity are described for example U.S. Published Patent Application 20050042764 entitled Optically encoded particles to Sailor et al. published Feb. 24 2005 2 U.S. Published Patent Application 20050009374 entitled Direct patterning of silicon by photoelectrochemical etching to Gao et al. published Jan. 13 2005 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 433 811 issued Oct. 7 2008 3 U.S. Published Patent Application 20030146109 entitled Porous thin film time varying reflectivity analysis of samples to Sailor et al. published Aug. 7 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 042 570 issued May 9 2006 4 PCT Application PCT US04 043001 entitled Optically encoded particles system and high throughput screening to Sailor et al filed Dec. 21 2004 now U.S. Publication No. US 2007 0148695 A1 published Jun. 28 2007 5 PCT Application PCT US04 042997 entitled Optically encoded particles with grey scale spectra to Sailor et al filed Dec. 21 2004 now U.S. Publication No. US 2007 0051815 A1 published Mar. 8 2007 and 6 PCT Application PCT US04 26572 entitled Photonic Sensor Particles and Fabrication Methods to Sailor et al filed Aug. 13 2004 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 167 605 issued Jan. 23 2007.

The porosity of particles of the invention can have a complex structure that enables coding for example. With varying porosity and multiple porosities in different layers complex codes can be encoded in the porosity of a particle of the invention. Example codes realizable through control of the porosity of a particle are disclosed in U.S. Published Patent Application 20050042764 entitled Optically encoded particles to Sailor et al. published Feb. 24 2005 and PCT Application PCT US04 042997 entitled Optically encoded particles with grey scale spectra to Sailor et al. filed Dec. 21 2004 now U.S. Publication No. US 2007 0051815 A1 published Mar. 8 2007.

A preferred method of formation and a porous magnetic particle of the invention are illustrated in . A substrate e.g. silicon or another semiconductor is etched by a sinusoidal anodic etch. The etch is controlled to produce a crystal film having a porosity having a characteristic optical response. The porous film is released from the substrate . The release can be achieved for example by application of a current pulse. Magnetic nanoparticles such as Fe nanoparticles commercially available from Nanomat Inc. of North Huntingdon Pa. are adhered to one side of the porous film . Upon drying the magnetic nanoparticles adhere sufficiently to the porous film . The film is then divided for example by fracturing into small magnetic porous particles . The particles have on one side the porous film surface and on the other side the magnetic material .

The magnetic porous particles have microscopic dimensions. Preferred embodiment particles are formed from silicon which is a biocompatible material have a magnetic coating of Fe. This results in a magnetic coating on one side which exhibits an insubstantial optical response and a porous film on the other side which exhibits a strong optical response e.g. an intensely colored optical response. Other magnetic materials may also be used e.g. rare earth magnetic materials gadolinium or nickel.

The reflection of a laser beam impinging on particles of the invention can be used to quantify the rate of switching with larger switching rates in smaller particles. Substantial switching rates are possible. In an exemplary experiment switching of the particles at a rate of 175 Hz was demonstrated.

In addition to the vibration and reorientation of particles magnetic field s may also be used to move particles from one location to another such as in a fluid medium e.g. a microfluidic channel or a volume of liquid. Movement of particles by application of a magnetic field can be useful for example in optoelectronics chemical and biological sensors high throughput screening and drug delivery applications.

Magnetic porous particles may be used to bind and then release materials including liquids and solids. Thus other example applications of particles of the invention include microfluidics transport of liquids and solids using magnetic fields controlled manipulation of liquid or solid micro or nano particles delivery targeting and controlled release of therapeutic and or diagnostic reagents in a patient high throughput screening of molecules for genomics proteomics drug discovery applications and controlled manipulation of liquids containing cells proteins or other biological systems.

The formation method of has been demonstrated with experiments. The invention is not limited to the experiments but additional embodiments and inventive features will be apparent to artisans by reference to the experimental results that will now be described.

In the experiments consistent with the formation method of multilayered porous silicon films were prepared by electrochemical etch of Si wafers degenerate p type B doped 

Magnetic porous particles produced by the above process were placed on a glass plate over a wire coil electromagnet wound around an iron core. The electromagnet was powered by a EG G Princeton Applied Research 363 potentiostat operating in constant current mode with an external source waveform supplied by the sinusoidal output from a Tektronix CFG 250 function generator. The waveform supplied 400 mA to the magnet coil producing a maximum field of approx. 600 mT. To measure the flipping rate of the magnetic particles in the oscillating magnetic field the particles were illuminated with a 10 mW He Ne laser and the reflected light intensity was measured as the photocurrent from an Ealing Electro Optics Si photodiode. The photodiode signal was amplified with a Stanford Research Systems SR560 preamplifier and recorded on a Tektronix TDS 520 digitizing oscilloscope.

Optical reflectivity spectra were obtained using a tungsten light source optical microscope and an Ocean Optics S2000 silicon CCD spectrometer fitted with a fiber optic input. The light collection end of the fiber optic was positioned at the focal plane of an optical microscope allowing acquisition of spectra from a nominal spot size of 1 mm.

Photographs of ferromagnetic porous Si photonic crystal after formation revealed a green side that reflected the color characteristic of the photonic crystal while the bottom side coated with Fe nanoparticles appeared black. The particles were flipped over in the experiments by application of an oscillating magnetic field.

Scanning electron microscope SEM images were obtained using an FEI Quanta 600 instrument operating at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. An Oxford Instruments Energy Dispersive X ray Spectrometer EDS was used to obtain qualitative elemental analysis of the Si and Fe nanoparticle layers. Cross sectional scanning electron micrograph images backscattered electron image of a ferromagnetic porous Si photonic crystal produced by the above process before removal from the Si substrate showed a layer of Fe nanoparticles on top of a porous Si multilayer.

Another specific embodiment magnetic porous particle of the invention can self assemble at a hydrophobic hydrophilic interface. Such particles can effect controlled manipulation of small volumes of liquids which has application in microfluidics for many high throughput analyses and micro assays.

Experiments were conducted to demonstrate the method of . The invention is not limited to the experiments but additional embodiments and inventive features will be apparent to artisans by reference to the experimental results that will now be described.

Multilayered porous Si dielectric mirrors were prepared by electrochemical etch of a single crystal 100 oriented p type Si wafer with a resistivity between 0.08 to 0.2 mOhm cm by application of a sinusoidal current waveform oscillating between 13.3 and 39.8 mA cm. The periodicity of the waveform was 8 sec repeated for 100 cycles in a 3 1 v v aqueous 49 HF ethanol solution. Thermal hydrosilylation was accomplished by placing the porous Si sample in liquid 1 dodecene 95 Sigma Aldrich Chemicals in a Schlenk flask degassing the liquid with 3 successive freeze pump thaw cycles and then heating at 120 C. under nitrogen for two hours. A second rugate filter with a periodicity of 10 seconds was then etched into the substrate immediately beneath the first layer for the same number of repeats. The porous Si structure was then removed from the crystalline Si substrate by application of a current pulse of ca. 15 mA cmin a 1 13.5 v v aqueous 49 HF ethanol solution for ca. 1 min and the freestanding film was rinsed with ethanol and dried in an oven at 100 C.

Magnetite FeO for infusion was prepared. In a representative preparation 100 mL of a 1M aqueous NHOH solution is added over a period of ten minutes to 10 mL of a 4 1 solution of 1M FeCland 2M FeClin water. The resulting black precipitate magnetite was filtered and then re dispersed in 10 mL of 40 wt. aqueous tetrabutylammonium hydroxide. Dynamic light scattering measurements indicated that the particles were ca. 30 nm in diameter.

The magnetite particles were then adhered to trapped in the film. The freestanding film was fractured by ultrasonication in ethanol and the resulting micro particles allowed to settle. The supernatant was removed and the aqueous magnetite colloidal suspension was added. The high pH of the magnetite suspension spontaneously induces oxidation of the second porous Si layer presumably trapping the magnetite nanoparticles in an oxide matrix. After isolation from the solution with the aid of an applied magnetic field the microparticle composites are thermally oxidized to more completely trap the magnetite. Oxidation of the porous Si films was confirmed by Fourier transform infrared FTIR spectroscopy and the presence and disposition of magnetite in the porous Si film is determined by FTIR and elemental mapping of iron in a cross sectional electron microscope image using energy dispersive x ray spectroscopy. Thermal oxidation preferentially produces oxide on the more reactive hydrogen terminated porous Si layer. The oxide imparts hydrophilic character to the second mirror while the hydrosilylated side retains its hydrophobic nature allowing the particles to align at an aqueous organic liquid interface.

To collect and oxidize particles after stirring for 5 min the magnetic porous Si photonic crystal particles were isolated from solution by removal with a bar magnet. While still being held in the flask with a magnet the particles were rinsed several times with acetone to remove free magnetite nanoparticles. The isolated magnetic microparticles were then thermally oxidized in air at 100 C. for 1 2 h.

In a basic demonstration of a microfluidic application the bifunctional magnetic microparticles were used to chaperone droplets of water immersed in an organic phase between a source and a drain. The microparticles spontaneously orient at the interface of a 30 microliter water droplet with the hydrophilic side facing the aqueous phase. The interfacial adhesive forces are strong enough to allow the particles to move the droplet when a magnetic field is applied. When the droplet assembly is brought into contact with a glass capillary water is removed from the assembly by capillary action. The magnetic porous Si chaperones can then be moved to a stainless steel syringe needle and refilled with liquid completing the transport cycle.

The reflectivity spectrum from the bifunctional mirrors provides a signal that that can be used to identify the payload. The position of the spectral peaks in porous Si dielectric mirrors is a strong function of the average refractive index of the layers and shifts in the wavelength of the spectral features have been shown to provide a very sensitive transduction modality for sensing condensable liquids proteins DNA and other molecules. In example magnetic amphiphilic porous photonic crystal particles of the invention the hydrosilylated layer displays a spectral wavelength maximum of 540 nm that shifts to 579 nm when it is immersed in hexane. The opposite side of the particle displays a band at 660 nm in air that shifts to 760 nm when immersed. The porous Si photonic crystals contain enough repeat layers 100 that cross talk between opposite sides is not readily observed in the spectra.

The approximate spherical shape of the water droplet chaperone assembly leads to a strong reflection from the hydrophobic side over a large range of incident angles trace a. Upon delivery of the aqueous payload the sphere is deflated and reflection from the assembly is dramatically reduced in intensity trace b. These spectral characteristics can thus indicate the identity of the chaperones and the status of the chaperoned droplet.

The method presented here provides a general technique for manipulating small volumes of liquids without a microfluidic container. Because the magnetic porous Si particles adhere to the surface of the water drop they do not require a specific payload composition such as a high ionic strength in order to effect liquid motion. The electrochemical synthesis of porous Si photonic crystals allows the incorporation of spectral bar codes see e.g. U.S. Published Patent Application 20050042764 entitled Optically encoded particles to Sailor et al. published Feb. 24 2005 allowing the possibility of distinguishing between multiple distinct liquid drops in combinatorial assays. Since either water or an organic liquid can be encapsulated by the amphiphilic particles a wide range of inorganic or organic molecules can be manipulated for the purpose of carrying out micro reactions. Mammalian or bacterial cells can also be incorporated in this system for cell based assays. In addition a wide range of molecules can be incorporated within the porous nanostructure of the magnetic porous Si particles allowing controlled manipulation of very small amounts of chemical reagents.

While specific embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described it should be understood that other modifications substitutions and alternatives are apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. Such modifications substitutions and alternatives can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention which should be determined from the appended claims.

