---

title: Virtual tags and the process of virtual tagging
abstract: The present invention relates to a method and system for transformation of an electronic document through learning transformation rules during training from the original electronic document using visual user feedback and applying the learned transformation rules to either the original electronic document or a second electronic document having a similar structure as the original document or all future instances of the original electronic document. Accordingly, the transformed document is customized to the user's preference learned during training. Preferably, the transformed document is created in a queriable form. For example, the original electronic document can be defined any type of mark-up language or electronic document generation language, such as Hypertext mark-up language (HTML), extended mark-up language (XML), portable data file (PDF) or Microsoft® Word, and the like and the transformed document is defined in a queriable language such as (XML) views and the like. For example, a virtual page can be a customization of an instance of a Web page which can be used to transform all future instances of the original Web page. Alternatively, the virtual page is formed form a customization of an original electronic document, such as a chapter in a book, which is applied to a second electronic document having a similar structure, such as all chapters in the book.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07730395&OS=07730395&RS=07730395
owner: 
number: 07730395
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20051118
---
This application is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 750 505 filed Dec. 28 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 055 094 which claims priority on U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 173 757 filed Dec. 30 1999 hereby incorporated in its entirety by reference into this application.

The present invention relates to a system and method for establishing and implementing user defined virtual tags which can be used to mark items of an original electronic document that the user is interested in displaying and creating a customized document which can be updated from the virtual tags and extraction rules used for implementing the virtual tags.

The World Wide Web WWW is a collection of documents determined as Web pages resident on computers that are distributed over the Internet. Web pages are typically defined in Hypertext Mark up Language HTML . Multiple Web pages are sometimes linked together to form a Web site which can be a collection of Web pages directed to a particular topic or theme.

Web pages often contain a vast amount of information which is much more than a user needs. However access to data residing on individual Web pages is hindered by the fact that there is no defined structure for organizing information on a Web page. Also it is difficult to determine the Web page scheme as it is buried in underlying HTML code. A further difficulty arises in that a similar visual effect as defined by the Web page scheme can be achieved with different HTML features such as HTML tables ordered lists or HTML tagging.

Conventional proxy servers retrieve Web pages and syntactically transform them to better present their content on devices other than those intended to view those pages. U.S. Pat. No. 5 918 013 describes a method of transcoding Web documents in a network environment. A proxy server including a persistent document database which stores various attributes of all Web documents previously retained in a response to a request from the client. When a Web document is retrieved from a remote server in response to a request from the client the database is consulted and the stored information related to the requested document is used by the proxy server to transcode the document. The document is transcoded to circumvent bugs found in the Web document to size the document for display on a television set to improve transmission efficiency of the document and to reduce latency. However these proxy servers work purely by translating the page content into a more appropriate form. Accordingly the systems are device driven rather than user driven.

Style sheets are used to set a style for a Web page or multiple Web pages. Style sheets provide information separate from the content of the page they reference. Accordingly style sheets add functional display information to conventional tags physically present in a Web page.

Techniques have been described for extracting content from Web pages. U.S. Pat. No. 5 913 214 describes a system for extracting data from Web pages to be used to augment a traditional structured database. A user query is converted to a set of commands to interact with content of a Web page. A data retriever receives content from the Web page and translates the data from the data content of the Web page into a data content associated with the initial request.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 128 655 describes a method for recasting web content on a hosting site. The invention provides an automated system for replicating published web content and associated advertisements in the context of a hosting web site. At the hosting web site the invention includes the process of brokering a client browser s request for a web page analyzing the returned content and splitting it into component elements extracting the desired component elements recasting the desired elements in the look and feel of the hosting site and sending the recast content to the requesting client as a web page. Once the reformatted file is received at the client the client browser interprets the HTML in the web page presenting the content in the context of the hosting web site. The component original page is parsed into desired content elements using a filter definition. A filter designer determines items to be used in a recast page. The filter definition is used to break the content into component parts such as title area primary and secondary advertisements and the content itself. The filter definitions can be created by the filter with analysis of the HTML source code imbedded comments or delineators and through comparisons with similar documents. This method would be difficult to use with custom user modifications and on a dynamic Web page since a filter designer apart from the user is required to develop a filter for each modification of a user.

It is desirable to delimit and annotate information in a Web page by user interaction in order to allow portions of the Web pages to be identified for dynamic independent retrieval to provide a customized Web page layout.

The present invention relates to a method and system for transformation of an electronic document through learning transformation rules during training from the original electronic document using visual user feedback and applying the learned transformation rules to either the original electronic document or a second electronic document having a similar structure as the original document or all future instances of the original electronic document. Accordingly the transformed document is customized to the user s preference learned during training. Preferably the transformed document is created in a queriable form. For example the original electronic document can be defined any type of mark up language or electronic document generation language such as Hypertext mark up language HTML extended mark up language XML portable data file PDF or Microsoft Word and the like and the transformed document is defined in a queriable language such as XML views and the like.

For example a virtual page can be a customization of an instance of a Web page which can be used to transform all future instances of the original Web page. Alternatively the virtual page is formed form a customization of an original electronic document such as a chapter in a book which is applied to a second electronic document having a similar structure such as all chapters in the book.

The present invention provides a system and process of tagging portions of an electronic document by readers of the pages users rather than by content providers. The virtual tags are defined by a combination of context for example words and phrases structure of the page for example paragraphs item lists and other content defined predicates. The transformation rules are used to customize the original electronic document a second electronic document having a similar structure as the original document or all future instances of the original electronic document. Preferably the transformation rules are used to transform the original electronic document defined in a mark up language or document generating language into a queriable form. In one embodiment the user feedback is used to create a virtual tag for tagging portions of a Web page.

Virtual tags can be visualized on the original electronic document presenting the user interest distribution on different segments of the page. For example frequently accessed or referenced areas on the page can be displayed in a different color i.e. red.

Virtual tags can be determined by the user providing feedback from a graphic user interface GUI by reviewing the original electronic document. For example the electronic document can be a Web page. The feedback is used to learn or discover using machine learning techniques such as that invariant web page scheme by learning extraction rules or definitions of subobjects and relationships among them. The virtual tags and extraction rules allow users to build extended mark up language XML views of HTML pages through an entirely visual process such as click and highlight.

Virtual tags are stored along with their verbal descriptions in a virtual repository. The virtual repository maintains a count of how often each virtual tag has been used and can communicate this information back to the owner of the Web page. In this manner the Web page owner can be made aware which parts of the owned web pages are frequently requested and may decide to include that information in the Web page s tag structure. Accordingly the process provides adaptive tagging of page content which reflects the information demand. This has the advantage that the more the page owner knows about that demand structure the better he can tailor the tags on the Web page. In contrast in the conventional blind tagging which involves the content provider tagging in anticipation of individual user interest the content provider possesses no real knowledge of the user s interest. Additionally virtual tags can be viewed and used by other clients so the same process for creating virtual tags does not have to be repeated by the other clients. In this way all the users and the content providers are involved in the collaborative tagging of the web page. The process of virtual tagging can be used for XML pages wherein users may choose to tag substructures of the XML objects defined by the content provider.

Virtual active tags can be used for sending messages about pre specified changes of the tagged content to the user. In this manner the users can monitor selected areas of the source pages without any additional effort on the part of the content provider. A content provider may set up a virtual active tag to provide messages to the page owner following user interest. Virtual active tags also allow tracking and monitoring of arbitrarily specific objects and data items which occur on the source web page without any additional effort necessary on the part of the owner of the source web page.

Virtual tags can include expiration clauses. The expiration clauses monitor source page changes that may affect the semantic correctness of the virtual tag. For example due to the structural changes of a source web page a virtual tag may no longer tag the content that corresponds to its semantic description. An expiration clause related to this warning condition may result in the review of the virtual tag definition by the user.

Virtual tagging can be used to enable small devices such as PDAs small screen phones and phones with voice only input output to access information which has already been created on the Web for users equipped with general purpose graphic terminals. Virtual tagging is a scalable solution on the otherwise hopeless problem of having the content provider tag information on his web site in anticipation of any possible use of it on any device or any possible user interest. Virtual tags free the web page owner from any awareness of the devices that might access his page. Virtual tagging also allows the gathering of micro statistics about user interest in page components. This can lead possibly to more focused advertising banners associated with virtual tags rather than with the entire page.

The method of the present invention has advantages over conventional decoding techniques since it is user driven rather than device driven. The present invention provides semantical extraction of pieces such as headlines bodies of text stock quotes and construction of user defined complex objects from these pieces. In an implementation of the method Web page attributes are defined which allow the learning of extraction rules and discovering associations between different portions on a Web page. A user can use the learning techniques and build XML views on any Web page and have the determined extract rules work for all future instances of the Web page provided that it does not radically change its structure. Accordingly the transformation rules are generated during training by the user and the generated transformation rules can be later applied without further input from the user in that the user does not have to even be present when the transformation rules are applied.

For a better understanding of the present invention reference may be made to the accompanying drawings.

Reference will now be made in greater detail to a preferred embodiment of the invention an example of which is illustrated in the accompanying drawings. Wherever possible the same reference numerals will be used throughout the drawings and the description to refer to the same or like parts.

In block created virtual tags and transformation rules are stored in a virtual repository as a virtual tag object. A virtual tag object is used to embody a virtual tag and the procedural aspects and other information supporting the virtual tags implementation such as the transformation rules. A virtual page is created by applying the transformation rules to the original electronic document or a second electronic document having a similar structure as the original document or all future instances of the original electronic document. The virtual page can also be stored in the virtual repository. The stored virtual tag objects are retrieved from the virtual repository in block . In block the retrieved virtual tag objects are used to create a virtual page.

Alternatively the transformation rules determined in block can be directly applied in block to the original electronic document a second electronic document having a similar structure as the original document or all future instances of the original electronic document without implementing storage and retrieval blocks and .

Blocks and comprise a training aspect of method in which a user provides visual feedback by interacting with an original electronic document for example a current version of a Web page denoted as the original Web page to generate virtual tags and transformation rules. The training aspect is determined once for the original electronic document unless there are substantial structural changes made to the original electronic document. Thereafter blocks and are implemented in a processing aspect of method in which a user applies the transformation rules to the original electronic document a second electronic document having a similar structure as the original document or all future instances of the original electronic document. For example the transformation rules can be applied to a current version of the original Web page. It will be appreciated that the current version of the original Web page is accessed after the training aspect. The current version of the original Web page can be the same or different than the original Web page.

Preferably the transformation rules are determined from attributes of the original electronic document that have stability such that the formed transformation rules have stability. The stability of the transformation rules allows the transformation rules formed during training consistently provide the desired result when the transformation rules to be applied to the original electronic document a second electronic document having a similar structure as the original document or all future instances of the original electronic document without using additional training.

A graphical user interface is used at user system to visually interact with electronic document to receive user interaction and construct user feedback. Graphical user interface can interact with browser to view electronic document as a Web page.

Processing module uses user feedback for creating transformation rules and virtual tags for tagging Web pages . Electronic documents as Web pages that are virtually tagged can be addressed by for example universal resource locators URL s URLs obtained through CGI scripts running of a web server i.e. results from searches or from submissions where the CGI query is a part of the URL and indirect links that are followed selectively based on user defined parameters. Graphical user interface allows the user to visually point to areas of the original electronic document such as Web page with conventional input devices such as a mouse and processing module defines virtual tags contextually by using learning features which reflect the page structure as well as the features dependent on the semantics of the page content. Graphical user interface can include a proxy to monitor user system actions and learn from the access method how the user accessed the electronic document. For example if user system is accessing a Web page the proxy can determine which links the user used to access the Web page.

Transformation rules are generated by processing module using user feedback from graphical user interface and learning techniques. Transformation rules are used to implement virtual tags . Transformation rules are expressed in a language that clearly identifies how to process virtual tags in order to extract information or transform information of the original electronic document that is tagged and to define extraction of information or transformation of information for subsequent versions of the original electronic document. Virtual pages are generated from transformation rules .

Virtual tag objects are generated by system as incarnations of virtual tags and transformation rules . Virtual tag objects embody the procedural aspect of virtual tags as defined by transformation rules as well as any other information supporting the implementation of virtual tags . Virtual tags transformation rules and virtual pages are stored in virtual repository . Virtual repository can be located on user system . Alternatively virtual repository can be located remotely of user system and networked to user system and possibly other user systems. Virtual repository is used for storage retrieval caching monitoring analysis and enforcement of virtual tags transformation rules and virtual pages and the information they delimit. Graphical user interface also allows users such as clients or servers to view micro statistics derived from the information system stored in virtual repository .

User system and content provider can comprise any computer or component connected or connectable in any known or later developed manner to a computer network such as the Internet. User system and content provider can be a personal computer such as an IBM compatible machine Dell running any Windows 2000 or the like operating system. Of course the invention may be run on a variety of computers or collection of computers under a number of different operating systems. The computers on which the client software and the hosting and content provider Web site reside could be for example a personal computer a mini computer mainframe computer or a hand held computer. Although the specific choice of computer is limited only by processor speed and disk storage requirements. User system and content provider can comprise devices such as a keyboard a mouse a display processor memory management and memory.

The method and system of the present invention are previously described in the context of an electronic document or Web page it will be appreciated that the method can be applied to a plurality of Web pages residing at a Web site or a plurality of Web sites or any form of document comprising any of the following text images or graphics.

The path description space assigns attributes to the path separating two Web page elements. A suitable feature set for path description space is described in Table 2.

The PDCM feature sets described above in Tables 1 and 2 relate to Web page defined in HTML. It will be appreciated that a PDCM feature set could be determined for alternative mark up languages including without limitation SGML Standardized Generalized Mark up Language dynamic HTML XML Extended Mark up Language PDF Portable document format and Microsoft Word.

In block one or more document elements for inclusion or exclusion in a virtual page are selected by a user using a graphical user interface GUI interaction with a visual presentation of the original electronic document. For example the visual presentation of the original electronic document can include a visual display of an original Web page and highlighting of respective portions of the Web page as a cursor is moved within the original Web page by a mouse. The document elements can be selected by clicking on the respective highlighted portions. In block the associated features of selected document elements are identified with features of the PDCM feature set. The associated features of the selected document elements are also identified based on the user intent to be included or excluded in the virtual page.

In block the one or more identified features for each document element are collected into a set. Preferably one set of identified features is identified for one document element. For example the identified document elements can be represented as a vector of features from the feature set of the PDCM element description space and the feature set from the PDCM path feature space. A pool of document elements is determined as a sum of all the sets of identified features in block . The pool can also include the identified user s intent to include or exclude the document element in the virtual page. In block a classification algorithm is applied to the pool of document elements to classify the one or more document elements based on their sets of identified features. The results of the classification algorithm yields one or more transformation rules. The set of features identified by the virtual tag and the related transformation rules constitutes the virtual tag object. Accordingly the classification algorithm classifies the document elements based on their feature sets.

In block the classified one or more document elements are indicated to the user in the visual presentation of the original Web page. Approval of the indicated classified document elements by the user is determined in block . If the user approves the classification of the document elements the one or more virtual tags and transformation rules are established in block . If the user does not approve the classification of document elements blocks are repeated.

In block the structural relationships of which the user is interested are selected from a visual presentation of the original Web page. For example the visual presentation is interacted with a GUI. The GUI can include a point and click interface to enable the user to select one or more structural objects from the original Web page document. In block one or more first virtual tags are determined using the visual presentation of the original Web page as described above in method . In block one or more second virtual tags are determined from information derived from the visual presentation of the original Web page and the selected structural objects. The one or more second virtual tags are associated with the tree in block . In block learning techniques are applied to the second virtual tags with structural objects determined in block . In block one or more transformation rules are determined based upon the relationships learned in block and block .

As an example if the original document is organized as a table T a tree T is defined as a tree built from table T . T is defined as a root of table T . Table T can be a nested table such that if a table is a cell in a table than there is a directed edge from the table to the cell. In block a leaf table L of tree T is selected. In block a plurality of ordering schemes are determined for the retrieved virtual tags for creating a virtual page. A representative ordering of a table is shown in table 3.

An example of an ordering scheme for table 3 is a document ordering scheme in which the virtual tags are ordered left to right and top to bottom as shown in table 4.

A second example of an ordering scheme for table 3 is a transposed ordering scheme as shown in table 5.

In block virtual tag objects are matched to each of the determined ordering schemes. An ordering scheme is selected for a leaf in block . For example the ordering scheme can be selected by letting c o be the number of instances in o which are out of order and selecting the ordering as having the largest c o . In the previous example the c o of table 4 is zero because there are no virtual tags out of document order and the c o of table 5 is six 6 because there are six virtual tag instances that are out of document order. In this example c o is determined as six because HEADING2 is preceded by BODY1 HEADING3 is preceded by BODY1 and BODY2 HEADING4 is preceded by BODY1 BODY2 and BODY3.

In block a parent leaf of table L is replaced with the selected ordering. Accordingly tree T has been reduced by one table L. In block a determination is made as to whether the next leaf is a tree root. If the next leaf is not a tree root blocks are repeated. If the next leaf is a tree root tree T is replaced with the final determined ordering. An outline of the final determined ordering is determined and is used to form a virtual page. In the outline the first ordered tag is the topmost outline item and subsequent tags are subordinate.

In block a determination is made as to if the relative path definition has been determined for all virtual tag objects. If the relative path definition has been determined for all virtual tag objects a virtual page is created from the retrieved virtual tag objects and relative path definition in block . If the relative path definition has not been determined for all virtual tag objects blocks are repeated.

A process of editing dynamic documents with a cut and paste command is depicted in . A dynamic document is a document which changes over time. In block a virtual tag is determined for a portion of an original electronic document which is intended to be cut from the original electronic document and pasted to a different location. A virtual tag is determined for a portion of the original electronic document which is intended to be pasted in block . For example blocks and can be implemented using the visual presentation of an original Web page and identifying the document elements using features of the PDCM feature set as described above. A transformation rule is determined with learning techniques to identify the location of the cut and the location to paste the cut out portion in block . In block the transformation rules and virtual objects are used for determining a cut and paste operation. For example the cut and paste operations can be used in all future versions of the original Web page. In alternate embodiments the document can be a hyperlinked document which comprises indirect links. The indirect link can be cut and pasted by virtually tagging the link and determining transformation rules to define the indirect link.

In another alternate embodiment a process of editing dynamic documents by reformatting of font features such as font size color and the like is shown in . In block a virtual tag is determined for a portion of the original electronic document to be reformatted. A transformation rule is determined with learning techniques to identify the location to reformat in block . In block the transformation rule is applied to the virtual tag object to determine presentation of reformatting of the original electronic document.

In an alternate method for creating virtual tags is described which is referred to as method . In block all elements of an electronic document such as a Web page are categorized as a plurality of OLAP cubes. The user selects document elements using a GUI with the visual presentation of the original electronic document. In block the selected document elements are assigned to the OLAP cubes. Preferably the document elements are assigned to the OLAP cubes such that the document elements belong to the same OLAP cube if they have the same values of selected features. For example if two document elements have the same font and the same size the two document elements are assigned to the same OLAP cube. For example the document elements can be defined in the PDCM element feature space and or the PDCM path feature space.

In block the OLAP cubes can be browsed using conventional roll up and roll down operations as described in Online Analytical Processing OLAP . A roll down operation splits an OLAP cube into smaller OLAP cubes by adding an additional feature thereby further identifying the document element. A roll up operation expands an OLAP cube by dropping one or more features from the OLAP cube definition. One or more virtual tags can be represented by the established OLAP cubes.

Method provides transformation rules which can be determined once during training with visual feedback from the user and can be used subsequently with any dynamic electronic document that has not substantially changed from the original electronic document without needing additional visual feedback from the user. illustrates a method for determining if the document scheme of the recent version of the electronic document is substantially the same as the original version of the electronic document referred to as method . In block a tree representation of an original electronic document is built. The tree representation defines the document scheme for the original electronic document down to the smallest individual element such as words. For example the tree representation can be performed automatically for a Web page by parsing HTML source code.

A document scheme is determined by intersecting the tree representation of the original electronic document with alternate versions of the original electronic document in block . For example the original electronic document can be a Web page or a chapter from a book. The intersection can be defined as the largest subtree which is common to all versions. Each of the versions can be the same or different as the original version. The document scheme can be determined during the training aspect of method described above. The document scheme is defined when the intersection no longer changes.

In block a determination is made if the current version of the original document has a document scheme which is substantially similar to the document scheme determined in block such as being within a threshold value. If the document scheme of the current electronic document is substantially similar to the previously determined document scheme block is performed to create a virtual page from retrieved virtual tag objects and the current version of the original electronic document. If the document scheme of the current electronic document is not substantially similar to the previously determined document scheme previously defined virtual tags and transformation rules are marked as expired in block . The previously defined virtual tags and transformation rules are revised to be used with the current document scheme in block . In block a virtual page is created from the current version of the document and the revised virtual tags and revised transformation rules. In an embodiment of the present invention the marking of the expiration clause of the virtual tag can be checked before generating a virtual page in block of .

As described above virtual repositories can store virtual tags and virtual pages for more than one user. In a method is described for learning the types of virtual tags which are stored in the virtual tag repository and creating virtual links which is referred to as method . In block the virtual tag repository is monitored to determine consecutive instances of a virtual tag. A type of the virtual tag is determined for virtual tags having consecutive instances in block . The type can be determined by categorizing the virtual tag with characteristics. Suitable characteristics include character heights such as average and variance numerical alpha numeric presence of distinct characters such as in a sports score.

In block virtual tags having similar definitions are matched to form a virtual link in the virtual tag repository. The virtual link is useful for performing a query across different virtual pages. In application of method the determined definition of the virtual tag can be used by a first user to access a specified virtual tag which was previously created by the first user or a second user. The predefined virtual tag can be combined with virtual tags created by the user to define the virtual page. Similarly virtual linking determined in block can be combined with virtual tags created by the user to define the virtual page. In block a user can use the information on monitored virtual tags which were previously created by users to create new virtual tags transformation rules and virtual pages.

Transformation rules determined during the application of method can be parameterized in order to apply a generated transformation rule to a family of pages having the same document structure. The family of pages are linked with indirect addressing or are parameterized by name. Accordingly if a transformation rule is determined for a first page and a linked second page has a similar structure to the first page the transformation rule determined for the first page can be used as the transformation rule for the second page. For example each stock may have a different page describing its performance and data about the company such stock pages can be accessed either by filling the box with the stock s name which is parameterized access through a box or through a symbolic link like Stock of the day which can lead to different stock every day. The pages are homogeneous in terms of structure and the same transformation rules can be used to for example extract the stock s quote.

In summary virtual tags are indirect physical tags for providing the ability to tag existing electronic document elements such as table cells elements of ordered and unordered lists paragraphs titles subtitles etc. The virtual tag is a context dependent tag for providing the ability to tag changing content based on the patterns that precede and follow the content on an electronic document such as a Web page for example a virtual tag may delimit all entries of a dated list up to a certain date when such data is present and inclusive tags for providing the ability to tag different structures that contain a given pattern such as a word or phrase for example a virtual tag may delimit a paragraph based on the existence of words within it.

It must also be made clear that while some of the description of this invention is directed toward it application to Web based information it is also applicable to other forms of information available through other Internet technologies.

It is understood that the above described embodiments are illustrative of only a few of the many possible specific embodiments which can represent applications of the principles of the invention. Numerous and varied other arrangements can be readily derived in accordance with these principles by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

