---

title: Method and apparatus for providing trend information from network devices
abstract: A method of providing performance trend information from a device in a packet-switched network to a network management station comprises maintaining in the device one or more state variables that store values associated with data processing functions of the device; storing in the device a trend indicator value and a trend tendency value, both associated with a particular state variable among the state variables; periodically sampling the particular state variable to obtain one or more sampled values; determining and updating the trend indicator value with a direction of change in the sampled values of the particular state variable over a particular time; determining and updating the trend tendency value with a rate of change in the one or more sampled values of the particular state variable over the particular time; and sending the trend indicator value and the trend tendency value to the network management station.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07562140&OS=07562140&RS=07562140
owner: Cisco Technology, Inc.
number: 07562140
owner_city: San Jose
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051115
---
The present invention generally relates to management of computer network infrastructure devices such as routers and switches. The invention relates more specifically to techniques for determining values of state variables that are maintained in the network devices.

The approaches described in this section could be pursued but are not necessarily approaches that have been previously conceived or pursued. Therefore unless otherwise indicated herein the approaches described in this section are not prior art to the claims in this application and are not admitted to be prior art by inclusion in this section.

Computer network infrastructure devices such as routers and switches store values for many types of state variables as part of normal operation. The state variables may include numerous types of counters such as packet loss counters. Network administrators typically examine discrete values of the state variables at a particular point in time also termed obtaining a snapshot of a state variable value when a device is experiencing problems and when the current performance status of the device is reviewed.

However such a snapshot may not provide a complete picture of performance issues associated with the device. Specifically a snapshot value does not convey the trend and the tendency of a particular state variable that is is the value of the state variable getting better or getting worse Is the trend accelerating or decelerating Answers to these questions are important to assess a proper course of action.

Determining a trend and a tendency for a state variable requires observation of the device and the state variable over time. Thus one approach to assess a trend and a tendency of a state variable is for a management station or network administrator to repeatedly poll the device to request a different snapshot of the state variable at successive times. However such a repetitive polling of counters and state variables imposes a large strain on the performance of management applications uses excessive processing resources of managed devices does not scale well in networks that have thousands of devices and introduces a dependency on expensive management applications to determine trend and tendency values.

Further devices often do not store historical values for the state variables therefore the needed information may be unavailable when a snapshot is taken. Even if historical information were present in a device determination of trends based on the historical information would require additional computation power and analysis logic in management applications.

Based on the foregoing there is a clear need for a way to obtain trend and tendency information for state variables in network devices without incurring the overhead of continuous monitoring or repetitive polling.

Some management information bases MIBs define notifications that can be emitted in case certain events are occurring including events related to performance variations. An example is the Remote Network MONitoring RMON MIB in which setting a notification variable causes the system to deliver notifications about changes in RMON values. The use of such notifications requires the presence of a powerful management application integrating diagnosis and event processing. Coverage of those notifications is generally incomplete. Furthermore notifications do not address the problem of providing information on demand at arbitrary points in time.

Certain management applications provide trending over past statistical data but obtaining such trending requires data to be collected from the application over some period of time and to be computed by the application not the device. Further a trend indication of an alarm state may be communicated through an alarm e.g. an alarm may include a state value of severity major deteriorating after a previous severity had been minor . However such alarm information refers to alarm state not to a general statistical counter and is not something that can be retrieved on demand.

The NetFlow application that is integrated into Cisco IOS Software from Cisco Systems Inc. San Jose Calif. maintains a statistics database on the device including certain historical data and provides summation functions. However the NetFlow service can report historical data only on flow data available through NetFlow not any state variable represented by any MIB in a device. Further NetFlow cannot deliver trend and tendency data for a particular state variable to an application on demand instead applications are continuously exposed to a flow of data from the device. The summary functions of NetFlow which aggregate data from multiple flows are different from trend and tendency functions which mathematically convey the first and second deviation of the function of the state variable over time x axis time y axis value of the state .

Other network device features such as RMON and PDM PIX offer a capability to collect and maintain certain statistics on a device for instance the snapshot of certain statistical parameters at certain time intervals but not trend and tendency information. For example RMON provides a History Control Group that allows values representing a history of various network media to be kept on an RMON agent on a network device however there is no computation of trend or tendency. RMON provides a User History feature that allows values representing history to be stored on the device there is no computation of trend or tendency.

The Cisco PIX Firewall allows certain statistics values to be collected and maintained including interface statistics feature statistics failover statistics connection performance statistics DHCP statistics etc. and displayed as graphs in PDM an application hosted outside the device. A user or management application can determine a trend or tendency only through further manipulation of the information and only outside the device the firewall or device do not internally compute and cannot deliver trend and tendency immediately upon demand.

A method and apparatus for providing trend information from network devices are described. In the following description for the purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the present invention. It will be apparent however to one skilled in the art that the present invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known structures and devices are shown in block diagram form in order to avoid unnecessarily obscuring the present invention.

The needs identified in the foregoing Background and other needs and objects that will become apparent for the following description are achieved in the present invention which comprises in one aspect a method for providing performance trend information from a device in a packet switched network to a network management station comprises maintaining in the device one or more state variables that store values associated with data processing functions of the device storing in the device a trend indicator value and a trend tendency value both associated with a particular state variable among the state variables periodically sampling the particular state variable to obtain one or more sampled values determining and updating the trend indicator value with a direction of change in the sampled values of the particular state variable over a particular time determining and updating the trend tendency value with a rate of change in the one or more sampled values of the particular state variable over the particular time and sending the trend indicator value and the trend tendency value to the network management station.

According to one feature of this aspect the method further comprises receiving first information from the network management station that specifies the particular state variable and creating and storing the trend indicator value and the trend tendency value associated with the particular state variable identified in the first information only in response to receiving the first information.

In another feature the trend indicator value and the trend tendency value are sent to the network management station in response to receiving a request from the network management station. In another feature the particular time is any time in a range of about one millisecond to about one year.

In a further feature the method comprises receiving first information from the network management station that specifies the particular state variable and the particular time selecting a sampling interval that is less than and based on the particular time and performing the periodic sampling by repeatedly sampling the particular state variable at the sampling interval during the particular time and storing a plurality of sampled values of the particular state variable in a circular buffer. In a related feature the sampling interval is selected as sufficiently small to avoid missing spikes in values of the particular state variable.

In still another feature the trend indicator value is determined based upon whether a difference in two or more values of the particular state variable in the particular time exceeds a specified threshold. In yet another feature the trend tendency value is determined based upon a rate of the change in the sampled values.

In another feature the method further comprises receiving first information from the network management station that specifies any one or more of a sampling time interval a number of samples required to establish a trend a type value specifying whether the state variable represents a counter or a gauge and a threshold value required to establish a trend.

In other aspects the invention encompasses a computer apparatus and a computer readable medium configured to carry out the foregoing steps. For example a router or switch for a packet switched network configured to perform the functional steps described herein are examples of apparatus that the invention encompasses.

According to one embodiment a network device includes functional logic that implements a trend indication management function. For example a router or a switch in a packet switched network host one or more computer programs or other software elements that implement the trend management function as described herein the software elements may comprise applications or agents of an operating system that the devices host or may be integrated into the operating system. The trend management function maintains trend information for a configurable set of counters gauges or other state variables at the device. The trend management function allows users to retrieve on demand the trend and the tendency of the trend for a particular state variable that the device manages. In this description the term user broadly includes management applications or human users. In this approach an application can retrieve trend and tendency information when it is needed and only then and without repetitive polling or computation at the application.

To illustrate the foregoing approach is a flow diagram that illustrates a high level overview of one embodiment of a method for providing trend information from a network device and is a graph illustrating a change in a state variable value over time. Referring first to in step state variables that store values for data processing functions are created and maintained in a network device. For example an operating system of a network device may create and manage various counters and gauges that track performance of functions or features of the device such as packet loss threshold violations ports disabled etc.

In step in the network device a trend indicator value associated with a particular state variable is created and stored. Step may involve configuration of the trend indicator value in response to user input or a management application request that specifies the state variable. Approaches for configuring trend indicator values are described further below.

In step in the network device a trend tendency value associated with the particular state variable is created and stored. Step may involve configuration of the trend tendency value in response to user input or a management application request that specifies the state variable. Approaches for configuring trend indicator values are described further below.

In step the particular state variable is periodically sampled to result in obtaining sampled values. The sampled values may be stored in any appropriate storage within the network device such as in main memory in any appropriate data structure that enables retaining a set of sampled values.

In step a trend indicator value is determined and updated based on the sampled values. The trend indicator value represents a direction of change in the sampled values over a particular period of time. In step a trend tendency value is determined and updated. The trend tendency value represents a rate of change in the sampled values over the particular time. Thus by analogy a tendency value indicates whether the trend is accelerating or decelerating. In step the trend indicator value and trend tendency value are sent from the host device to a network management station.

The approaches of are performed in a network device. In this context network device broadly refers to any data processing device or software system including any managed network infrastructure elements such as a router or switch a computing device configured as a network end station such as a workstation server or printer and software elements that manage state variables internally.

In one embodiment the trend management function provides output indicating whether a values of a particular state variable have been rising or falling over time and whether the rise or fall has been strong or weak. In an embodiment trend and tendency functions provided within the trend management function mathematically convey the first and second deviation of the function of the state variable over time.

Referring now to an example graph of a state variable includes a curved line representing values of a state variable indicating a packet loss count over a period of time for a particular interface of a network device such as a router. Time is indicated in the X axis and ranging from the time 09 05 15 am to 09 05 30 am in 5 second intervals. The Y axis represents the number of packets counted as lost. At a first time point 09 05 15 the packet loss count is about 4 at time 09 05 20 the packet loss count is about 10 at time 09 05 25 the packet loss count is about 16 and at time 09 05 30 the packet loss count is about 55. Thus the trend of the packet loss counter state variable may be termed as increasing because the number of lost packets is increasing over time and the tendency of the state variable may be termed as worsening because the line representing the state variable is concave and more packets are being lost at later time intervals.

In one embodiment the trend management function is configured to deliver shorter term trends over time spans ranging from few seconds to few minutes which are useful in diagnosing and troubleshooting a network. In another embodiment the trend management function is configured to deliver longer term trends over time spans ranging for hours which are useful in capacity planning.

In an embodiment the trend management function provides the following operations Set or delete a trend monitor for a state variable comprising a counter or gauge in response to a configuration request provide trend and trend tendency values for the state variable from the function hosted on the device to a requesting management application or user in response to a request and optionally provide automatic notification of trend changes for the state variable in response to a configuration request.

In various embodiments a human user may issue the configuration requests to the trend management function using a command line interface of the network device that is coupled to the trend management function or an application may issue the configuration requests through an API that the trend management function exposes to applications or SNMP GET or SET operations may accomplish configuration of the trend management function and retrieval of data.

In one embodiment the trend management function is coupled with alerting functions to notify a user if a change in trend is occurring for example if a trend is reversing.

In one implementation the trend management function periodically samples one or more state variables that are to be monitored for their trend in certain time intervals. The trend management function internally maintains state values sufficient for use in computing trend and tendency. For example the trend management function creates stores and maintains a plurality of values of a state variable that have been sampled at a plurality of discrete points in time that immediately precede the current point in time. The values can be stored for example in a circular buffer with the newest sample overriding the oldest sample.

In one embodiment sampling interval is selected to be sufficiently small to avoid missing spikes in the values of the state variable. Enough samples are maintained to be able to distinguish a temporary aberration from a trend. In an embodiment the method takes into account a set of the most recent samples that are sufficient to indicate a trend generally at least three samples and possibly more. Alternatively the sampling interval is selected to miss spikes. Because the user is interested in a trend and tendency a spike can be considered an aberration so if a spike is missed it is not detrimental to the value of the trend indication function.

The particular state variables that are monitored for their trends are user configurable. Requiring a user to configure one or more state variables for monitoring rather than computing and maintaining trend and tendency information for all state variables of a device reduces the performance impact of the trend management function on the device.

In one view values of a state variable constitute a function that can be plotted as a curve over time. In this view a trend value as computed by the trend management function reflects the first deviation of the curve indicating whether the curve is increasing or decreasing and the tendency value represents the second deviation of the function indicating whether the curve is concave or convex.

Accordingly embodiments provide a method and apparatus that can provide information on trend and tendency for a configurable set of parameters that indicate state for a device and that may change over time. The embodiments allow users and management applications to retrieve a reading on the trend and tendencies over time as part of information retrieved from the device. Various embodiments are usable for example in embedded management instrumentation for any network infrastructure device including routers and switches that host an internetworking operating system SNMP agents etc.

Various embodiments offer numerous technical benefits. For example embodiments enable devices to offer a meaningful reading of health data when management applications request a snapshot of device information. Trends as well as tendencies can be recognized without requiring additional application support in response to a request to the device to deliver trend and tendency information. The ability to notify about changing trends and tendencies allows users to spot impending problems early and manage a network actively. Embodiments provide improved scale and performance characteristics when compared with approaches that require an application to perform repetitive polling.

This section describes further details about how trend and tendency values can be computed and how the trend indication management function can be exposed over a management interface in various embodiments. While this section provides more specific details about various embodiments the details herein merely provide examples are not essential and are not intended to limit the scope of all embodiments.

In various embodiments the trend indication management function computes a trend value and a tendency value in any of several ways.

In one embodiment for a state variable comprising a gauge a trend is established if from the current time to the first time interval in the sample the difference in values of the state variable exceeds a configurable threshold value. In this embodiment in addition to qualify as a trend a configurable majority of differences between adjacent data points in the sample point need to have the same direction. For example a trend is indicated if 60 of the differences between successive sampled values all are increasing or if 60 are decreasing. The value of 60 as a threshold may be changed through a user configuration operation.

In an alternative embodiment a trend is indicated if the value of a state variable is greater than a specified portion of an absolute value of the state variable. For example a trend may be indicated for a gauge if the value of the gauge exceeds 2 of the gauge s absolute value or minimum value.

In various embodiments a trend is categorized using designations such as improving or falling deteriorating or rising and stable . In other embodiments the trend is further refined as slightly moderately or strongly rising or falling depending on the rate of the observed change. Threshold values that determine whether a trend is categorized as slightly or strongly changing may be modified using a user configuration operation.

In another alternative designations such as unstable falling and unstable rising indicate that there a significant delta exists between the first and current time intervals in the sample but that the data points in between do not point in the same direction. Thus with such designations the second criterion specified above that a configurable majority of differences between adjacent data points in the sample point need to have the same direction is not satisfied. Accordingly there is no clear stable trend based on the above criteria. Such a condition may occur when values of a state variable are oscillating for example.

To determine a tendency value in one embodiment the trend indication management function can be determined by maintaining numeric values of the last several trend values stored as the difference between the first and the last sample of their respective time period and computing a trend of such values. Thus the tendency value may reflect a trend of the trend .

To illustrate a tendency value assume the following sequence of state values is observed at points in time t t and t 5 7 10. The trend is increasing because a positive difference exists between t t and t. The tendency is accelerating because the difference at t and t is 3 which is greater than the difference between t and t which is 2. As a further example assume that values at t t and t are 2 10 and 15. The tendency is decelerating because t t 5 is less than t t 8 even although absolute values are larger.

For a state variable comprising a counter the trend value and the tendency value are calculated in an analogous manner. In the case of a counter the relative increase of the state variable value is analyzed in comparison to a previous value of the same state variable. In effect the trend value is the second deviation and the tendency is the third deviation of a function of the counter values over time.

Trend indication management logic comprises one or more computer programs or other software elements that implement the functions of . In one embodiment trend management logic may form part of statistics management information bases MIBs and supporting logic in Cisco IOS Software. Further trend indication management logic may be coupled to an embedded event manager that may receive output trend values and tendency values package the values in event messages and publish the event messages to subscribing applications or services within or outside device .

The trend indication management logic is coupled to a trend indication MIB within device and the MIB can access one or more state variables A B N and one or more trend profiles A B. For purposes of illustrating a clear example shows three 3 state variables and two 2 trend profiles however practical implementations may use any number of state variables and trend profiles.

In an embodiment MIB comprises a table that associates identifiers of state variables with trend profiles and with corresponding trend values and tendency values. Alternatively MIB comprises a table that associates identifiers of state variables with a plurality of configuration parameters that determine how the trend values and tendency values are computed and also associates the identifiers with the trend values and tendency values. An example of MIB is shown in and described further below.

The state variables A B N are values that the operating system or its applications create and store in the ordinary course of operation for tracking performance of one or more functions or features of the operating system or the applications.

Each of the trend profiles A B is a set of configured values that determine how trend indication management logic computes and reports a trend value and tendency value for one or more state variables. As further described below trend indication MIB is configured to associate one or more state variables A B N with a particular trend profile A B. For example in MIB state variable A could be associated with trend profile A and state variable N could be associated with trend profile B. As a result trend indication management logic would determine and report a trend value and tendency value for state variable A in a different manner than for state variable N.

A network management application is coupled to or can access trend indication management logic . Application may comprise any system of software hardware or a combination that typically performs any of the FCAPS functions of network management and can access trend indication management logic by calling methods or functions of an application programming interface API that the trend indication management logic provides. Additionally or alternatively a console may be coupled to device through a console interface to enable a user to enter command line interface commands or to perform other configuration operations that configure or affect operation of trend indication management logic MIB and trend profiles A B. Additionally or alternatively an embedded event manager may be coupled to trend management logic .

Using console or application through an API a user can access a plurality of functions of trend management logic . In an embodiment trend management logic has a first function that can set or delete a trend monitor for a state variable a second function that can retrieve a trend value and trend tendency value for a state variable and a third function that can set or clear a flag that causes notification of trend changes.

To set a trend monitor for a state variable using first function trend management logic receives information identifying a trend profile as indicated in step . For example a user may create and store trend profiles A B on device using a configuration command or function giving a unique identifier or name to each trend profile. At step the user provides the profile identifier or name to trend indication management logic as part of a CLI command or API call.

Alternatively trend management logic receives information identifying one or more trending parameters as indicated in step . The trending parameters may comprise values for the columns of trend indication MIB that drive determination of a trend value and a tendency value such as the columns described in the next section and with reference to .

At step the trend management logic receives a state variable identifier such as an object identifier OID of a MIB variable that the operating system or an application or agent maintains in a MIB other than trend indication MIB . In step trend management logic creates a row entry in trend indication MIB that associates the OID either with the profile identified at step or with the parameters received at step and that includes columns for a trend value and a tendency value. Thereafter trend management logic determines the trend value and tendency value for the new row in the MIB based on the approach of .

The approach herein controls performance impact on a network device by configuring trend and tendency computation only for selected state variables that are user specified. This approach requires far less computing resources than an approach in which all state variables of a device are configured for trend and tendency computation. In an alternative embodiment the trend management logic a device a device operating system or an application may specify a default set of device state variables for which a trend monitor is always configured for example at device startup or when the trend management logic initializes.

Deleting a trend monitor involves a user providing an OID for a state variable and a request to delete the trend monitor. In response trend management logic deletes a row in MIB corresponding to the state variable OID.

To retrieve a trend value and trend tendency value for a state variable using second function a user provides a request to trend indication management logic . If the user previously set a trend monitor for the same state variable that is identified in the request then using the approach of the trend management logic has computed a trend value and a tendency value for the state variable and stored the values in columns of MIB . Therefore in response to the request the trend management logic retrieves the values from the columns of the MIB and provides the values to the requesting user. Unlike prior approaches no repetitive polling is required and the device can deliver the trend value and tendency value promptly on demand or upon request from a user. In an embodiment in step trend management logic creates an SNMP response that contains the trend and tendency values from the MIB and sends the SNMP response to the user.

To set or clear a flag that causes notification of trend changes using third function the user sends a command or API call to the trend management logic containing a request to set or clear notification. In response the trend management logic internally sets or clears a flag that controls issuance of notification messages.

In various embodiments the trend indication management function is exposed to users through various management interfaces. Embodiments are not dependent on a particular management protocol.

In one embodiment a management application uses SNMP to retrieve values that the trend indication management function computes at a device which are stored in a trend indication MIB at the device. is a table illustrating an example management information base MIB that may be used in one embodiment. A trend indication MIB comprises a user configurable table having a plurality of columns . Each row in the table corresponds to one particular object identifier OID as shown in OID column and that corresponds to and uniquely identifies a state variable for which a trend is to be monitored. Thus a configurable column in the trend indication MIB comprises an identifier of the monitored state variable.

In various embodiments other configurable columns in the trend indication MIB comprise one or more of the following 

4. In counter column a flag indicating whether the observed state variable represents a counter or a gauge which controls whether the trend indication management function operates with absolute values or deltas 

5. In columns and values for thresholds that determine what state variable values constitute a slight moderate or strong trend tendency for example in percent of overall difference such as 1 2 or 4 respectively.

Various embodiments may include fewer than all of columns and also may include columns for values not shown in that affect operation of the trend indication logic in other ways. For example the particular columns included in MIB of may vary depending on the nature of device a router switch and server each may have different parameters that govern computation of trend and tendency represented by different arrangements of columns in the MIB. In an embodiment values in the columns of MIB are user configurable through a management interface so that a user can customize operation of the trend indication management function. In an embodiment each column is associated with a default value so that a user is not required to configure a column.

In an embodiment the trend indication MIB further includes a plurality of columns that are readable using SNMP GET operations and contain a current trend value in column and a current tendency value in column .

In an embodiment values for the configurable columns of the trend indication MIB can be specified or modified by user configuration of a trend management profile A that is separate from the trend indication MIB. For example one or more trend management profiles A B are hosted in the network device and contain sets of values for all the configurable variables specified above other than the OID of the state variable to be monitored. Different trend management profiles may have different combinations of values for the configurable variables. One or more OIDs corresponding to one or more state variables are then associated with one of the trend management profiles. A user determines which trend management profile is appropriate to associate with a particular state variable. This approach simplifies configuration and management of multiple state variables for which trends are tracked.

For all such embodiments while SNMP is identified above as an example protocol for communications between a device that hosts the trend indication management function and a network management station the same functionality may be accomplished using other management protocols such as TL 1.

Computer system includes a bus or other communication mechanism for communicating information and a processor coupled with bus for processing information. Computer system also includes a main memory such as a random access memory RAM flash memory or other dynamic storage device coupled to bus for storing information and instructions to be executed by processor . Main memory also may be used for storing temporary variables or other intermediate information during execution of instructions to be executed by processor . Computer system further includes a read only memory ROM or other static storage device coupled to bus for storing static information and instructions for processor . A storage device such as a magnetic disk flash memory or optical disk is provided and coupled to bus for storing information and instructions.

A communication interface may be coupled to bus for communicating information and command selections to processor . Interface is a conventional serial interface such as an RS 232 or RS 422 interface. An external terminal or other computer system connects to the computer system and provides commands to it using the interface . Firmware or software running in the computer system provides a terminal interface or character based command interface so that external commands can be given to the computer system.

A switching system is coupled to bus and has an input interface and an output interface to one or more external network elements. The external network elements may include a local network coupled to one or more hosts or a global network such as Internet having one or more servers . The switching system switches information traffic arriving on input interface to output interface according to predetermined protocols and conventions that are well known. For example switching system in cooperation with processor can determine a destination of a packet of data arriving on input interface and send it to the correct destination using output interface . The destinations may include host server other end stations or other routing and switching devices in local network or Internet .

The invention is related to the use of computer system for providing trend information from network devices. According to one embodiment of the invention trend information from network devices is provided by computer system in response to processor executing one or more sequences of one or more instructions contained in main memory . Such instructions may be read into main memory from another computer readable medium such as storage device . Execution of the sequences of instructions contained in main memory causes processor to perform the process steps described herein. One or more processors in a multi processing arrangement may also be employed to execute the sequences of instructions contained in main memory . In alternative embodiments hard wired circuitry may be used in place of or in combination with software instructions to implement the invention. Thus embodiments of the invention are not limited to any specific combination of hardware circuitry and software.

The term computer readable medium as used herein refers to any medium that participates in providing instructions to processor for execution. Such a medium may take many forms including but not limited to non volatile media volatile media and transmission media. Non volatile media includes for example optical or magnetic disks such as storage device . Volatile media includes dynamic memory such as main memory . Transmission media includes coaxial cables copper wire and fiber optics including the wires that comprise bus . Transmission media can also take the form of acoustic or light waves such as those generated during radio wave and infrared data communications.

Common forms of computer readable media include for example a floppy disk a flexible disk hard disk magnetic tape or any other magnetic medium a CD ROM any other optical medium punch cards paper tape any other physical medium with patterns of holes a RAM a PROM and EPROM a FLASH EPROM any other memory chip or cartridge a carrier wave as described hereinafter or any other medium from which a computer can read.

Various forms of computer readable media may be involved in carrying one or more sequences of one or more instructions to processor for execution. For example the instructions may initially be carried on a magnetic disk of a remote computer. The remote computer can load the instructions into its dynamic memory and send the instructions over a telephone line using a modem. A modem local to computer system can receive the data on the telephone line and use an infrared transmitter to convert the data to an infrared signal. An infrared detector coupled to bus can receive the data carried in the infrared signal and place the data on bus . Bus carries the data to main memory from which processor retrieves and executes the instructions. The instructions received by main memory may optionally be stored on storage device either before or after execution by processor .

Communication interface also provides a two way data communication coupling to a network link that is connected to a local network . For example communication interface may be an integrated services digital network ISDN card or a modem to provide a data communication connection to a corresponding type of telephone line. As another example communication interface may be a local area network LAN card to provide a data communication connection to a compatible LAN. Wireless links may also be implemented. In any such implementation communication interface sends and receives electrical electromagnetic or optical signals that carry digital data streams representing various types of information.

Network link typically provides data communication through one or more networks to other data devices. For example network link may provide a connection through local network to a host computer or to data equipment operated by an Internet Service Provider ISP . ISP in turn provides data communication services through the worldwide packet data communication network now commonly referred to as the Internet . Local network and Internet both use electrical electromagnetic or optical signals that carry digital data streams. The signals through the various networks and the signals on network link and through communication interface which carry the digital data to and from computer system are exemplary forms of carrier waves transporting the information.

Computer system can send messages and receive data including program code through the network s network link and communication interface . In the Internet example a server might transmit a requested code for an application program through Internet ISP local network and communication interface . In accordance with the invention one such downloaded application provides for providing trend information from network devices as described herein.

Processor may execute the received code as it is received and or stored in storage device or other non volatile storage for later execution. In this manner computer system may obtain application code in the form of a carrier wave.

In the foregoing specification the invention has been described with reference to specific embodiments thereof. It will however be evident that various modifications and changes may be made thereto without departing from the broader spirit and scope of the invention. The specification and drawings are accordingly to be regarded in an illustrative rather than a restrictive sense.

