---

title: Launchable grenade system
abstract: A launchable grenade system is backwards compatible with conventional launch platforms and is capable of launching a variety of payloads at greater range and increased launch velocity, and with significantly improved targeting accuracy. The grenade is pre-packaged in a disposable launch canister that effectively confines launch ejection gases behind the projectile until it exits the canister. Additional enhancements in one or more embodiments, include collapsible aerodynamic stabilizers that are folded inside the launch canister prior to firing and deploy in flight to improve projectile stability and ballistic performance; electronic fuzing for improved repeatability and targeting precision, next-generation digital capabilities that include electronic device identification, failsafe and device monitoring; and momentum arresting forward expulsion of the payload to reduce blunt trauma hazard from projectile hardware and to provide for short distance targeting at significantly greater speed.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08220392&OS=08220392&RS=08220392
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 08220392
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050728
---
The present invention relates generally to small projectiles and more particularly to a launchable grenade system for dispersing payloads such as screening aerosols as well as a wide variety of other fill materials.

Launchable grenades are used by military and law enforcement organizations for a number of purposes including target screening obscuration concealment target marking crowd control decontamination and the like. During military field operations for example a unit may be targeted visually or detected by devices that rely on ultraviolet infrared millimeter or other electromagnetic radiation. Often the most practical and effective countermeasure involves launching one or more aerosol grenades to set up an aerosol cloud in an effort to confuse such targeting and detection systems. Launchable grenades are also increasingly used for dispensing non lethal payloads including aerosol irritants non penetrating projectiles pyrotechnic flash bang devices and the like.

Grenade payloads can include phosphorus titanium dioxide and other smoke producing and incendiary materials. Other fill materials include particulates that are designed to disrupt or interfere with electronic detection and guidance systems. For example aerosols made from carbon fiber particles may be released to block targeting that relies on radar or millimeter wavelength sensors. Brass flakes may be used to interfere with infrared tracking and target acquisition devices. Aerosols such as tear gas or pepper mace are dispersed in crowd control and riot situations. Still other payloads may include aerosol disinfectants decontaminants pesticides fire retardants as well as non penetrating projectiles including rubber sting balls bean bags sock rounds and other blunt trauma devices.

Currently fielded launchable grenades include the M81 Screening Grenade M82 Screening Grenade and M90 pyrotechnic smoke dispenser the M98 Distraction Grenade M99 Blunt Trauma Grenade and L96A1 and L97A1 non lethal grenades. Compatible launch platforms include the M7 Light Vehicle Obscuration Smoke System LVOSS and the M6 Countermeasure Discharger CD . The M7 LVOSS is a 4 tube 66 mm grenade launcher designed to be mounted on light vehicles such as the high mobility multipurpose wheeled vehicle or Humvee and is made from lightweight materials. The M6 CD is a 4 tube 66 mm grenade launcher of heavier construction designed for mounting on armored vehicles.

The conventional 66 mm grenade is housed in a frangible cylindrical body and contains an elongate payload section that includes a compacted annular payload that surrounds a high explosive burster assembly at the center. A propulsion section is positioned beneath the payload section and includes an electric match a lift charge and a pyrotechnic delay fuze.

When the launch operator activates a firing switch the conventional 66 mm grenade launcher will deliver a 24 volt direct current signal to contacts located in the base of each grenade. Grenades in the same launcher are wired in parallel so that they will fire at the same time. The 24 volt signal causes the electric match to ignite the lift charge propelling the grenade from the discharger tube of the launcher. The pyrotechnic fuze is ignited by the burning lift charge and after a delay nominally of about 1.7 seconds the fuze detonates the high explosive burster assembly which ruptures the frangible housing and disseminates the payload.

Although the high explosive burster works well at rapidly disseminating the grenade payload fragmentation of the housing can pose a hazard to personnel in the vicinity of the blast. Non explosive payload disseminating mechanisms have been developed to reduce fragmentation hazards as described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 047 644 to Malecki et al. granted Apr. 11 2000 644 patent and U.S. Pat. No. 6 412 416 to Rouse et al. granted Jul. 2 2002 416 patent both of which are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth.

Developments such as those described in the 644 and 416 patents have expanded the utility of conventional 66 mm grenades and similar devices however a number of problems remain. The conventional 66 mm grenade is not highly accurate given today s requirements frequently takes too long to disseminate the payload and has a range that is inadequate for many applications. A number of factors contribute to these performance problems. Although the nominal time of flight to a distance of 30 meters is 1.7 seconds the time delay of the pyrotechnic fuze of the conventional grenade can vary by as much as 0.4 second resulting in device detonation anywhere from approximately 22 to 38 meters. Projectile instability causes the device to tumble in flight and the blunt nose shape produces drag adding to the performance problems and targeting uncertainty of the 66 mm grenade.

Differences in launch platform characteristics further degrade performance and targeting accuracy. These differences can arise from a number of factors including the fielding of discharger tubes in several different lengths variability in discharger tube bore diameter caused by temperature changes repeated firings or other wear and tear and the presence of non uniform drain holes in the base of the discharger tubes which dissipate propulsion energy and vary in size with temperature. While the problems of poor range and launch velocity might be solved by simply increasing the size of the lift charge structural limitations of the discharger tubes of some launch platforms such as the lightweight M 7 LVOSS prevent increasing the size of the lift charge. In addition increasing the size of the lift charge would likely exacerbate targeting accuracy problems.

Such drawbacks and others limit the effectiveness of the conventional 66 mm grenade and other similar munitions in a growing number of applications where greater accuracy shorter time to target and or greater range are needed to disseminate a grenade payload with greater effectiveness and reduced risk to non combatants or friendly forces. Any improvements should also be backwards compatible with existing systems to the extent practicable. These and other problems are solved at least in part by embodiments of grenade systems in accordance with the present invention.

In general in one aspect an embodiment of a system according to the present invention includes a launchable grenade that has a lift charge a lift charge ignition system a fuze a payload expulsion system and a payload. The grenade is packaged in a disposable launch canister from which it can be launched that is configured to lock into a discharger tube of a conventional launch platform and has a closed base in which lift charge gases can be confined to increase launch thrust. In another aspect the launchable grenade system includes a seal such as an obturator or an o ring to confine launch gases behind the grenade in the launch canister until the grenade is propelled from the launch canister. In yet another aspect the launchable grenade system includes a lift charge reservoir positioned at the base of the grenade around which the seal is provided. The lift charge reservoir may be integrated into the base of the grenade or may be configured to separate from the grenade when it is expelled from the launch canister.

In another aspect an embodiment of a system according to the present invention includes a launchable grenade system that is electrically and mechanically configured for compatibility with existing launch platforms. In another aspect an embodiment of a system according to the present invention includes a collapsible aerodynamic stabilizer that has a slidable ring around the body of the grenade and a plurality of collapsible fins extending therefrom is contained within the launch canister before launch and is configured to slide aft to form a radially flaring tail after the grenade exits the launch canister.

In another aspect embodiments of systems according to the present invention may expel the payload in several different ways. The payload for example may be expelled from the grenade in a direction that provides a deceleration of the grenade in flight. In other embodiments of systems according to the present invention the payload may be expelled from the grenade in a direction that provides an acceleration of the grenade. In another aspect the aerodynamic stabilizer is configured to oppose a reverse thrust produced when the payload is forward expelled from the grenade.

In another aspect embodiments of systems according to the present invention include a launchable grenade having a substantially sealed payload compartment that is configured to dispense the payload with a reduced hazard of fragmentation and shrapnel.

In yet another aspect the payload compartment includes a member such as a rupture diaphragm that is configured to rupture at a predetermined pressure and in which the payload is expelled by building gas pressure within the substantially sealed compartment until the member bursts.

Still another aspect of an embodiment of a system according to the present invention includes a precision programmable electronic fuzing which may include a controller that processes data and instructions comprising one or more of the following grenade identification launch initiation time function impact function and self destruct function determining grenade operability.

Another aspect of the present invention includes a method of launching a grenade that includes pre packaging the grenade in a disposable canister from which the grenade can be launched and which is configured to lock into a discharger tube of a conventional launch platform and be electrically compatible therewith providing a seal between the grenade and the launch canister that confines launch ejection gases in a substantially sealed chamber behind the grenade until it has exited the canister equipping the grenade with a collapsible aerodynamic stabilizer that folds inside the launch canister prior to launch and deploys in flight to improve grenade stability and ballistic performance providing an electronic fuze that is backwards compatible with a conventional launch platform and is also programmable via digital signals that can be multiplexed over the conventional launch platform electrical system.

In yet another aspect an embodiment of the present invention includes a disposable launch canister for a launchable grenade that has an elongated substantially smooth bore tube with an opening at the top and a substantially sealed bottom is dimensioned and configured to be secured within a discharger tube of a grenade launcher includes an electrical connector that is compatible with a corresponding electrical connector inside the discharger tube and conveys electrical signals to and from a launchable grenade positioned within the launch canister.

In another aspect an embodiment of the present invention includes a modular insert for retrofitting in a launchable grenade that has an electronic fuze assembly and an electronic detonator to replace a pyrotechnic fuze and detonator of the launchable grenade which improves the targeting accuracy of the launchable grenade. In another aspect the modular insert is dimensioned for insertion into the base of a conventional 66 mm grenade.

Other aspects features and advantages of the present invention will become apparent to those skilled in the art from the detailed description and the accompanying drawings. It should be understood however that the detailed description and accompanying drawings while indicating preferred embodiments of the present invention are given by way of illustration and not of limitation. Many changes and modifications may be made within the scope of the present invention without departing from the spirit thereof and the invention includes all such modifications.

In the following detailed description reference is made to the accompanying drawings that form a part hereof and in which are shown by way of illustration specific embodiments in which the invention as claimed may be practiced. This invention may however be embodied in many different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the scope of the invention to those skilled in the art.

Grenade is prepackaged for firing directly from a precision fit disposable launch canister . Launch canister is an elongate smooth bore tube that is open at the top and closed at the bottom end to form a base . Launch canister is configured to lock into discharger tube in the same manner as a conventional grenade and is equipped with electrical contacts in base that are compatible with an existing electrical connector that is provided in the discharger tube of current 66 mm launch platforms. To provide uniform launch performance regardless of discharger tube length launch canister is preferably at least as long as the longest discharger tube in use. In this example launch canister is approximately 9.88 inches in length 250.99 mm and has an outside diameter of approximately 2.6 inches 65.79 mm slightly less than the bore diameter of discharger tube . A longer or shorter launch canister may of course be employed in alternative embodiments.

Launch canister can be formed from a variety of lightweight impact resistant material such as a molded or extruded hardened polymer fiberglass a metal such as aluminum or steel composites or combinations of such materials. Launch canister is configured to withstand the increased radial and longitudinal impulse loads imposed by launch of grenade taking into account structural capabilities of the weakest of the conventional discharger tubes in which it may be deployed. In addition to structural considerations launch canister should be constructed to protect the grenade during storage and transportation.

A tubular projectile case forms the body of grenade . Projectile case includes a tapered nose cone at the top and a cylindrical payload section underneath. The outside diameter of projectile case is somewhat smaller than the inside diameter of launch canister to accommodate a collapsible aerodynamic stabilizer on the outside of grenade and described below. Payload section provides a cylindrical storage compartment capable of holding 310 cc. In general payload section may contain any substance material or device which is desired to be delivered to a target area using a projectile according to the present invention as the carrying and dispersing device. Payload materials may include but are not limited to substances capable of being dispersed in the form of an aerosol electronic sensors and devices unmanned aerial vehicles flash bang munitions sting balls ground sensors mines bomblets concussion grenades tire puncturing elements signal emitting devices disinfectants decontaminants and fire retardants. The aerosol substance is preferably selected from the group consisting of smoke crowd control agents obscurants target marking compounds dyes and inks chaffs and the like. Of course all payload materials will be in compliance with national and international laws treaties and agreements to which the United States is a party.

Projectile case rests upon a lift charge cup which provides a downward facing cup or disk shaped reservoir that contains an enhanced lift charge preferably comprising 18 grams of a black or smokeless powder or similar composition. Lift charge cup is dimensioned and configured to slide inside launch canister and to accumulate expanding launch gases beneath it to drive the grenade out of launch canister . A groove or notch is provided in the external sidewall of lift charge cup for securing a seal or obturator ring . Obturator ring provides a flexible seal against the inside wall of launch canister and improves confinement of launch gases to the area of launch canister beneath grenade . Obturator ring may be made from a thermoplastic resin or a fluoroelastomer or another suitable material. In alternative embodiments an o ring seal may be used.

Projectile case is preferably made from a lightweight metal plastic or composite material that provides sufficient strength to withstand the forces of launch and payload dissemination. The sidewall portions of projectile case are preferably fabricated from a material such as 7075 T6 AL aluminum tube which will resist fragmentation when the grenade functions. To disseminate the payload projectile case preferably includes a burst diaphragm or burst panel that is configured to pop open rupture or separate when an appropriate internal pressure has been reached. For a rear eject device such as depicted in a rear burst diaphragm made from a plastic metal film or composite material is provided at the bottom of payload section . Similarly a forward eject device such as the device shown in includes a forward burst diaphragm at the top of payload section . Other embodiments may provide a burst diaphragm or burst panel in a sidewall of projectile case to provide for expulsion of the payload in a different direction.

Base is positioned immediately beneath lift charge cup and generally will remain in launch canister after grenade has been fired. While base is shown as a separate component it may be integrated with launch canister in alternative embodiments. Base includes an electronic lift module and an electronic discharger interface and controller module . In response to a firing signal from the launcher electronic lift module starts an electronic or E match at the top of base to ignite the adjacent lift charge.

The electronic discharger interface and controller is configured to be compatible both electrically and mechanically with electrical connector at the bottom of discharger tube . Connector provides supply and signal voltages from the arming firing unit of the launcher for programming and pre launch configuration device charging and precision setting arming and launching of grenade from grenade system . Electronic discharger interface and controller can communicate with and be programmed via digital signals multiplexed over a conventional launch platform electrical system and received through electrical connector and will also maintain compatibility with existing 24 volt launch systems. Where next generation digital electronic systems are not available the grenade may be configured and fired in the same way as a conventional 66 mm device. Next generation digital capabilities where available may include failsafe and monitoring systems to prevent unauthorized or accidental use of the grenade systems to identify the grenade the payload condition of the payload grenade performance specifications age of the grenade its condition and operability and the like. Other advanced functions may include pre launch monitoring systems and post launch systems that check for the presence of non functioning devices in the launcher.

For a rear expelling device such as grenade system of payload expulsion is performed by an electronic burst module positioned forward of payload section in nose cone . Electronic burst module includes a precision electronic time delay fuze that ignites a payload expelling gas generator assembly . Accuracy of the electronic time delay fuze is the range of 1 1000 sec. substantially eliminating targeting errors resulting from fuze time delay inaccuracy. Electronic burst module may be configured by signals communicated via electronic discharger interface and controller . Gas generator assembly is coupled to payload compartment at one end. A felt disc is positioned between gas generator assembly and the payload to avoid ignition of the payload. Payload compartment is substantially air tight and is equipped with a burst diaphragm on the end opposite to gas generator assembly . Burst diaphragm is configured to rupture at a pressure that will effectively and rapidly expel and disseminate the payload to a target zone and at the same time result in minimal fragmentation of projectile case .

Launchable grenades according to the present invention preferably will provide multiple fuze modes for added safety and assurance of success. For example systems according to the present invention should be programmable to function under both time delay and impact modes to ensure that devices will detonate even if there is a failure of one or the other fuze mode. Fuze modes including proximity heat deceleration and the like may also be provided in alternative embodiments.

Grenade system further includes a collapsible aerodynamic stabilizer that deploys in flight to improve dynamic stability of the projectile and further extend range capabilities. Referring to which show an exploded view of grenade system with grenade in an in flight configuration a collapsible aerodynamic stabilizer is formed of a number of longitudinal fins attached on end to a sliding collar that encircles projectile case . Fins are spaced about the circumference of projectile case and preferably made of a flat vane like compressible resilient material such as spring steel. Other resilient materials that regain their original shape after periods of compression including metals plastics or composites may also be employed.

Before the grenade is launched fins are packed inside the launch canister . Collar is initially positioned against a forward stop at the base of nose cone and fins lie around and alongside of projectile body and are biased against the inside surface of launch canister . As grenade exits launch canister frictional and inertial forces urge sliding collar and attached fins aft until collar has reached a rear stop position and attached fins have extended in a tail past the rear of the projectile case . After grenade is free of launch canister fins are able to spring out radially beyond the projectile slipstream to form a shuttlecock like tail that stabilizes the projectile. While fins are preferably made from a spring like material alternative embodiments may employ folded compressed or collapsed struts arms vanes or similar collapsible aerodynamic stabilizers. In other alternative embodiments of the present invention stabilizing fins or projections may be actuated deployed or extended electronically or in response to inertial rotational or aerodynamic forces.

A payload section which provides the same capacity as payload compartment is configured for forward expulsion of the payload. A gas generator assembly of grenade system is positioned beneath payload section and a forward burst diaphragm is provided on top of payload section . A removable nose cone preferably of a very light material such as balsa wood tapered to improve aerodynamic performance is provided on top of grenade .

The increased launch velocity of grenade system provides proportionately greater forward momentum. In applications where it is desirable to impact a target with as much force as possible the increased forward momentum will be advantageous. However a growing number of applications favor a grenade system that has the ability to disseminate a payload in a target zone with a minimum of fragmentation hazard explosive burst and impact force. Grenade system is configured to reduce or eliminate the force of impact of the projectile by reducing projectile momentum in flight when the device is at or near the target. Grenade reduces projectile forward momentum by a reverse thrust produced when the payload is forward expelled at or near the target. The reverse thrust is minimized by the braking action of the tail fins decelerating the projectile in close proximity to the target so that the grenade body drops to the ground with minimal momentum after device function. Forward expulsion of the payload according to this embodiment thus reduces the risk of personnel blunt trauma without adding to the time it takes the projectile to reach the target. In alternative embodiments projectile deceleration may be augmented by deploying a parachute drag chute airfoil speed brake or other drag producing device.

As in the first embodiment an electronic lift module fires an e match at the top of base to ignite the lift charge in lift charge cup . An electronic discharger interface and controller module provides signaling and communications interface with the launcher as in the embodiment described above.

A burst module of grenade system is housed beneath payload section and positioned with electronic lift module and electronic discharger interface and controller module . Burst module includes a precision electronic time delay fuze that ignites a payload expelling gas generator as in the reverse expelling embodiment.

In operation of an embodiment of a grenade system according to the present invention a grenade that is packaged in a launch canister is hand loaded into a discharger tube and locked into a socket at the bottom of the discharger tube to connect electrically to the arming firing system of the launcher. Just prior to launch a 24 Vdc current is applied to the grenades to charge the firing circuits. After the fuze is charged the current is automatically applied to the e match to ignite the lift charge. In next generation launchers low voltage digital signals may be used to set fuze delays provide arming options to the grenade and communicate cartridge type and status information to the launcher.

The lift charge of each grenade burns rapidly building pressure of propellant gases behind the grenade lift charge cup and obturator . The focused energy of this expanding column of gases drives grenade piston like from the launch canister at significantly increased velocity compared to conventionally launched grenades. As grenade exits launch canister a launch separation signal is provided by a sensor or switch. The launch separation signal is sensed by or communicated to the programmable electronic fuze and the pre programmed time of flight delay countdown is initiated arming the device. Launch canister is retained in the launcher after function.

As the grenade exits the launch canister aerodynamic stabilizer slides aft and stabilizer fins flare out radially to form a tail similar to the tail of a badminton shuttle cock. The cartridge travels downrange along a stable tumble free trajectory.

When the preprogrammed delay expires the electronic fuze triggers the e match igniting the gas generator to build pressure in payload compartment until burst diaphragm ruptures expelling the payload in flight. The payload is expelled forward to the rear or radially depending on device configuration. If the projectile impacts the ground or other structure before the flight delay fuze times out the sudden deceleration may be sensed in the fuze so the grenade will function immediately.

The embodiment shown in employs a conventional high explosive burster assembly to dissimilate the payload. High explosive burster assembly is positioned at the center of payload section for substantially omni directional payload dissemination and is initiated by the electronic detonator in response to a signal issued by electronic fuze . The high accuracy electronic fuze can be configured electronically for time delays ranging between 0.100 to 9.999 seconds. Electronic fuze is preferably controlled by a programmable microprocessor and may include in one or more embodiments functions that include failsafe and encryption systems to prevent unauthorized or accidental use of the grenade systems to identify the grenade by payload type and condition by device performance specifications device age condition operability and the like. Other advanced functions may include pre launch configuration and monitoring systems and post launch systems that indicate the presence of a non functioning device in the launcher.

Embodiments of launchable grenades and grenade launch systems according to the present invention provide significant improvements over existing grenade launch systems and are capable of achieving reduced time to target longer range and greater launch stability improved ballistics and targeting accuracy. The grenades are easier to launch and may be equipped with next generation digital systems that provide additional arming options device identification and a variety of safety checks. Embodiments of grenades according to the present invention not only demonstrate greater launch velocity and targeting distance but also exhibit flight characteristics that are more predictable and repeatable resulting in fewer targeting errors.

It will be clear to one skilled in the art that the above embodiments may be altered in many ways without departing from the scope of the invention. For example while 66 mm diameter cartridges have been described embodiments of the present invention may be scaled to other caliber grenade systems. Alternative embodiments may incorporate other types of fuzes and initiators including mechanical or electronic time delay devices point detonating impact proximity and GPS based fuzes and the like. Additionally embodiments according to the present invention may be designed for forward rear or radial expulsion of the grenade payload. Accordingly the scope of the invention should be determined by the following claims and their legal equivalents.

