---

title: Igniter for exothermic torch rod
abstract: An igniter's housing is bored continuously there through to define, in succession, several bore regions. A firing pin, slidingly fit in the first bore region, terminates in a tip that protrudes into a primer-filled second bore region when the firing pin is fully seated in the first bore region. An air-filled third bore region follows the second bore region. An open-ended cup is fitted substantially in and sealed to the fourth bore region with the cup's closed end being structurally weakened at a portion thereof. A bored out slug of pyrotechnic material is fitted in the cup.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07117796&OS=07117796&RS=07117796
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07117796
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051229
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention relates generally to exothermic torch rods and more particularly to an igniter for a torch rod that does not require any power for use in or out of water.

As is known in the art oxygen based cutting torch or torch rod systems use hollow steel tubes that house hollow or solid steel wires or rods therein. An igniter is used to ignite one end of the steel wires or rods which burn to form a cutting torch. Current ignition methods include exposing the ends of the steel wires or rods to high current placing the ends of the steel wires or rods in a smoldering cardboard punk tube or depositing a molten metallic product on the ends of the wires or rods while exposing same to a supply of oxygen. However the high current and smoldering punk tube ignition systems are either useless unreliable or at the very least difficult to use in underwater environments. Currently available ignition systems that produce a molten metallic product use a powdered energetic compound and a chemical catalyst that are separated from one another until ignition is required. However powdered energetic compounds are not reliable and have a limited shelf life.

Accordingly it is an object of the present invention to provide an igniter for use with an exothermic torch rod.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a reliable non electric igniter adapted for use with a torch rod in underwater applications.

Other objects and advantages of the present invention will become more obvious hereinafter in the specification and drawings.

In accordance with the present invention a housing of an igniter is bored continuously there through to define in succession a first bore region that begins at the housing s first end a second bore region a third bore region and a fourth bore region that terminates at a second end of the housing.

A firing pin is slidingly fit in the first bore region and extends from the first end of the housing. The firing pin terminates in a tip that protrudes into the second bore region when the firing pin is fully seated in the first bore region. A primer is press fit in the second bore region. A cup having an open end and a closed end is fitted substantially in and sealed to the fourth bore region with the closed end being substantially coincident with the second end of the housing. The closed end is structurally weakened at a portion thereof. A slug of pyrotechnic material is fitted in the cup. The slug has a bore that is formed continuously there through and that is substantially centrally aligned with the third bore region. Upon ignition the pyrotechnic material converts at least partially to molten metallic reaction products.

Referring now to the drawings and more particularly to an igniter in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention is shown and is referenced by numeral . The igniter is shown installed in the aft end of a conventional torch rod which is shown in phantom to indicate that torch rod is not a part or limitation of the present invention. Such torch rods are well known in the art and will not be described further herein.

The igniter has a rigid body or housing e.g. made of a metal such as stainless steel a plastic a composite etc. that is bored there through to define several different sized regions aligned along a central axis A. Typically each bore region is cylindrical owing to the simplicity of manufacturing same in this fashion. A first bore region houses a firing pin e.g. made of a metal such as stainless steel a plastic a composite etc. such that firing pin can slide therein as in a piston cylinder relationship. An o ring can be provided in an annular recess in order to form a seal between firing pin and first bore region . Such a seal is important when the igniter is used in underwater environments.

The firing pin terminates at one end in a strike head that remains outside of the housing . At an opposite end of the firing pin the firing pin terminates in a protruding tip that remains in the housing and is aligned with a second bore region . The second bore region has a smaller diameter than the first bore region so that only a tip will extend into the second bore region when the firing pin is fully seated in the first bore region .

Illustrated in a pre use state the firing pin is positioned in first bore region such that the tip is spaced apart from the second bore region . To lock the firing pin in this pre use state any of a variety of locking mechanisms can be used. For example a safety pin can be provided and extend through aligned holes and in the housing and the firing pin respectively. The safety pin can be retained in holes and by means of a pull ring on one end of the safety pin and a spring loaded ball at the other end of the safety pin. When the igniter is to be used the safety pin is removed by pulling on the ring until the spring force operating on the ball is overcome.

The second bore region is filled with a percussion primer material . Typically the primer material is press fit into the second bore region . While a variety of percussion primer materials could be used a commercially available example of such a material is a mixture of potassium chlorate and lead sulfocyanate available as M42C2 793 primer.

On the other side of the second bore region is a third bore region that is air filled. When the primer material is press fit in the second bore region the third bore region is typically smaller in diameter than second bore region in order to define a ledge or stop for the primer material . When the primer material is ignited the third bore region forms a flash through hole for the combustion product of the primer material.

Adjacent the third bore region is a larger diameter fourth bore region . Mounted in the fourth bore region is an assembly that includes a cup shaped element and a hollow slug of a pyrotechnic material that when burning is at least partially converted to molten metallic reaction products. When installed in and sealed to the housing e.g. using an epoxy seal a threaded seal and or o ring seal the cup shaped element forms both a holder and waterproof seal for the slug . The cup shaped element can be made from a plastic composite or metal without departing from the scope of the present invention. By way of illustrative example the remainder of the description assumes that the cup shaped element is made from aluminum.

The element has an open end for receiving the slug and a closed end that has been structurally weakened in some fashion. In general the closed end is structurally weakened such that the weakened portion fails when exposed to the molten metallic reaction products produced when the slug burns. For example when the element is made from aluminum the closed end can be stamped with a design e.g. a cross or X as shown in such that the stamped design is reduced in thickness i.e. is structurally weaker with respect to the unstamped portion of the closed end . Other stamp designs or forms of structural weakening known to those skilled in the art can be used without departing from the scope of the present invention.

The slug is a pre pressed or molded pyrotechnic composition. While a variety of pyrotechnic compositions can be used without departing from scope of the present invention a unique composition that provides good results i.e. low gas production of reaction products ease of ignition high thermal stability non toxic and good production of molten metallic reaction products will be described herein. Rounding to the nearest tenth of a percent this exemplar composition comprises approximately 48.0 weight percent iron oxide approximately 31.3 weight percent titanium approximately 17.6 weight percent zirconium and approximately 2.9 weight percent of a binder such as a polyacrylic rubber binder. The term approximately here is meant to cover deviations of 2 for each listed component without departing from the scope of the present invention.

The slug is formed with a centrally positioned hollow core along the length thereof. The core can be cylindrical with a constant diameter or more preferably can diverge or increase in diameter as shown between the open end and the closed end of the cup shaped element . The slug can be formed such that the core aligns with and is sized to substantially match the third bore region where it is adjacent thereto.

The slug can further be sized such that it extends slightly from the open end of the cup shaped element as shown. In this way when the element with the slug disposed therein is fitted into the fourth bore region the slug will positively seat fully in the fourth bore region to thereby prevent any unwanted movement thereof when the element is sealed to the fourth bore region .

In order to install the igniter in the torch rod the housing can be provided with one or more e.g. three are shown in open annular channels that can form locations where torch rod is crimped at location onto the housing . Additionally or alternatively o rings can be provided in one or more of the channels to provide a seal with the inner dimensions of the torch rod . The o rings can be used in place of or in conjunction with the above described crimping as illustrated.

With the igniter installed in the torch rod as just described the igniter is ready for use. At the desired time the safety pin is removed. Note that the presence of o ring maintains the position of the firing pin after the safety pin is removed. By firmly striking the head in the axial direction of the firing pin the tip is pushed into percussion primer material causing same to be ignited. The combustion output of the material flashes through the third bore region and into the core thereby igniting the slug . As the slug burns the resulting molten metallic reaction products melt the weakened region s of the closed end and is available for contact with the fuel rods or wires not shown of the torch rod . With the core diverging in dimension the energy of the molten metallic reaction products are directed toward the closed end instead of burning omni directionally within the slug .

The advantages of the present invention are numerous. The igniter requires no electrical input and is completely waterproof. The pressed pyrotechnic material is reliable is easily ignited is non toxic produces little reaction gas and produces substantial amounts of molten metallic reaction products required to start a torch rod s exothermic reaction. When an electrically conductive material is used for the igniter s housing the igniter is not susceptible to ignition by electrostatic discharge as the housing acts as a Faraday cage.

Although the present invention has been described relative to specific embodiments it is not so limited. For example the igniter could use a variety of different primer and or pyrotechnic materials without departing from the scope of the present invention. The igniter could also be formed as an integral part of a torch rod. Still further the slug could be pressed using different pressures along the length thereof in order to customize its burn profile. For example a lesser pressure could be used at the end of the slug nearest the third bore region in order to enhance ignition reliability at temperature extremes.

Thus it will be understood that many additional changes in the details materials steps and arrangement of parts which have been herein described and illustrated in order to explain the nature of the invention may be made by those skilled in the art within the principle and scope of the invention as expressed in the appended claims.

