---

title: Associating information with an electronic document
abstract: A system for associating information comprises an association module that uses anchoring information to associate a first piece of information with a second piece of information, wherein the second piece of information is not part of the first piece of information. The system further includes a rendering module that presents the second piece of information for use. Methods for using such a system are also described.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07734631&OS=07734631&RS=07734631
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07734631
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050915
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent application Ser. No. 60 674 628 entitled SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR ADDING INTERACTIVE CONTENT TO WEB PAGES and filed on Apr. 25 2005. The entirety of the above referenced application is incorporated by reference herein.

The Internet has evolved into a communication platform upon which a variety of information based services can be provided. One of the most popular of these services is the provision of electronic documents constructed using hypertext markup language HTML . These documents are often referred to as web pages and are available from computing locations or sites on a logical segment of the Internet commonly referred to as the World Wide Web or simply the Web. Information available on these Web sites and servers is typically accessed using a Web browser executing on a remote computer. For example a user can launch a Web browser and access a Web site by entering a Uniform Resource Locator URL of the Web site into an address bar of the Web browser and pressing the enter key on a keyboard or clicking a button with a mouse. The URL typically includes three pieces of information that facilitate access a protocol indicator that designates a set of rules or standards for the exchange of information in computer communication a domain name that is often based on the name of an organization that maintains the Web site and a path to the desired document within the domain. Standard Web browsers can use the information included in a URL to establish a connection with a Web server and obtain information from that Web server.

In addition to Web sites and Web pages other types of services are available. Among those services are electronic mail instant messaging chat services audio or video services and other information services. Typically each service available on the Internet has existed in isolation from other services. For example a user can access a Web site using a Web browser but must open an audio application to access audio information as a separate service. Additionally a user may have to open a third application to access a chat service and a fourth application to access a messaging service.

Typically although information content from each type of service exists in isolation from other services such information can be logically related in a variety of different ways. For example information can be logically related in the sense that information available from each service can refer to information available on another service. Also information from more than one available service can be topically related originate from the same source or be related in some other fashion. Current systems fail to provide any ability to integrate information from various services in logical and meaningful ways.

The following presents a simplified summary in order to provide a basic understanding and high level survey. This summary is not an extensive overview. It is neither intended to identify key or critical elements nor to delineate scope. The sole purpose of this summary is to present some concepts in a simplified form as a prelude to the more detailed description later presented. Additionally section headings used herein are provided merely for convenience and should not be taken as limiting in any way.

A rendering module can obtain information such as a Web page from an information source using a network. An associative module can analyze that obtained information and use results of its analysis to identify and locate key or important pieces of the information. This information among other types can be used as an anchor with which to associate other information in addition to the original information. Additional information can be presented to a user.

A variety of additional types of information or information services can be provided to a user based upon an analysis of the content of the information obtained by the user for example content of a Web page. Content from Web logs that relate or refer to a Web page currently being viewed by the user can be presented along with the currently viewed Web page. Among the possible types of content that can be presented are advertising based content and content created by other visitors to a Web site such as notes comments ratings and reviews. Also one or more hyperlinks from a Web page that references the present Web page can be presented. Additionally services such as automatic connection to relevant chat room discussions and page biased searches can be provided.

The disclosed and described components and methods comprise one or more of the features hereinafter described and particularly pointed out in the claims. The following description and the annexed drawings set forth in detail certain specific illustrative components and methods. However these components and methods are indicative of but a few of the various ways in which the disclosed components and methods can be employed. Specific implementations of the disclosed and described components and methods can include some many or all of such components and methods as well as their equivalents. Variations of the specific implementations and examples presented herein will become apparent from the following detailed description when considered in conjunction with the drawings.

As used in this application the terms component system module and the like are intended to refer to a computer related entity such as hardware software for instance in execution and or firmware. For example a component can be a process running on a processor a processor an object an executable a program and or a computer. Also both an application running on a server and the server can be components. One or more components can reside within a process and a component can be localized on one computer and or distributed between two or more computers.

Disclosed components and methods are described with reference to the drawings wherein like reference numerals are used to refer to like elements throughout. In the following description for purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the disclosed subject matter. It may be evident however that certain of these specific details can be omitted or combined with others in a specific implementation. In other instances certain structures and devices are shown in block diagram form in order to facilitate description. Additionally although specific examples set forth may use terminology that is consistent with client server architectures or may even be examples of client server implementations skilled artisans will appreciate that the roles of client and server may be reversed that the disclosed and described components and methods are not limited to client server architectures and may be readily adapted for use in other architectures specifically including peer to peer P2P architectures without departing from the spirit or scope of the disclosed and described components and methods. Further it should be noted that although specific examples presented herein include or reference specific components an implementation of the components and methods disclosed and described herein is not necessarily limited to those specific components and can be employed in other contexts as well.

It should also be appreciated that although specific examples presented may describe or depict systems or methods that are based upon components of personal computers the use of components and methods disclosed and described herein is not limited to that domain. For example the disclosed and described components and methods can be used in a distributed or network computing environment. Additionally or alternatively the disclosed and described components and methods can be used on a single server accessed by multiple clients. Those of ordinary skill in the art will readily recognize that the disclosed and described components and methods can be used to create other components and execute other methods on a wide variety of computing devices.

The primary information data store can be a database an intranet the World Wide Web the Internet a file share or some other source of information specifically including a source of information that can be accessed remotely. Information included in the primary information data store can depend upon a specific implementation of the primary information data store but generally can include any information in an electronic or machine readable form. Specifically information stored in the primary information data store can include Web pages from the Internet or an intranet text documents in a variety of formats graphical image information audio information video information multimedia information and other suitable forms of information.

An association plug in can communicate with the rendering component and the primary information data store to obtain information that the rendering component can present to a user. Additionally or alternatively the interactive plug in can obtain additional information from another information source such as the secondary information data store . The secondary information data store can be implemented in much the same way as the primary information data store and can include the same types of information among others. Specifically the secondary information data store can include notes documents such as Web pages intranet pages text documents in a variety of formats graphical or audio information search related information including search terms or results and access to search engines wikis Web logs blogs RSS or other news feeds chat content including notification based chat content instant message information including messages or user names tags inlinks outlinks and any other information that can be stored or presented in an electronic or machine readable format.

Information included in the secondary information data store can be created by a secondary content creation module . Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize from reading this disclosure that implementation details of the secondary content creation module can vary depending upon a specific type of information to be created for use with the secondary information data store . Specifically depending upon such content the secondary content creation module can be a text editor a word processor a spreadsheet program a slideshow or presentation program a Web page editor a graphics program an audio program a Web logging blogging tool a chat program an instant messaging program or some other suitable component specifically including a combination of some or all of the foregoing examples.

The association plug in can relate or associate information from the secondary information data store with information originally obtained from the primary information data store for display by the rendering component . Specifically the additional information from the secondary information data store can be anchored to information from the primary information data store . Such anchoring or association can be accomplished in a variety of ways. For example a domain name such as example domain name.tld associated with a Web page can be used as an anchor for a piece of information from the secondary information data store . Similarly a fully or partially qualified uniform resource locator URL including a relative URL of a currently or previously accessed Web page or other resource can be used as an anchor. Other possible anchors include but are not limited to locations of files on file shares or other remote locations keywords included in content from the primary information data store or form data among others.

In one example information from the secondary information data store can be a note that includes some text. The note can be anchored to a Web page by associating the note with the URL of the Web page. The note could also be anchored to a piece of form data. For instance if the form data is a postal zip code the note can appear whenever a user enters that zip code into a form. As another example the note can be anchored to specific keywords. When a user views information from the primary information data store that includes such keywords the note can be displayed to the user by the rendering component . The note can be replaced with any content from the secondary information data store . Generally any content from the secondary information data store can be anchored using any appropriate anchor to any content from the primary information data store in any appropriate combination.

It should be noted that although the additional information can be anchored to or associated with the information originally obtained content of the additional information does not have to be related to content included in the information originally obtained. For example the information originally obtained can be a Web page about computer programming languages and the additional information can be a link to a search engine. In this example the link to the search engine has no connection with the content of the Web page. Many other types of additional content or additional functions can be used or provided by the association plug in .

An example based upon Web pages follows. The rendering component can retrieve a Web page from the primary information data store . The Web page can be presented to a user by the rendering component . The association plug in can analyze the Web page to determine which content of the Web page is important. A variety of approaches can be employed to analyze the Web page. Among these approaches is a technique of creating a list of terms that are included in the web page and use the term frequency inverse document frequency TF IDF algorithm to create a probabilistic summary of the content of the Web page. The association plug in can use content of the Web page to identify other content to be presented to the user. This other content can include among other things content from interactive chat rooms organized around topics related to the Web page content from Web log blogs entries or RSS or other news feeds that are related to the Web page or that specifically mentioned the Web page hyperlinks from other pages that specifically point to the Web page access to a search engine advertising that is related to the content of the Web page or content in the form of comments made by other visitors to the Web page.

The association plug in can be implemented in a variety of ways that can depend in large part upon a specific implementation of the rendering component among other factors that will be readily apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art upon reading this disclosure. In one exemplary implementation the association plug in can be executable code that runs in a sidebar or similar area of a window or a Web browser. The association plug in can also be a stand alone application or other suitable executable code. The association plug in can be a notation component that provides a user with the ability to post a notice that can be associated with a specific URL.

The notice can be informational in nature including such things as hyperlinks to related subjects information on products or services that are similar to products or services mentioned in a Web page or other information. The notice can also be organizational in the sense that the notice can be used to organize personal notes by URL such as notes regarding research papers at a specific home page. Social applications of the notice are also possible by using the notice to post a message to another user who visits a URL with which the notice is associated. The message can be intended to another person who will be attending an event another person with interests that are similar to interests of the creator of the message a part of a discussion regarding a topic of a Web page or any other type of message. The notice can also have an entertainment purpose such as providing humor or being part of an online game.

The note can include a plurality of fields. An anchor field can include information that can be used to anchor content of the note to an information location. Information in the anchor field can include a URL a domain name or a root domain among other location identifiers. The anchor field can be used to describe any appropriate anchor specifically including the types of anchors previously disclosed and described in conjunction with . The anchor field can be used to associate content that can be used by an association plug in with some information location.

Based upon the type of anchor and other factors the note can include a variety of fields. A keywords field can include keywords that relate to content and can be used for indexing or search purposes. A content key field can include some keywords or phrases that can be used to locate content such as a Web page that includes or matches information in the content key field . A form data field can include information that can be used to search for similar information in forms. The form data field can also include form information such as one or more form field names to match a form field to a value for that field.

A scope field can include information regarding a level at which a note such as the note can be distributed. For example the scope field can indicate that the note is private and should only be viewable by its creator. The scope field can also indicate that group access is permitted for members of a particular group or groups. These groups can be defined based upon some criterion or can include preselected members among other ways of defining membership. Further public access can be indicated by information in the scope field such that the note can be viewed by anyone.

The note can also include a type field . Information in the type field can be used to define different types of notes. For example different types can include simple text boxes pictures discussion threads or user defined types among others. Different types of notes can be displayed to a user in different ways to provide visual cues regarding the specific type of not being presented. It should be noted that presence of these fields can provide the ability for a user to filter notes based upon personal preferences. Additionally notes such as the note can be static in the sense that its content can be fixed or can be dynamic. A dynamic note for example can request updated information from a server each time the dynamic note is activated.

In another exemplary implementation a user can specify a provider of content such as a note from which the user desires to obtain content. The user can also specify a region within which such content can be displayed. One possible method of specifying such a region is by providing a graphical tool that the user can place in a sidebar of a Web browser window. The user can also select from among other options such as closing notes having notes automatically refresh content have notes provide labeled sub bars that can categorize information associate a note with one or more anchors set an expiration date restrict dissemination of the note and create notes anonymously among other things.

Perceived utility of notes can be subject to a network effect where a value of a note system increases with a number of users. To provide some initial value when initializing a note system a variety of techniques can be used. For example notes can be shared across URLs. Notes can also provide automatic annotation of Web sites blogs newsgroups and discussion forums among others. Dynamic notes and other content boxes can readily supply content. Scenario sites that demonstrate uses for notes can also be created. Additionally an application programming interface API for notes can be provided to encourage developers to create their own notes. Search functions for notes can also add to their usefulness. Prizes can also be awarded to users of notes to encourage additional use. Also popular Web sites can be used to promote installation and further use of notes by users. At least some of those popular Web sites can be formally engaged as promoters of notes. Also certain content can be provided only through use of notes such that installation of notes components can be required to access that content.

Notes can also be subjected to filtering and ranking functions. Ordering of notes can be accomplished according to a variety of social networking or web of trust networking concepts. Notes that are anchored to a specific URL can be ranked more or less highly than notes that are simply anchored to a domain name. Ranking functions can also be employed based at least in part upon one or more factors such as a scope of a note an author of a note a date of creation of a note a preference profile of a user a filter function link analysis feedback for a note such as a score or whether the note was closed by a user and thresholds for note rankings among others.

Privacy concerns for use of notes can be addressed in a variety of ways. For example a component can request multiple notes from different URLs to obscure identifying information for a note that is actually desired. This technique can be used in combination with a prefetching scheme. A one way hash of a URL for the note can be created and sent to a server instead of a cleartext request. Additionally or alternatively an intermediate server can be employed to obscure the identity of a user requesting a particular note.

Along with notes an interactive component can be a web chat component that can allow for dynamic chat sessions between or among users. Such chat sessions can also be anchored to a URL or a domain name among others. Chat sessions can also be anchored to more than one site to provide for more varied discussion. Such chat sessions can also be notification based such that a user can be notified when another user arrives at a specified site and desires to participate in a chat session with other users. Other Web aware applications can also be implemented such as a listing component that provides a list of Web pages that link to a Web page being viewed a page summary component that summarizes content on a currently viewed Web page and a search component that provides links to search engine searches for terms that appear frequently in a Web page among others.

The associative plug in can access and analyze the informational content that the rendering component has retrieved from the network . To analyze the informational content the associative plug in can use any suitable approach including one of the approaches discussed in relation to other figures. The associative plug in can then connect to a chat server to establish a session in a chat room that is organized around a topic that is related to the informational content.

For example in operation the rendering component can obtain a Web page from the World Wide Web. The associative plug in can then analyze the content of the Web page to determine a subject of the Web page. The associative plug in can then connect to the chat server to locate a chat room that is related to the subject of the Web page. A user can then participate in a discussion in the chat room while continuing to view the web page.

The associative component can analyze the information it receives from the rendering component and use that information to obtain additional content from a Web log blog data store . The Web log blog data store can include information about Web log blog entries and cross references from Web log blog entries to Web sites. A cross reference can be created for a Web log blog entry that deals with a topic that is the same as or similar to a topic of a Web site. A cross reference can also be created for Web log blog entry that specifically references a Web site. Other cross references can also be created.

In use the rendering component accesses a piece of information from the network and renders that information for presentation to a user. The associative component analyzes the piece of rendered information to discern a general topic or other content related theme of the information. The associative component accesses the Web log blog data store to locate Web log blog entries that are cross referenced with the information that was obtained by the rendering component . The associative component can then cause those Web log entries to be presented to the user while the user is still viewing the information.

Instead of or in addition to a Web log blog entry information about a product or service that is related to a subject of Web page can be presented. Such information can be in the form of user reviews or can be advertising from a provider of a product or service itself. Such advertising can be triggered by using keywords from the information already retrieved by the rendering component . Therefore the advertising can be targeted to users who are most likely to respond to such ads. Additionally or alternatively a user can subscribe to content updates to have a variety of events such as addition of content server as a trigger to cause a content update operation to occur automatically.

One possible implementation includes a sidebar component that can provide a contextually intelligent search application. This search application can access content of a Web page that is being viewed by a user and calculate importance of various terms on that Web page for example by using an algorithm such as the term frequency inverse document frequency TF IDF algorithm. The user when submitting a query through the search application can obtain query results that are biased in favor of results having content that is similar to the content being viewed.

For example the rendering module can obtain a Web page for a user. The associative module can then analyze contents of that Web page to determine keywords or important concepts. A user can then perform a search for additional information. The associative module can use keywords or concept descriptors that it obtained from the Web page to augment a search query entered by the user. The search server will use the augmented search to obtain responsive information. Results of the search can be biased in favor of those Web pages that are similar or contain similar concepts as the Web page originally obtained by the rendering module .

The context server can access a visitor content data store that can include content such as user comments ratings rankings feedback or other content that is related to the Web page obtained by the rendering component . The context server can then send such content to the associative component for presentation to the user. In this fashion the user can access information from other visitors to the Web page and obtain opinions from those users that relate to the Web page.

A wide variety of types of information that relate to a Web page that is created by other users or viewers of a Web page can be created. This content can include notes and chat sessions such as those previously disclosed or described in conjunction with other figures. Such content can also include backlinks context specific or context aware search functions Web log blog postings and ranking functions among others. It should be noted that any of these types of content can be anchored to a location such as a URL or a domain name as previously disclosed or described. Such anchoring can enable association of content with a Web site that is hosted by a party other than a party that hosts the Web site with which the content is associated or anchored.

One type of content that can be created by a user of a Web site is a tag. A tag can be an annotation created by a user that can relate to a Web site or some other information of interest to the creating user. For example a user can create a tag that includes a short descriptive phrase associated with the Web site. Additionally or alternatively a rating of a site such as a multiple star rating or a simple thumbs up thumbs down rating can be provided. The rating can apply to the Web site itself or to a product or service offered on the Web site among other things. A link to a related or similar Web site can also be provided including advertising links. Other types of content can also be added. Further tags can be ranked according to various attributes and also used to rank Web pages with which those tags are associated.

The supplemental content provision system includes a client user interface . The client user interface can be a Web browser or another type of user interface that has the ability to obtain information and present that information to a user. Specifically the client user interface can be a pluggable sidebar that can be displayed to a user in conjunction with primary content that can be presented by another component such as a Web browser in certain implementations. Pluggability of the client user interface can provide the ability for developers to add support for various types of content that can be associated with primary content in any of the ways disclosed or described in conjunction with other figures.

The client user interface can communicate with a third party content provider . The third party content provider can provide informational content such as notes documents such as Web pages intranet pages text documents in a variety of formats graphical or audio information search related information including search terms or results and access to search engines wikis Web logs blogs RSS or other news feeds chat content including notification based chat content instant message information including messages or user names tags inlinks outlinks and any other information that can be stored or presented in an electronic or machine readable format or another type of information to a user by employing a suitable means of communication that can be supported by the client user interface . A separate advertising interface can provide a platform for advertisers to create or provide advertising to be presented to the user. The advertising interface can be a Web browser window or some other suitable interface. Specifics of the advertising interface depend largely upon details of a particular implementation as well as a desired level of access to be provided to an advertiser.

The client user interface can send requests for various types of information through a privacy protection service . These requests can be requests for content that is associated with or anchored to content provided by the third party content providers . The privacy protection service can act to protect an identity or other privacy related information of a user submitting the requests for information. This protection can be accomplished by obscuring a true user request by including the request among a group of dummy requests. Other techniques specifically including use of hash or other encryption functions to encode information requests or use of various anonymizer functions can additionally or alternatively be used.

The privacy protection service can send information requests to and receive information from an information provision system . The information provision system can include a variety of components that can facilitate creation and access of supplemental information. This supplemental information can be manually created by a user can be automatically created by a script or bot such as a Web crawler or can be otherwise configured to create content for a user.

The information provision system includes a fetcher . The fetcher can receive a request for information that can include a URL a domain name or other appropriate identifier from the client user interface . The fetcher can use the request from the client user interface to obtain information from other components. Specifically the fetcher can obtain a set of preferences for the requesting user from a set of user preferences . The fetcher can use any obtained user preferences to tailor information to be provided to the client user interface in accordance with individual desires of a requesting user.

The fetcher can obtain content from a content data store . The content data store can be a database a Web service or some other appropriate data store. Content that can be included in the content data store can include user created content from a user content writer . The user content writer can provide a means by which content created by a user can be added to the content data store . This means can be a Web form or other Web service among other things. The content data store can also include content from a non user content module . The non user content module can include such things as scripts Web crawlers and tags among other things.

The fetcher can also obtain advertising information from an advertising data store . The advertising data store can include advertising content including graphical audio and video content from an advertising purchasing module . Advertisers using the advertising user interface can purchase or otherwise obtain an ability to place advertisements into the information provision system by using the advertising purchasing module . The advertising purchasing module can access user models to allow advertisers to select one or more user models to be used in targeting advertising to users.

A ranking and filtering module can accept content from the fetcher and modify that content in accordance with user preferences and user feedback . User feedback can be created by the user of the client user interface and can be used to customize content prior to provision of the content to the client user interface . Modified content can be provided to the client user interface by the ranking and filtering module .

The content data store can also create a notification that can be sent to the client user interface . A user of the client user interface can subscribe to such notifications that can be used to trigger requests for information from the client user interface . The content data store can generate an event upon modification of included content. This event can cause generation of the notification . The notification can be sent to the client user interface which can use the notification as a triggering event to request new or updated content from the information provision system .

Various components of the information provision system can use artificial intelligence based components to provide functionality to the system. For example the ranking and filtering module can employ classifiers to assign ranks to content to be provided to the client user interface . Also for example the advertising purchasing module can use artificial intelligence based components to match user models with users in desired target demographic groups.

The disclosed and described components for example in connection with the previously mentions matching or inference tasks among others can employ various artificial intelligence based schemes for carrying out various tasks. For example demographic matching or content ranking in accordance with user feedback or preferences can be carried out by a neural network an expert system a rules based processing component or a support vector machine.

A classifier is a function that maps an input attribute vector X x x x x . . . x to a confidence that the input belongs to a class that is f X confidence class . Such a classification can employ a probabilistic and or statistical based analysis for example factoring into the analysis utilities and costs to prognose or infer an action that a user desires to be automatically performed. In the case of a content provision system for example attributes of a reference set of information such as user preferences to be used in a comparison can be used to determine whether attributes of a piece of content can be considered to match the preferences of the user.

A support vector machine SVM is an example of a classifier that can be employed. The SVM operates by finding a hypersurface in the space of possible inputs which hypersurface attempts to split the triggering criteria from the non triggering events. Intuitively this makes the classification correct for testing data that is near but not identical to training data. Other directed and undirected model classification approaches include for example na ve Bayes Bayesian networks decision trees and probabilistic classification models providing different patterns of independence can be employed. Classification as used herein also includes statistical regression that is utilized to develop models of priority.

As will be readily appreciated from the subject specification components disclosed or described herein can employ classifiers that are explicitly trained for example by a generic training data as well as implicitly trained for example by observing user behavior receiving extrinsic information . For example SVMs are configured by a learning or training phase within a classifier constructor and feature selection module. Thus the classifier s can be used to automatically perform a number of functions including but not limited to matching and ranking functions.

In operation the supplemental content provision system can function as follows. A user can operate the client user interface to obtain a Web page. The Web page can be provided over a network connection such as a LAN a WAN an intranet or the Internet among others. The client user interface can use an anchoring scheme such as any of the anchoring schemes disclosed or described herein to identify additional content to obtain from the third party content provider . Based upon the anchor the client user interface can request additional content from the information provision system . This additional content can be notes chat room connections tags advertisements or any combination of these among others.

The client user interface sends its request to the privacy protection service . This request can be triggered by the notification . The privacy protection service anonymizes the request by stripping any personally identifiable information from the request and forwards the request to the fetcher . Additionally or alternatively the privacy protection service can include the request in with a group of dummy requests to hide the real request from anyone who may be monitoring the requests.

The fetcher obtains user preferences that can be anonymized as well from the user preferences and uses those preferences to obtain content from the content data store and advertisements from the advertisement data store . The fetcher sends the content and advertisements to the ranking and filtering module that ranks and filters the content and advertisements in accordance with the user preferences user models and user feedback . The ranking and filtering module sends the content and advertisements to the privacy protection service that relays the content and advertisements to the client user interface .

The user can use the client user interface through the privacy protection service to create user content by accessing the user content writer . The user content writer places the user created content into the content data store . Additionally or alternatively the non user content can be placed into the content data store and included in content ultimately sent to the client user interface .

The user can also access the user feedback module to provide explicit feedback for the content provided to the client user interface . The feedback can include measures of quality such as relevance along with requests for more information of the type provided or requests to block certain content. User feedback can be used in ranking and filtering tasks and can specifically be used to assist in training any artificial intelligence based components of the ranking and filtering module .

Advertisers can use the advertising user interface to access the advertising purchasing module . Those advertisers can purchase advertising space and access the user models to define target recipients of the advertising. Advertisers can also use the advertiser user interface and the advertising purchasing module to upload or otherwise provide specific advertising to be provided to users. These advertisements are stored in the advertising data store .

The user interface can include a primary information pane . In this example which is based upon a Web browsing platform and which can be modified to accommodate variations previously disclosed or described in conjunction with other figures the primary information pane can be used to render or display a Web page to which a user has navigated. Standard Web page elements such as text graphics multimedia content and embedded code among other things can be rendered in the primary information pane . The Web page rendered in the primary information pane can be reached by entering a URL in a navigation bar by performing a search using a search engine or by clicking on a hyperlink from another Web page among other methods.

A secondary information pane or sidebar can be displayed near the primary information pane . Although called a sidebar the secondary information pane or sidebar can be part of a single window that also includes the primary information pane as shown or can be presented in a separate window. Additionally or alternatively the secondary information pane or sidebar can be positioned at the top or bottom of the window as well as on either the left or right sides. Such positioning can be in accordance with a user selectable preference for the user interface .

The secondary information pane or sidebar can provide an area within which various elements such as notes chat boxes and advertising such as the notes chat boxes and advertising disclosed and described herein in conjunction with other figures can be displayed. A note includes a message from a user indicating that the user has tickets for sale for an event that is to occur in the same approximate geographic location as an establishment described by a Web page rendered in the primary information pane . Other messages are included in notes .

An add note component provides a text box and an entry control that allows a user to create and add a note that can be anchored to the domain name of the Web site currently being viewed in the primary information pane . A chat box provides an interface for a user to join a chat session that is related to a general topic of the currently viewed Web site. An advertising area provides a space where targeted advertising can be delivered to a user.

With reference to flowcharts in accordance with various methods or procedures are presented. While for purposes of simplicity of explanation the one or more methodologies shown herein for example in the form of a flow chart are shown and described as a series of acts it is to be understood and appreciated that neither the illustrated and described methods and procedures nor any components with which such methods or procedures can be used are necessarily limited by the order of acts as some acts may occur in a different order and or concurrently with other acts from that shown and described herein. For example those skilled in the art will understand and appreciate that a methodology could alternatively be represented as a series of interrelated states or events such as in a state diagram. Moreover not all illustrated acts may be required to implement a methodology or procedure.

Processing of the method begins at START block and proceeds to process block . At process block a Web page is fetched from some location on a network. The network can be a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN an intranet or the Internet among others. Content of the fetched Web page is analyzed at process block . Various analysis algorithms can be employed to find important or relevant terms in a Web page. Among those algorithms is the TF IDF algorithm previously discussed in conjunction with other figures.

At process block additional content that is related to content of the fetched Web page is identified and obtained. This content can be obtained from a location other than the network location that provided the Web page being viewed or the Web page that was analyzed. The content can be related in a variety of ways including but not limited to being topically related or being anchored to a URL of the Web page. Specifically the obtained content can be created by a current user or by other users who have made such content available for public or group viewing. At process block the obtained additional content is presented to a user. Presentation can occur in an identified region of a human computer interface such as a graphical user interface. Processing of the method terminates at END block .

Processing of the method begins at START block and proceeds to process block . At process block a Web page is obtained from a location on a network. This network can be a LAN a WAN an intranet or the Internet among others. At process block content of the Web page is analyzed. As in other examples the TF IDF algorithm can be used to analyze the Web page. Other algorithms can also be used.

An interactive service in this example a chat session that is related to the content of the Web page is identified at process block . Identification can be based upon a keyword search for chatroom topics among other methods. At process block a connection is made to at least one identified chat session and chatroom content is presented to a user. Processing of the method terminates at END block .

Processing of the method begins at START block . Processing then continues to process block where a Web page is fetched. The Web page can be fetched from some Web server that can be local or remote. A remote Web server can be accessed by using a network such as a LAN a WAN an intranet or the Internet among others. At process block content of the fetched Web page is analyzed. Analysis of the content of the Web page can be according to a variety of algorithms specifically including the TF IDF algorithm. Another suitable algorithm can be substituted for the TF IDF algorithm.

Content from Web logs that is relevant to content of the fetched Web page is identified and obtained at process block . Web log content can be relevant in a variety of ways. For example a Web log can specifically discuss content on the Web page that was analyzed. A Web log entry can also provide a hyperlink to the analyzed Web page. Also a Web log entry can simply discuss the same or a similar topic as the analyzed Web page. Such Web log content is presented to user at process block . Processing of the method terminates at END block .

Processing of the method begins START block . At process block a Web page is fetched from some information server such as a Web server. The information server can be local or remote. In the case where the information server is remote the Web page can be obtained over a network such as a LAN a WAN an intranet or the Internet among others.

The fetched Web page is analyzed at process block . Important terms or concepts from the Web page are identified at process block . Analysis and identification tasks can be performed using various algorithms including the TF IDF algorithms discussed in conjunction with other figures. Processing of the method continues at process block where a search query is accepted from the user.

At process block the search query accepted from the user is optionally augmented by adding important terms or concepts identified from the analyzed Web page to the query. A search using the augmented query is performed at process block . Augmentation of the query in this manner can be used to bias results of the search in favor of results that include content that is similar to content of the analyzed Web page. Searches can also optionally be refined in a variety of ways such as by limiting a query to a current domain or to pages that link to a currently viewed page. Other modifications are also possible. Results of the search are obtained at process block and can be presented to a user through some interface. At process block the obtained results are optionally reordered. Processing of the method terminates at END block .

In order to provide additional context for implementation and the following discussion is intended to provide a brief general description of a suitable computing environment within which disclosed and described components and methods can be implemented. While various specific implementations have been described above in the general context of computer executable instructions of a computer program that runs on a local computer and or remote computer those skilled in the art will recognize that other implementations are also possible either alone or in combination with other program modules. Generally program modules include routines programs components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks and or implement particular abstract data types.

Moreover those skilled in the art will appreciate that the above described components and methods may be practiced with other computer system configurations including single processor or multi processor computer systems minicomputers mainframe computers as well as personal computers hand held computing devices microprocessor based and or programmable consumer electronics and the like each of which may operatively communicate with one or more associated devices. Certain illustrated aspects of the disclosed and described components and methods may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where certain tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network or other data connection. However some if not all of these aspects may be practiced on stand alone computers. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in local and or remote memory storage devices.

One possible means of communication between a client and a server can be in the form of a data packet adapted to be transmitted between two or more computer processes. The system includes a communication framework that can be employed to facilitate communications between the client s and the server s . The client s are operably connected to one or more client data store s that can be employed to store information local to the client s . Similarly the server s are operably connected to one or more server data store s that can be employed to store information local to the servers .

With reference to an exemplary environment for implementing various aspects of the invention includes a computer . The computer includes a processing unit a system memory and a system bus . The system bus couples system components including but not limited to the system memory to the processing unit . The processing unit can be any of various available processors. Dual microprocessors and other multiprocessor architectures also can be employed as the processing unit .

The system bus can be any of several types of bus structure s including the memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus or external bus and or a local bus using any variety of available bus architectures including but not limited to Industrial Standard Architecture ISA Micro Channel Architecture MSA Extended ISA EISA Intelligent Drive Electronics IDE VESA Local Bus VLB Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI Card Bus Universal Serial Bus USB Advanced Graphics Port AGP Personal Computer Memory Card International Association bus PCMCIA Firewire IEEE 1394 and Small Computer Systems Interface SCSI .

The system memory includes volatile memory and nonvolatile memory . The basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines to transfer information between elements within the computer such as during start up is stored in nonvolatile memory . By way of illustration and not limitation nonvolatile memory can include read only memory ROM programmable ROM PROM electrically programmable ROM EPROM electrically erasable ROM EEPROM or flash memory. Volatile memory includes random access memory RAM which acts as external cache memory. By way of illustration and not limitation RAM is available in many forms such as synchronous RAM SRAM dynamic RAM DRAM synchronous DRAM SDRAM double data rate SDRAM DDR SDRAM enhanced SDRAM ESDRAM Synchlink DRAM SLDRAM and direct Rambus RAM DRRAM .

Computer also includes removable non removable volatile non volatile computer storage media. For example illustrates a disk storage . The disk storage includes but is not limited to devices like a magnetic disk drive floppy disk drive tape drive Jaz drive Zip drive LS 100 drive flash memory card or memory stick. In addition disk storage can include storage media separately or in combination with other storage media including but not limited to an optical disk drive such as a compact disk ROM device CD ROM CD recordable drive CD R Drive CD rewritable drive CD RW Drive or a digital versatile disk ROM drive DVD ROM . To facilitate connection of the disk storage devices to the system bus a removable or non removable interface is typically used such as interface .

It is to be appreciated that describes software that acts as an intermediary between users and the basic computer resources described in the suitable operating environment . Such software includes an operating system . The operating system which can be stored on the disk storage acts to control and allocate resources of the computer system . System applications take advantage of the management of resources by operating system through program modules and program data stored either in system memory or on disk storage . It is to be appreciated that the subject invention can be implemented with various operating systems or combinations of operating systems.

A user enters commands or information into the computer through input device s . The input devices include but are not limited to a pointing device such as a mouse trackball stylus touch pad keyboard microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner TV tuner card digital camera digital video camera web camera and the like. These and other input devices connect to the processing unit through the system bus via interface port s . Interface port s include for example a serial port a parallel port a game port and a universal serial bus USB . Output device s use some of the same type of ports as input device s . Thus for example a USB port may be used to provide input to computer and to output information from computer to an output device . Output adapter is provided to illustrate that there are some output devices like monitors speakers and printers among other output devices which require special adapters. The output adapters include by way of illustration and not limitation video and sound cards that provide a means of connection between the output device and the system bus . It should be noted that other devices and or systems of devices provide both input and output capabilities such as remote computer s .

Computer can operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as remote computer s . The remote computer s can be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a workstation a microprocessor based appliance a peer device or other common network node and the like and typically includes many or all of the elements described relative to computer . For purposes of brevity only a memory storage device is illustrated with remote computer s . Remote computer s is logically connected to computer through a network interface and then physically connected via communication connection . Network interface encompasses wire and or wireless communication networks such as local area networks LAN and wide area networks WAN . LAN technologies include Fiber Distributed Data Interface FDDI Copper Distributed Data Interface CDDI Ethernet Token Ring and the like. WAN technologies include but are not limited to point to point links circuit switching networks like Integrated Services Digital Networks ISDN and variations thereon packet switching networks and Digital Subscriber Lines DSL .

Communication connection s refers to the hardware software employed to connect the network interface to the bus . While communication connection is shown for illustrative clarity inside computer it can also be external to computer . The hardware software necessary for connection to the network interface includes for exemplary purposes only internal and external technologies such as modems including regular telephone grade modems cable modems and DSL modems ISDN adapters and Ethernet cards.

What has been described above includes examples of the subject invention. It is of course not possible to describe every conceivable combination of components or methodologies for purposes of describing the subject invention but one of ordinary skill in the art may recognize that many further combinations and permutations of the subject invention are possible. Accordingly the subject invention is intended to embrace all such alterations modifications and variations that fall within the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

In particular and in regard to the various functions performed by the above described components devices circuits systems and the like the terms including a reference to a means used to describe such components are intended to correspond unless otherwise indicated to any component which performs the specified function of the described component e.g. a functional equivalent even though not structurally equivalent to the disclosed structure which performs the function in the herein illustrated exemplary aspects of the invention. In this regard it will also be recognized that the invention includes a system as well as a computer readable medium having computer executable instructions for performing the acts and or events of the various methods of the invention.

In addition while a particular feature of the invention may have been disclosed with respect to only one of several implementations such feature may be combined with one or more other features of the other implementations as may be desired and advantageous for any given or particular application. Furthermore to the extent that the terms includes and including and variants thereof are used in either the detailed description or the claims these terms are intended to be inclusive in a manner similar to the term comprising. 

