---

title: Agents for preventing and treating disorders involving modulation of the RyR receptors
abstract: 

and salts, hydrates, solvates, complexes, and prodrugs thereof. The present invention further provides methods for synthesizing compounds of Formula I. The invention additionally provides pharmaceutical compositions comprising the compounds of Formula I and methods of using the pharmaceutical compositions of Formula I to treat and prevent disorders and diseases associated with the RyR receptors that regulate calcium channel functioning in cells. Such disorders and diseases include, by way of example only, cardiac disorders and diseases, skeletal muscular disorders and diseases, cognitive disorders and diseases, malignant hyperthermia, diabetes, and sudden infant death syndrome. Cardiac disorder and diseases include, but are not limited to, irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases; exercise-induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases; sudden cardiac death; exercise-induced sudden cardiac death; congestive heart failure; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; and high blood pressure. Irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include and exercise-induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include, but are not limited to, atrial and ventricular arrhythmia; atrial and ventricular fibrillation; atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmia; atrial and ventricular tachycardia; catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT); and exercise-induced variants thereof. Skeletal muscular disorder and diseases include, but are not limited to, skeletal muscle fatigue, exercise-induced skeletal muscle fatigue, muscular dystrophy, bladder disorders, and incontinence. Cognitive disorders and diseases include, but are not limited to, Alzheimer's Disease, forms of memory loss, and age-dependent memory loss.

url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07704990&OS=07704990&RS=07704990
owner: The Trustees of Columbia University in the City of New York
number: 07704990
owner_city: New York
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050825
---
This invention was made with government support under NIH Grant No. PO1 HL 67849 01. As such the United States government may have certain rights in this invention.

This invention relates to novel compounds and their use to treat and prevent disorders and diseases associated with the RyR receptors that regulate calcium channel functioning in cells. More particularly the invention discloses compounds that are related to 1 4 benzothiazepines and are useful to treat cardiac and skeletal muscular disorders. The invention also discloses pharmaceutical compositions comprising the compounds and articles of manufacture comprising the pharmaceutical compositions.

The sarcoplasmic reticulum SR is a structure in cells that functions among other things as a specialized intracellular calcium Ca store. Channels in the SR called ryanodine receptors RyRs open and close to regulate the release of Ca from the SR into the intracellular cytoplasm of the cell. Release of Ca into the cytoplasm from the SR increases cytoplasmic Ca concentration. Open probability Po of the RyR receptor refers to the likelihood that the RyR channel is open at any given moment and therefore capable of releasing Ca into the cytoplasm from the SR.

There are three types of ryanodine receptors all of which are highly related Ca channels RyR1 RyR2 and RyR3. RyR1 is found predominantly in skeletal muscle as well as other tissues RyR2 is found predominantly in the heart as well as other tissues and RyR3 is found in the brain as well as other tissues. The RyR channels are formed by four RyR polypeptides in association with four FK506 binding proteins FKBPs specifically FKBP12 calstabin1 and FKBP12.6 calstabin2 . Calstabin1 binds to RyR1 calstabin2 binds to RyR2 and calstabin1 binds to RyR3. The FKBP proteins calstabin1 and calstabin2 bind to the RyR channel one molecule per RyR subunit stabilize RyR channel functioning and facilitate coupled gating between neighboring RyR channels thereby preventing abnormal activation of the channel during the channel s closed state.

Besides the calstabin binding proteins protein kinase A PKA also binds to the cytoplasmic surface of the RyR receptors. PKA phosphorylation of the RyR receptors causes partial dissociation of calstabins from RyRs. Dissociation of calstabin from RyR causes increased open probability of RyR and therefore increased Ca release from the SR into the intracellular cytoplasm.

Ca release from the SR in skeletal muscle cells and heart cells is a key physiological mechanism that controls muscle performance because increased concentration of Ca in the intracellular cytoplasm causes contraction of the muscle.

Excitation contraction EC coupling in skeletal muscles involves electrical depolarization of the plasma membrane in the transverse tubule T tubule which activates voltage gated L type Ca channels LTCCs . LTCCs trigger Ca release from the SR through physical interaction with RyR1. The resulting increase in cytoplasmic Ca concentration induces actin myosin interaction and muscle contraction. To enable relaxation intracellular Ca is pumped back into the SR via SR Ca ATPase pumps SERCAs which is regulated by phospholamban PLB depending on the muscle fiber type.

It has been shown that disease forms that result in sustained activation of the sympathetic nervous system and increased plasma catecholamine levels cause maladaptive activation of intracellular stress pathways resulting in destabilization of the RyR1 channel closed state and intracellular Ca leak. SR Ca leak via RyR1 channels was found to deplete intracellular SR calcium stores to increase compensatory energy consumption and to result in significant acceleration of muscle fatigue. The stress induced muscle defect permanently reduces isolated muscle and in vivo performance particularly in situations of increased demand.

It also has been shown that destabilization of the RyR1 closed state occurs under pathologic conditions of increased sympathetic activation and involves depletion of the stabilizing calstabin1 FKBP12 channel subunit. Proof of principle experiments have shown that PKA activation as an end effector of the sympathetic nervous systems increases RyR1 PKA phosphorylation at Ser 2843 which decreases the binding affinity of calstabin 1 to RyR1 and increases channel open probability.

In cardiac striated muscle RyR2 is the major Ca release channel required for EC coupling and muscle contraction. During EC coupling depolarization of the cardiac muscle cell membrane during phase zero of the action potential activates voltage gated Ca channels. Ca influx through the open voltage gated channels in turn initiates Ca release from the SR via RyR2. This process is known as Ca induced Ca release. The RyR2 mediated Ca induced Ca release then activates the contractile proteins in the cardiac cell resulting in cardiac muscle contraction.

Phosphorylation of cardiac RyR2 by PKA is an important part of the fight or flight response that increases cardiac EC coupling gain by augmenting the amount of Ca released for a given trigger. This signaling pathway provides a mechanism by which activation of the sympathetic nervous system in response to stress results in increased cardiac output. PKA phosphorylation of RyR2 increases the open probability of the channel by dissociating calstabin2 FKBP12.6 from the channel complex. This in turn increases the sensitivity of RyR2 to Ca dependent activation.

Despite advances in treatment heart failure remains an important cause of mortality in Western countries. An important hallmark of heart failure is reduced myocardial contractility. In heart failure contractile abnormalities result in part from alterations in the signaling pathway that allows the cardiac action potential to trigger Ca release via RyR2 channels and muscle contraction. In particular in failing hearts the amplitude of the whole cell Ca transient is decreased and the duration prolonged.

Cardiac arrhythmia a common feature of heart failure results in many of the deaths associated with the disease. Atrial fibrillation AF is the most common cardiac arrhythmia in humans and represents a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Structural and electrical remodeling including shortening of atrial refractoriness loss of rate related adaptation of refractoriness and shortening of the wavelength of re entrant wavelets accompany sustained tachycardia. This remodeling is likely important in the development maintenance and progression of atrial fibrillation. Studies suggest that calcium handling plays a role in electrical remodeling in atrial fibrillation.

Approximately 50 of all patients with heart disease die from fatal cardiac arrhythmias. In some cases a ventricular arrhythmia in the heart is rapidly fatal a phenomenon referred to as sudden cardiac death SCD . Fatal ventricular arrhythmias and SCD also occur in young otherwise healthy individuals who are not known to have structural heart disease. In fact ventricular arrhythmia is the most common cause of sudden death in otherwise healthy individuals.

Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia CPVT is an inherited disorder in individuals with structurally normal hearts. It is characterized by stress induced ventricular tachycardia a lethal arrhythmia that causes SCD. In subjects with CPVT physical exertion and or stress induce bidirectional and or polymorphic ventricular tachycardias that lead to SCD even in the absence of detectable structural heart disease. CPVT is predominantly inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Individuals with CPVT have ventricular arrhythmias when subjected to exercise but do not develop arrhythmias at rest. Studies have identified mutations in the human RyR2 gene on chromosome 1q42 q43 in individuals with CPVT.

Failing hearts e.g. in patients with heart failure and in animal models of heart failure are characterized by a maladaptive response that includes chronic hyperadrenergic stimulation. In heart failure chronic beta adrenergic stimulation is associated with the activation of beta adrenergic receptors in the heart which through coupling with G proteins activate adenylyl cyclase and thereby increase intracellular cAMP concentration. cAMP activates cAMP dependent PKA which has been shown to induce hyperphosphorylation of RyR2. Thus chronic heart failure is a chronic hyperadrenergic state which results in several pathologic consequences including PKA hyperphosphorylation of RyR2.

The PKA hyperphosphorylation of RyR2 has been proposed as a factor contributing to depressed contractile function and arrhythmogenesis in heart failure. Consistent with this hypothesis PKA hyperphosphorylation of RyR2 in failing hearts has been demonstrated in vivo both in animal models and in patients with heart failure undergoing cardiac transplantation.

In failing hearts the hyperphosphorylation of RyR2 by PKA induces the dissociation of FKBP12.6 calstabin2 from the RyR2 channel. This causes marked changes in the biophysical properties of the RyR2 channel including increased open probability Po due to an increased sensitivity to Ca dependent activation destabilization of the channel resulting in subconductance states and impaired coupled gating of the channels resulting in defective EC coupling and cardiac dysfunction. Thus PKA hyperphosphorylated RyR2 is very sensitive to low level Ca stimulation and this manifests itself as a diastolic SR Ca leak through the PKA hyperphosphorylated RyR2 channel.

The maladaptive response to stress in heart failure results in depletion of FKBP12.6 from the channel macromolecular complex. This leads to a shift to the left in the sensitivity of RyR2 to Ca induced Ca release resulting in channels that are more active at low to moderate Ca concentrations. Over time the increased leak through RyR results in resetting of the SR Ca content to a lower level which in turn reduces EC coupling gain and contributes to impaired systolic contractility.

Additionally a subpopulation of RyR2 that are particularly leaky can release SR Ca during the resting phase of the cardiac cycle diastole. This results in depolarizations of the cardiomyocyte membrane known as delayed after depolarizations DADs which are known to trigger fatal ventricular cardiac arrhythmias.

In patients with CPVT mutations in their RyR2 and otherwise structurally normal hearts a similar phenomenon is at work. Specifically it is known that exercise and stress induce the release of catecholamines that activate beta adrenergic receptors in the heart. Activation of the beta adrenergic receptors leads to PKA hyperphosphorylation of RyR2 channels. Evidence also suggests that the PKA hyperphosphorylation of RyR2 resulting from beta adrenergic receptor activation renders mutated RyR2 channels more likely to open in the relaxation phase of the cardiac cycle increasing the likelihood of arrhythmias.

Cardiac arrhythmias are known to be associated with diastolic SR Ca leaks in patients with CPVT mutations in their RyR2 and otherwise structurally normal hearts. In these cases the most common mechanism for induction and maintenance of ventricular tachycardia is abnormal automaticity. One form of abnormal automaticity known as triggered arrhythmia is associated with aberrant release of SR Ca which initiates DADs. DADs are abnormal depolarizations in cardiomyocytes that occur after repolarization of a cardiac action potential. The molecular basis for the abnormal SR Ca release that results in DADs has not been fully elucidated. However DADs are known to be blocked by ryanodine providing evidence that RyR2 plays a key role in the pathogenesis of this aberrant Ca release.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 489 125 discusses JTV 519 4 3 4 benzylpiperidin 1 yl propionyl 7 methoxy 2 3 4 5 tetrahydro 1 4 benzothiazepine monohydrochloride also known as k201 or ICP Calstan 100 a 1 4 benzothiazepine as a new modulator of RyR calcium ion channels.

Co pending application U.S. Ser. No. 10 763 498 discusses RyR2 as a target for treating and preventing heart failure and cardiac arrhythmias including atrial fibrillation and cardiac arrhythmias that cause exercise induced sudden cardiac death SCD . RyR2 channels with 7 different CPVT mutations e.g. S2246L R2474S N4104K R4497C P2328S Q4201R V4653F were found to have functional defects that resulted in channels that became leaky i.e. a calcium leak when stimulated during exercise. The mechanism for the VT in CPVT has been demonstrated to be the same as the mechanism for VT in heart failure.

It has been shown that exercise induced arrhythmias and sudden death in patients with CPVT result from a reduced affinity of FKBP12.6 calstabin2 for RyR2. Additionally it has been demonstrated that exercise activates RyR2 as a result of phosphorylation by adenosine 3 5 monophosphate cAMP dependent protein kinase PKA . Mutant RyR2 channels which had normal function in planar lipid bilayers under basal conditions were more sensitive to activation by PKA phosphorylation exhibiting increased activity open probability and prolonged open states as compared with wild type channels. In addition PKA phosphorylated mutant RyR2 channels were resistant to inhibition by Mg a physiological inhibitor of the channel and showed reduced binding to FKBP12.6 aka calstabin2 which stabilizes the channel in the closed state . These findings indicate that during exercise when the RyR2 are PKA phosphorylated the mutant CPVT channels are more likely to open in the relaxation phase of the cardiac cycle diastole increasing the likelihood of arrhythmias triggered by SR Ca leak.

Additionally co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 288 606 discusses a method for regulating contraction of a subject s heart by administering a compound which regulates PKA phosphorylation of an RyR2 receptor and specifically decreases PKA phosphorylation. Co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 608 723 also discusses a method for treating and prophylaxis for atrial tachyarrhythmia and exercise and stress induced arrhythmias by administration of an agent which inhibits PKA phosphorylation of RyR2.

In view of the foregoing there is a need to identify new agents effective for treating or preventing disorders and diseases associated with the RyR receptors that regulate calcium channel functioning in cells including skeletal muscular disorders and diseases and especially cardiac disorders and diseases. More particularly a need remains to identify new compounds that can be used to treat RyR associated disorders by for example repairing the leak in RyR channels and enhancing binding of FKBP proteins calstabin1 and calstabin2 to PKA phosphorylated RyR and to mutant RyR that otherwise have reduced affinity for or do not bind to FKBP12 and FKBP12.6. Embodiments of the invention solve some or all of these needs.

Accordingly the present invention generally provides compounds that may be classified as 1 4 benzothiazepines and sometimes are referred to herein as RyCals. 

The present invention further provides a method of treating or preventing various disorders and diseases in a subject that are associated with RyR receptors such as muscular and cardiac disorders comprising administering to the subject an amount of a compound effective to prevent or treat a disorder or disease associated with the RyR receptors wherein the compound is of Formula I 

Also provided is a method of preventing or treating a leak in a RyR2 receptor in a subject including administering to the subject an amount of a compound effective to prevent or treat a leak in the RyR2 receptor wherein the compound is of Formula I 

In addition the present invention provides a method of modulating the binding of RyR and FKBP in a subject including administering to the subject an amount of a compound effective to modulate the level of RyR bound FKBP wherein the compound is of Formula I 

The present invention also provides articles of manufacture for treating and preventing disorders and diseases associated with the RyR receptors such as muscular and cardiac disorders in a subject. The articles of manufacture comprise a pharmaceutical composition of one or more of the compounds of Formula I. The articles of manufacture are packaged with indications for various disorders that the pharmaceutical compositions are capable of treating and or preventing.

Other features and advantages of the present invention will become apparent from the following detailed description. It should be understood however that the detailed description and the specific examples while indicating various embodiments of the invention are given by way of illustration only since various changes and modifications within the spirit and scope of the invention will become apparent to those skilled in the art from this detailed description.

As used herein and in the appended claims the singular forms a an and the include plural references unless the content clearly dictates otherwise. Thus for example reference to an agent includes a plurality of such agents and equivalents thereof known to those skilled in the art and reference to the FKBP12.6 polypeptide is a reference to one or more FKBP12.6 polypeptides also known as calstabin2 and equivalents thereof known to those skilled in the art and so forth. All publications patent applications patents and other references mentioned herein are incorporated by reference in their entirety.

The present invention provides novel compounds that are capable of treating and preventing disorders and diseases associated with the RyR receptors that regulate calcium channel functioning in cells. More particularly the present invention provides novel compounds that are capable of treating or preventing a leak in RyR channels. Disorders and diseases associated with the RyR receptors means disorders and diseases that can be treated and or prevented by modulating the RyR receptors that regulate calcium channel functioning in cells. Disorders and diseases associated with the RyR receptors include without limitation cardiac disorders and diseases skeletal muscular disorders and diseases cognitive disorders and diseases malignant hyperthermia diabetes and sudden infant death syndrome. Cardiac disorder and diseases include but are not limited to irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases sudden cardiac death exercise induced sudden cardiac death congestive heart failure chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and high blood pressure. Irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include and exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include but are not limited to atrial and ventricular arrhythmia atrial and ventricular fibrillation atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmia atrial and ventricular tachycardia catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia CPVT and exercise induced variants thereof. Skeletal muscular disorder and diseases include but are not limited to skeletal muscle fatigue exercise induced skeletal muscle fatigue muscular dystrophy bladder disorders and incontinence. Cognitive disorders and diseases include but are not limited to Alzheimer s Disease forms of memory loss and age dependent memory loss.

The compounds of Formula I treat and prevent disorders and diseases associated with the RyR receptors. Examples of such compounds include without limitation S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S9 S11 S12 S13 S14 S19 S20 S22 S23 S36 S37 S38 S40 S43 S44 S45 S46 S47 S48 S49 S50 S51 S52 S53 S54 S55 S56 S57 S58 S59 S60 S61 S62 S63 S64 S65 S66 S67 S69 S70 S71 S72 S73 S74 S75 S76 S77 S78 S79 S80 S81 S82 S83 S84 S85 S86 S87 S88 S89 S90 S91 S92 S93 S94 S95 S96 S97 S98 S99 and S100 which have the following structures 

In an embodiment of the present invention if Ris C O R or SOR then R is at positions 2 3 or 5 on the benzene ring.

In another embodiment of the invention if Ris C O R or SOR then each R is independently selected from the group consisting of H halogen OH NH NO CN N SOH acyl alkyl alkylamino cycloalkyl heterocyclyl heterocyclylalkyl alkenyl hetero aryl hetero arylthio and hetero arylamino wherein each acyl alkyl alkoxyl alkylamino cycloalkyl heterocyclyl heterocyclylalkyl alkenyl hetero aryl hetero arylthio and hetero arylamino may be substituted with one or more radicals independently selected from the group consisting of halogen N O S CN N SH nitro oxo acyl alkyl alkoxyl alkylamino alkenyl aryl hetero cycloalkyl and hetero cyclyl.

In another embodiment of the invention if Ris C O R or SOR then there are at least two R groups attached to the benzene ring. Furthermore there are at least two R groups attached to the benzene ring and both R groups are attached at positions 2 3 or 5 on the benzene ring. Still furthermore each R is independently selected from the group consisting of H halogen OH NH NO CN N SOH acyl alkyl alkylamino cycloalkyl heterocyclyl heterocyclylalkyl alkenyl hetero aryl hetero arylthio and hetero arylamino wherein each acyl alkyl alkoxyl alkylamino cycloalkyl heterocyclyl heterocyclylalkyl alkenyl hetero aryl hetero arylthio and hetero arylamino may be substituted with one or more radicals independently selected from the group consisting of halogen N O S CN N SH nitro oxo acyl alkyl alkoxyl alkylamino alkenyl aryl hetero cycloalkyl and hetero cyclyl.

In another embodiment of the invention if Ris C O R then Ris selected from the group consisting of NR NHNHR NHOH OR CONHNHR CONR CHX acyl aryl cycloalkyl cycloalkylalkyl heterocyclyl and heterocyclylalkyl wherein each acyl aryl cycloalkyl cycloalkylalkyl heterocyclyl and heterocyclylalkyl may be substituted with one or more radicals independently selected from the group consisting of halogen N O S CN N nitro oxo acyl alkyl alkoxyl alkylamino alkenyl aryl hetero cycloalkyl and hetero cyclyl.

The compounds of Formula I reduce the open probability of RyR by increasing the affinity of FKBP12 calstabin1 and FKBP12.6 calstabin2 for respectively PKA phosphorylated RyR1 and PKA phosphorylated RyR2. Moreover the compounds of Formula I normalize gating of mutant RyR channels including CPVT associated mutant RyR2 channels by increasing FKBP12 calstabin1 and FKBP12.6 calstabin2 binding affinity. Therefore the compounds of Formula I prevent disorders and conditions involving modulation of the RyR receptors particularly the RyR1 and RyR2 receptors. Examples of such disorders and conditions include without limitation cardiac disorders and diseases skeletal muscular disorders and diseases cognitive disorders and diseases malignant hyperthermia diabetes and sudden infant death syndrome. Cardiac disorder and diseases include but are not limited to irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases sudden cardiac death exercise induced sudden cardiac death congestive heart failure chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and high blood pressure. Irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include and exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include but are not limited to atrial and ventricular arrhythmia atrial and ventricular fibrillation atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmia atrial and ventricular tachycardia catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia CPVT and exercise induced variants thereof. Skeletal muscular disorder and diseases include but are not limited to skeletal muscle fatigue exercise induced skeletal muscle fatigue muscular dystrophy bladder disorders and incontinence. Cognitive disorders and diseases include but are not limited to Alzheimer s Disease forms of memory loss and age dependent memory loss. The compounds of Formula I treat these disorders and conditions by increasing FKBP12 calstabin1 RyR1 binding affinity and increasing FKBP12.6 calstabin2 RyR2 binding affinity.

In accordance with the foregoing the present invention provides a method for limiting or preventing a decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP calstabin in cells of a subject. As used herein RyR includes RyR1 RyR2 and RyR3. Additionally FKBP includes both FKBP12 calstabin1 and FKBP12.6 calstabin2 . RyR bound FKBP therefore refers to RyR1 bound FKBP12 calstabin1 RyR2 bound FKBP12.6 calstabin2 and RyR3 bound FKBP12 calstabin1 .

As used herein RyR also includes an RyR protein and an RyR analogue. An RyR analogue is a functional variant of the RyR protein having RyR biological activity that has 60 or greater amino acid sequence homology with the RyR protein. The RyR of the present invention are unphosphorylated phosphorylated e.g. by PKA or hyperphosphorylated e.g. by PKA . As further used herein the term RyR biological activity refers to the activity of a protein or peptide that demonstrates an ability to associate physically with or bind with FKBP12 calstabin1 in the case of RyR1 and RyR3 and FKBP12.6 calstabin2 in the case of RyR2 i.e. binding of approximately two fold or approximately five fold above the background binding of a negative control under the conditions of the assays described herein.

As used herein FKBP includes both an FKBP protein and an FKBP analogue whether it be FKBP12 calstabin1 or FKBP12.6 calstabin2 . Unless otherwise indicated herein protein shall include a protein protein domain polypeptide or peptide and any fragment thereof. An FKBP analogue is a functional variant of the FKBP protein having FKBP biological activity that has 60 or greater amino acid sequence homology with the FKBP protein whether it be FKBP12 calstabin1 or FKBP12.6 calstabin2 . As further used herein the term FKBP biological activity refers to the activity of a protein or peptide that demonstrates an ability to associate physically with or bind with unphosphorylated or non hyperphosphorylated RyR2 i.e. binding of approximately two fold or approximately five fold above the background binding of a negative control under the conditions of the assays described herein.

FKBP binds to the RyR channel one molecule per RyR subunit. Accordingly as used herein the term RyR bound FKBP includes a molecule of an FKBP12 calstabin1 protein that is bound to an RyR1 protein subunit or a tetramer of FKBP12 that is in association with a tetramer of RyR1 a molecule of FKBP12.6 calstabin2 protein that is bound to an RyR2 protein subunit or a tetramer of FKBP12.6 that is in association with a tetramer of RyR2 and a molecule of an FKBP12 calstabin1 protein that is bound to an RyR3 protein subunit or a tetramer of FKBP12 that is in association with a tetramer of RyR3. Therefore RyR bound FKBP refers to RyR1 bound FKBP12 RyR2 bound FKBP12.6 and RyR3 bound FKBP12. 

In accordance with the method of the present invention a decrease or disorder in the level of RyR bound FKBP in cells of a subject refers to a detectable decrease diminution or reduction in the level of RyR bound FKBP in cells of the subject. Such a decrease is limited or prevented in cells of a subject when the decrease is in any way halted hindered impeded obstructed or reduced by the administration of compounds of Formula I such that the level of RyR bound FKBP in cells of the subject is higher than it would otherwise be in the absence of the administered compound.

The level of RyR bound FKBP in a subject is detected by standard assays and techniques including those readily determined from the known art e.g. immunological techniques hybridization analysis immunoprecipitation Western blot analysis fluorescence imaging techniques and or radiation detection etc. as well as any assays and detection methods disclosed herein. For example protein is isolated and purified from cells of a subject using standard methods known in the art including without limitation extraction from the cells e.g. with a detergent that solubilizes the protein where necessary followed by affinity purification on a column chromatography e.g. FTLC and HPLC immunoprecipitation with an antibody and precipitation e.g. with isopropanol and a reagent such as Trizol . Isolation and purification of the protein is followed by electrophoresis e.g. on an SDS polyacrylamide gel . A decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in a subject or the limiting or prevention thereof is determined by comparing the amount of RyR bound FKBP detected prior to the administration of JTV 519 or a compound having Formula I in accordance with methods described below with the amount detected a suitable time after administration of the compound.

A decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in cells of a subject is limited or prevented for example by inhibiting dissociation of FKBP and RyR in cells of the subject by increasing binding between FKBP and RyR in cells of the subject or by stabilizing the RyR FKBP complex in cells of a subject. As used herein the term inhibiting dissociation includes blocking decreasing inhibiting limiting or preventing the physical dissociation or separation of an FKBP subunit from an RyR molecule in cells of the subject and blocking decreasing inhibiting limiting or preventing the physical dissociation or separation of an RyR molecule from an FKBP subunit in cells of the subject. As further used herein the term increasing binding includes enhancing increasing or improving the ability of phosphorylated RyR to associate physically with FKBP e.g. binding of approximately two fold or approximately five fold above the background binding of a negative control in cells of the subject and enhancing increasing or improving the ability of FKBP to associate physically with phosphorylated RyR e.g. binding of approximately two fold or approximately five fold above the background binding of a negative control in cells of the subject. Additionally a decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in cells of a subject is limited or prevented by directly decreasing the level of phosphorylated RyR in cells of the subject or by indirectly decreasing the level of phosphorylated RyR in the cells e.g. by targeting an enzyme such as PKA or another endogenous molecule that regulates or modulates the functions or levels of phosphorylated RyR in the cells . In one embodiment the level of phosphorylated RyR in the cells is decreased by at least 10 in the method of the present invention. In another embodiment the level of phosphorylated RyR is decreased by at least 20 .

The subject of the present invention are in vitro and in vivo systems including without limitation isolated or cultured cells or tissues non cell in vitro assay systems and an animal e.g. an amphibian a bird a fish a mammal a marsupial a human a domestic animal such as a cat dog monkey mouse or rat or a commercial animal such as a cow or pig .

The cells of a subject include striated muscle cells. A striated muscle is a muscle in which the repeating units sarcomeres of the contractile myofibrils are arranged in registry throughout the cell resulting in transverse or oblique striations that are observed at the level of a light microscope. Examples of striated muscle cells include without limitation voluntary skeletal muscle cells and cardiac muscle cells. In one embodiment the cell used in the method of the present invention is a human cardiac muscle cell. As used herein the term cardiac muscle cell includes cardiac muscle fibers such as those found in the myocardium of the heart. Cardiac muscle fibers are composed of chains of contiguous heart muscle cells or cardiomyocytes joined end to end at intercalated disks. These disks possess two kinds of cell junctions expanded desmosomes extending along their transverse portions and gap junctions the largest of which lie along their longitudinal portions.

A decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP is limited or prevented in cells of a subject by administering the compounds of Formula I to the subject this would also permit contact between cells of the subject and the compounds of Formula I. The compounds of Formula I are modulators of calcium ion channels. In addition to regulating Ca levels in myocardial cells the compounds of Formula I modulate the Na current and the inward rectifier K current in cells such as guinea pig ventricular cells and inhibits the delayed rectifier K current in cells such as guinea pig atrial cells.

The compounds of the invention are formulated into pharmaceutical compositions for administration to human subjects in a biologically compatible form suitable for administration in vivo. According to another aspect the present invention provides a pharmaceutical composition comprising compounds of Formula I in admixture with a pharmaceutically acceptable diluent and or carrier. The pharmaceutically acceptable carrier must be acceptable in the sense of being compatible with the other ingredients of the composition and not deleterious to the recipient thereof. The pharmaceutically acceptable carrier employed herein is selected from various organic or inorganic materials that are used as materials for pharmaceutical formulations and which are incorporated as analgesic agents buffers binders disintegrants diluents emulsifiers excipients extenders glidants solubilizers stabilizers suspending agents tonicity agents vehicles and viscosity increasing agents. If necessary pharmaceutical additives such as antioxidants aromatics colorants flavor improving agents preservatives and sweeteners are also added. Examples of acceptable pharmaceutical carriers include carboxymethyl cellulose crystalline cellulose glycerin gum arabic lactose magnesium stearate methyl cellulose powders saline sodium alginate sucrose starch talc and water among others.

The pharmaceutical formulations of the present invention are prepared by methods well known in the pharmaceutical arts. For example the compounds of Formula I are brought into association with a carrier and or diluent as a suspension or solution. Optionally one or more accessory ingredients e.g. buffers flavoring agents surface active agents and the like also are added. The choice of carrier is determined by the solubility and chemical nature of the compounds chosen route of administration and standard pharmaceutical practice.

The compounds of Formula I are administered to a subject by contacting target cells e.g. cardiac muscle cells in vivo in the subject with the compounds. The compounds of Formula I are contacted with e.g. introduced into cells of the subject using known techniques utilized for the introduction and administration of proteins nucleic acids and other drugs. Examples of methods for contacting the cells with i.e. treating the cells with the compounds of Formula I include without limitation absorption electroporation immersion injection introduction liposome delivery transfection transfusion vectors and other drug delivery vehicles and methods. When the target cells are localized to a particular portion of a subject it is desirable to introduce the compounds for Formula I directly to the cells by injection or by some other means e.g. by introducing the compounds into the blood or another body fluid . The target cells are contained in tissue of a subject and are detected by standard detection methods readily determined from the known art examples of which include without limitation immunological techniques e.g. immunohistochemical staining fluorescence imaging techniques and microscopic techniques.

Additionally the compounds of Formula I of the present invention are administered to a human or animal subject by known procedures including without limitation oral administration sublingual or buccal administration parenteral administration transdermal administration via inhalation or intranasally vaginally rectally and intramuscularly. The compounds of Formula I are administered parenterally by epifascial intracapsular intracranial intracutaneous intrathecal intramuscular intraorbital intraperitoneal intraspinal intrasternal intravascular intravenous parenchymatous subcutaneous or sublingual injection or by way of catheter. In one embodiment the agent is adiminstered to the subject by way of delivery to the subject s muscles including but not limited to the subject s cardiac muscles. In an embodiment the agent is administered to the subject by way of targeted delivery to cardiac muscle cells via a catheter inserted into the subject s heart.

For oral administration a formulation of the compounds of Formula I are presented as capsules tablets powders granules or as a suspension or solution. The formulation has conventional additives such as lactose mannitol corn starch or potato starch. The formulation also is presented with binders such as crystalline cellulose cellulose derivatives acacia corn starch or gelatins. Additionally the formulation is presented with disintegrators such as corn starch potato starch or sodium carboxymethylcellulose. The formulation also is presented with dibasic calcium phosphate anhydrous or sodium starch glycolate. Finally the formulation is presented with lubricants such as talc or magnesium stearate.

For parenteral administration i.e. administration by injection through a route other than the alimentary canal the compounds of Formula I are combined with a sterile aqueous solution that is isotonic with the blood of the subject. Such a formulation is prepared by dissolving a solid active ingredient in water containing physiologically compatible substances such as sodium chloride glycine and the like and having a buffered pH compatible with physiological conditions so as to produce an aqueous solution then rendering said solution sterile. The formulation is presented in unit or multi dose containers such as sealed ampoules or vials. The formulation is delivered by any mode of injection including without limitation epifascial intracapsular intracranial intracutaneous intrathecal intramuscular intraorbital intraperitoneal intraspinal intrasternal intravascular intravenous parenchymatous subcutaneous or sublingual or by way of catheter into the subject s heart.

For transdermal administration the compounds of Formula I are combined with skin penetration enhancers such as propylene glycol polyethylene glycol isopropanol ethanol oleic acid N methylpyrrolidone and the like which increase the permeability of the skin to the compounds of Formula I and permit the compounds to penetrate through the skin and into the bloodstream. The compounds of Formula I enhancer composition also are further combined with a polymeric substance such as ethylcellulose hydroxypropyl cellulose ethylene vinylacetate polyvinyl pyrrolidone and the like to provide the composition in gel form which are dissolved in a solvent such as methylene chloride evaporated to the desired viscosity and then applied to backing material to provide a patch.

In some embodiments the composition is in unit dose form such as a tablet capsule or single dose vial. Suitable unit doses i.e. therapeutically effective amounts can be determined during clinical trials designed appropriately for each of the conditions for which administration of a chosen compound is indicated and will of course vary depending on the desired clinical endpoint. The present invention also provides articles of manufacture for treating and preventing disorders such as cardiac disorders in a subject. The articles of manufacture comprise a pharmaceutical composition of one or more of the compounds of Formula I as described herein. The articles of manufacture are packaged with indications for various disorders that the pharmaceutical compositions are capable of treating and or preventing. For example the articles of manufacture comprise a unit dose of a compound disclosed herein that is capable of treating or preventing a muscular disorder and an indication that the unit dose is capable of treating or preventing a certain disorder for example an arrhythmia.

In accordance with a method of the present invention the compounds of Formula I are administered to the subject or are contacted with cells of the subject in an amount effective to limit or prevent a decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in the subject particularly in cells of the subject. This amount is readily determined by the skilled artisan based upon known procedures including analysis of titration curves established in vivo and methods and assays disclosed herein. A suitable amount of the compounds of Formula I effective to limit or prevent a decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in the subject ranges from about 5 mg kg day to about 20 mg kg day and or is an amount sufficient to achieve plasma levels ranging from about 300 ng ml to about 1000 ng ml. In an embodiment the amount of compounds from Formula I ranges from about 10 mg kg day to about 20 mg kg day.

The present invention provides a new range of therapeutic treatments for patients with various disorders involving modulation of the RyR receptors particularly skeletal muscular disorders RyR1 cardiac RyR2 disorders and cognitive RyR3 disorders.

In one embodiment of the present invention the subject has not yet developed a disorder such as cardiac disorders e.g. exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia . In another embodiment of the present invention the subject is in need of treatment for a disorder including a cardiac disorder.

Various disorders that the compounds of Formula I treat or prevent include but are not limited to cardiac disorders and diseases skeletal muscular disorders and diseases cognitive disorders and diseases malignant hyperthermia diabetes and sudden infant death syndrome. Cardiac disorder and diseases include but are not limited to irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases sudden cardiac death exercise induced sudden cardiac death congestive heart failure chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and high blood pressure. Irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include and exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include but are not limited to atrial and ventricular arrhythmia atrial and ventricular fibrillation atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmia atrial and ventricular tachycardia catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia CPVT and exercise induced variants thereof. Skeletal muscular disorder and diseases include but are not limited to skeletal muscle fatigue exercise induced skeletal muscle fatigue muscular dystrophy bladder disorders and incontinence. Cognitive disorders and diseases include but are not limited to Alzheimer s Disease forms of memory loss and age dependent memory loss. One skilled in the art will recognize still other diseases including but not limited to muscular and cardiac disorders that the compounds of Formula I are be useful to treat in accordance with the information provided herein.

The amount of compounds of Formula I effective to limit or prevent a decrease in the level of RyR2 bound FKBP12.6 in the subject is an amount effective to prevent exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia in the subject. Cardiac arrhythmia is a disturbance of the electrical activity of the heart that manifests as an abnormality in heart rate or heart rhythm. As used herein an amount of compounds of Formula I effective to prevent exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia includes an amount of compounds of Formula I effective to prevent the development of the clinical impairment or symptoms of the exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia e.g. palpitations fainting ventricular fibrillation ventricular tachycardia and sudden cardiac death . The amount of compounds of Formula I effective to prevent exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia in a subject will vary depending upon the particular factors of each case including the type of exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia the subject s weight the severity of the subject s condition and the mode of administration of the compounds of Formula I. This amount is readily determined by the skilled artisan based upon known procedures including clinical trials and methods disclosed herein. In an embodiment the amount of the compounds of Formula I effective to prevent the exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia is an amount effective to prevent exercise induced sudden cardiac death in the subject. In another embodiment the compounds of Formula I prevent exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia and exercise induced sudden cardiac death in the subject.

Because of its ability to stabilize RyR bound FKBP and maintain and restore balance in the context of dynamic PKA phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of RyR the compounds of Formula I are also useful in treating a subject who has already experienced clinical symptoms of these various disorders. For example if the symptoms of the disorder are observed in the subject early enough the compounds of Formula I are effective in limiting or preventing a further decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in the subject.

Additionally the subject of the present invention is a candidate for exercise induced cardiac disorders such as exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia. Exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia is a heart condition e.g. a ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia including any that leads to sudden cardiac death that develops during after a subject has undergone physical exercise. A candidate for an exercise induced cardiac disorder is a subject who is known to be or is believed to be or is suspected of being at risk for developing a cardiac disorder during after physical exercise. Examples of candidates for exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia include without limitation an animal person known to have catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia CPVT an animal person suspected of having CPVT and an animal person who is known to be or is believed to be or is suspected of being at risk for developing cardiac arrhythmia during after physical exercise and who is about to exercise is currently exercising or has just completed exercise. As discussed above CPVT is an inherited disorder in individuals with structurally normal hearts. It is characterized by stress induced ventricular tachycardia a lethal arrhythmia that causes sudden cardiac death. In subjects with CPVT physical exertion and or stress induce bidirectional and or polymorphic ventricular tachycardias that lead to sudden cardiac death SCD in the absence of detectable structural heart disease. Individuals with CPVT have ventricular arrhythmias when subjected to exercise but do not develop arrhythmias at rest.

Accordingly in still another embodiment of the present invention the subject has been exercising or is currently exercising and has developed an exercise induced disorder. In this case the amount of the compounds of Formula I effective to limit or prevent a decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in the subject is an amount of compound effective to treat the exercise induced disorder in the subject. As used herein an amount of compounds of Formula I effective to treat an exercise induced disorder includes an amount of compound of Formula I effective to alleviate or ameliorate the clinical impairment or symptoms of the exercise induced disorder e.g. in the case of cardiac arrhythmia palpitations fainting ventricular fibrillation ventricular tachycardia and sudden cardiac death . The amount of compounds of Formula I effective to treat an exercise induced disorder in a subject will vary depending upon the particular factors of each case including the type of exercise induced disorder the subject s weight the severity of the subject s condition and the mode of administration of the compounds of Formula I. This amount is readily determined by the skilled artisan based upon known procedures including clinical trials and methods disclosed herein. In an embodiment the compounds of Formula I treat exercise induced disorders in the subject.

The present invention further provides a method for treating exercise induced disorders in a subject. The method comprises administering the compounds of Formula I to the subject in an amount effective to treat the exercise induced disorder in the subject. A suitable amount of the compounds of Formula I effective to treat for example exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia in the subject ranges from about 5 mg kg day to about 20 mg kg day and or is an amount sufficient to achieve plasma levels ranging from about 300 ng ml to about 1000 ng ml. The present invention also provides a method for preventing an exercise induced disorder in a subject. The method comprises administering the compounds of Formula I to the subject in an amount effective to prevent the exercise induced disorder in the subject. A suitable amount of the compounds of Formula I effective to prevent the exercise induced disorder in the subject ranges from about 5 mg kg day to about 20 mg kg day and or is an amount sufficient to achieve plasma levels ranging from about 300 ng ml to about 1000 ng ml. Additionally the present invention provides a method for preventing exercise induced disorders in a subject. The method comprises administering the compounds of Formula I to the subject in an amount effective to prevent an exercise induced disorder in the subject. A suitable amount of the compounds of Formula I effective to prevent an exercise induced disorder in the subject ranges from about 5 mg kg day to about 20 mg kg day and or is an amount sufficient to achieve plasma levels ranging from about 300 ng ml to about 1000 ng ml.

Additionally the compounds prevent irregular heartbeat disorders in subjects with heterozygous defects in the FKBP12.6 gene.

The compounds of Formula I can be used alone in combination with each other or in combination with other agents that have cardiovascular activity including but not limited to diuretics anticoagulants antiplatelet agents antiarrhythmics inotropic agents chronotropic agents and blockers angiotensin inhibitors and vasodilators. Further such combinations of the compounds of the present invention and other cardiovascular agents are administered separately or in conjunction. In addition the administration of one element of the combination is prior to concurrent to or subsequent to the administration of other agent s .

In various embodiments of the above described methods the exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia in the subject is associated with VT. In some embodiments the VT is CPVT. In other embodiments of these methods the subject is a candidate for exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia including candidates for exercise induced sudden cardiac death.

In view of the foregoing methods the present invention also provides use of the compounds of Formula I in a method for limiting or preventing a decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in a subject who is a candidate for a disorder. The present invention also provides use of the compounds of Formula I in a method for treating or preventing a muscular disorder in a subject. Furthermore the present invention provides use of the compounds of Formula I in a method for preventing treating or preventing exercise induced muscular disorders in a subject.

Accordingly the present invention further provides a method for assaying the effects of the compounds of Formula I in preventing disorders and diseases associated with the RyR receptors. The method comprises the steps of a obtaining or generating a culture of cells containing RyR b contacting the cells with one or more of the compounds of Formula I c exposing the cells to one or more conditions known to increase phosphorylation of RyR in cells and d determining if the one or more compounds from Formula I limits or prevents a decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in the cells. As used herein a cell containing RyR is a cell in which RyR including RyR1 RyR2 and RyR3 or a derivative or homologue thereof is naturally expressed or naturally occurs. Conditions known to increase phosphorylation of RyR in cells include without limitation PKA.

In the method of the present invention cells are contacted with one or more of the compounds of Formula I by any of the standard methods of effecting contact between drugs agents and cells including any modes of introduction and administration described herein. The level of RyR bound FKBP in the cell is measured or detected by known procedures including any of the methods molecular procedures and assays known to one of skill in the art or described herein. In one embodiment of the present invention the one or more compounds of Formula I limits or prevents a decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in the cells.

RyR including RyR1 RyR2 and RyR3 has been implicated in a number of biological events in cells. For example it has been shown that RyR2 channels play an important role in EC coupling and contractility in cardiac muscle cells. Therefore it is clear that preventive drugs designed to limit or prevent a decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in cells particularly RyR2 bound FKPB12.6 in cardiac muscle cells are useful in the regulation of a number of RyR associated biological events including EC coupling and contractility. Thus the one or more compounds of Formula I are evaluated for effect on EC coupling and contractility in cells particularly cardiac muscle cells and therefore usefulness for preventing exercise induced sudden cardiac death.

Accordingly the method of the present invention further comprises the steps of contacting one or more compounds of Formula I with a culture of cells containing RyR and determining if the one or more compounds has an effect on an RyR associated biological event in the cells. As used herein an RyR associated biological event includes a biochemical or physiological process in which RyR levels or activity have been implicated. As disclosed herein examples of RyR associated biological events include without limitation EC coupling and contractility in cardiac muscle cells. According to this method of the present invention the one or more compounds of Formula I are contacted with one or more cells such as cardiac muscle cells in vitro. For example a culture of the cells is incubated with a preparation containing the one or more compounds of Formula I. The compounds effect on a RyR associated biological event then is assessed by any biological assays or methods known in the art including immunoblotting single channel recordings and any others disclosed herein.

The present invention is further directed to one or more compounds of Formula I identified by the above described identification method as well as a pharmaceutical composition comprising the compound and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier and or diluent. The compounds are useful for preventing exercise induced sudden cardiac death in a subject and for treating or preventing other RyR associated conditions. As used herein an RyR associated condition is a condition disease or disorder in which RyR level or activity has been implicated and includes an RyR associated biological event. The RyR associated condition is treated or prevented in the subject by administering to the subject an amount of the compound effective to treat or prevent the RyR associated condition in the subject. This amount is readily determined by one skilled in the art. In one embodiment the present invention provides a method for preventing exercise induced sudden cardiac death in a subject by administering the one or more compounds of Formula I to the subject in an amount effective to prevent the exercise induced sudden cardiac death in the subject.

The present invention also provides an in vivo method for assaying the effectiveness of the compounds of Formula I in preventing disorders and diseases associated with the RyR recpetors. The method comprises the steps of a obtaining or generating an animal containing RyR b administering one or more of the compounds of Formula I to the animal c exposing the animal to one or more conditions known to increase phosphorylation of RyR in cells and d determining the extent the compound limits or prevents a decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP in the animal. The method further comprises the steps of e administering one or more of the compounds of Formula I to an animal containing RyR and f determining the extent of the effect of the compound on a RyR associated biological event in the animal. Also provided is a pharmaceutical composition comprising this compound and a method for preventing exercise induced sudden cardiac death in a subject by administering this compound to the subject in an amount effective to prevent the exercise induced sudden cardiac death in the subject.

It has been demonstrated that compounds which block PKA activation would be expected to reduce the activation of the RyR channel resulting in less release of calcium into the cell. Compounds that bind to the RyR channel at the FKBP binding site but do not come off the channel when the channel is phosphorylated by PKA would also be expected to decrease the activity of the channel in response to PKA activation or other triggers that activate the RyR channel. Such compounds would also result in less calcium release into the cell.

By way of example the diagnostic assays screen for the release of calcium into cells via the RyR channel using calcium sensitive fluorescent dyes e.g. Fluo 3 Fura 2 and the like . Cells are loaded with the fluorescent dye of choice then stimulated with RyR activators to determine the reduction of the calcium dependent fluorescent signal Brillantes et al. Stabilization of calcium release channel ryanodine receptor function by FK506 binding protein. 77 513 23 1994 Gillo et al. Calcium entry during induced differentiation in murine erythroleukemia cells. 81 783 92 1993 Jayaraman et al. Regulation of the inositol 1 4 5 trisphosphate receptor by tyrosine phosphorylation. 272 1492 94 1996 . Calcium dependent fluorescent signals are monitored with a photomultiplier tube and analyzed with appropriate software. This assay can easily be automated to screen the compounds of Formula I using multiwell dishes.

To demonstrate that the compounds of Formula I inhibit the PKA dependent activation of RyR mediated intracellular calcium release an assay involves the expression of recombinant RyR channels in a heterologous expression system such as Sf9 HEK293 or CHO cells. RyR could also be co expressed with beta adrenergic receptors. This would permit assessment of the effect of compounds of Formula I on RyR activation in response to addition of beta adrenergic receptor agonists.

The level of PKA phosphorylation of RyR2 which correlates with the degree of heart failure also is assayed and then used to determine the efficacy of the one or more compounds of Formula I to block the PKA phosphorylation of the RyR2 channel. Such an assay is based on the use of antibodies that are specific for the RyR2 protein. For example the RyR2 channel protein is immunoprecipitated and then back phosphorylated with PKA and gammaP ATP. The amount of radioactive P label that is transferred to the RyR2 protein then is measured using a phosphorimager Marx et al. PKA phosphorylation dissociates FKBP12.6 from the calcium release channel ryanodine receptor defective regulation in failing hearts. 101 365 76 2000 .

Another assay of the compounds of Formula I involves use of a phosphoepitope specific antibody that detects RyR1 that is PKA phosphorylated on Ser 2843 or RyR2 that is PKA phosphorylated on Ser 2809. Immunoblotting with such an antibody can be used to assess efficacy of these compounds for therapy for heart failure and cardiac arrhythmias. Additionally RyR2 S2809A and RyR2 S2809D knock in mice are used to assess efficacy of therapy for heart failure and cardiac arrhythmias. Such mice further provide evidence that PKA hyperphosphorylation of RyR2 is a contributing factor in heart failure and cardiac arrhythmias by showing that the RyR2 S2809A mutation inhibits heart failure and arrhythmias and that the RyR2 S2809D mutation worsens heart failure and arrhythmias.

Therefore in a specific embodiment the present invention provides a method of treating heart failure atrial fibrillation or exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia comprising administering to an animal in need thereof a therapeutically effective amount of a compound selected from the compounds of Formula I.

Intracellular Ca leak is proposed as a principal mediator of depressed muscle performance and dystrophic muscle remodeling. Muscular dystrophies are heterogeneous hereditary diseases characterized by weakness and progressive muscle wasting. Of all forms of muscular dystrophies involving the dystrophin associated protein complex referred to as dystrophinopathies Duchenne muscular dystrophy DMD is one of the most frequent genetic diseases X linked 1 in 3 500 boys with death usually occurring before age 30 by respiratory and or cardiac failure in high numbers of patients. Becker muscular dystrophy BMD represents a milder form of the disease associated with a reduction in the amount or expression of a truncated form of the dystrophin protein whereas Duchenne patients have been characterized by complete absence or very low levels of dystrophin. Duchenne and Becker s muscular dystrophy DMD BMD are caused by mutations in the gene encoding the 427 kDa cytoskeletal protein dystrophin. However with increasing age in BMD cardiac symptoms are more common than in DMD patients and do not correlate with skeletal muscle symptoms. Since genetic screening will not eliminative DMD due to a high incidence of sporadic cases an effective therapy is highly desirable. DMD BMD have been consistently associated with disturbed intracellular calcium metabolism. Because alterations of intracellular Ca concentrations in DMD myofibers are believed to represent a central pathogenic mechanism development of a therapeutic intervention that prevents intracellular Ca abnormalities as a cause of skeletal muscle degeneration is highly desirable.

It is well established that lack of dystrophin expression is the primary genetic defect in DMD and BMD. However the key mechanism leading to progressive muscle damage is largely unknown. It has been suggested that elevations of intracellular Ca concentrations Ca under resting conditions directly contributed to toxic muscle cell myofiber damage and concurrent activation of Ca dependent proteases. Since calpain activity is increased in necrotic muscle fibers of mdx mice and calpain dysfunction contributes to limb girdle muscular dystrophy preventing activation of calcium dependent proteases by inhibiting intracellular Ca elevations represents a strategy to prevent muscle wasting in DMD. Significant differences in Ca between normal and dystrophic muscles have been reported in myotubes and animal models including the dystrophin deficient mdx mouse. Intracellular Ca elevations are prevented by administration of a pharmaceutical composition comprising a compound of Formula I.

The present invention also provides a method of diagnosis of a disease or disorder in a subject said method comprising obtaining a cell or tissue sample from the subject obtaining DNA from the cell or tissue comparing the DNA from the cell or tissue with a control DNA encoding RyR to determine whether a mutation is present in the DNA from the cell or tissue the presence of a mutation indicating a disease or disorder. In one embodiment the mutation is a RyR2 mutation on chromosome 1q42 q43. In another embodiment the mutation is one or more CPTV mutations. In another embodiment the mutation may be a mutation which is present in the DNA encoding RyR2 of a SIDS subject. The diagnostic method is used to detect the presence of a disease or disorder in an adult a child or a fetus. The disease and disorders include but are not limited to cardiac disorders and diseases skeletal muscular disorders and diseases cognitive disorders and diseases malignant hyperthermia diabetes and sudden infant death syndrome. Cardiac disorder and diseases include but are not limited to irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases sudden cardiac death exercise induced sudden cardiac death congestive heart failure chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and high blood pressure. Irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include and exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include but are not limited to atrial and ventricular arrhythmia atrial and ventricular fibrillation atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmia atrial and ventricular tachycardia catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia CPVT and exercise induced variants thereof. Skeletal muscular disorder and diseases include but are not limited to skeletal muscle fatigue exercise induced skeletal muscle fatigue muscular dystrophy bladder disorders and incontinence. Cognitive disorders and diseases include but are not limited to Alzheimer s Disease forms of memory loss and age dependent memory loss.

The present invention further provides a method of diagnosis of disorders and diseases in a subject said method comprising obtaining cells or tissue sample from the subject incubating the cells or tissue sample with the compound of Formula I under conditions which increase phosphorylation of RyR in cells determining a whether RyR bound to calstabin i.e. RyR1 bound to calstabin1 RyR2 bound to calstabin2 or RyR3 bound to calstabin1 is increased in the cells or tissue compared to RyR bound to calstabin in control cells or tissues said control cells or tissues lacking mutant RyR calcium channels or b whether a decrease in release of calcium occurs in RyR channels compared to a lack of decrease in release of calcium in the control cells an increase in RyR bound calstabin in a indicating a disorder or disease in the subject or a decrease in release of calcium in RyR channels in b compared to the control cells indicating a cardiac disease or disorder in the subject. The diagnostic method is used to detect the presence of a disease or disorder in an adult a child or a fetus. The disease and disorders include but are not limited to cardiac disorders and diseases skeletal muscular disorders and diseases cognitive disorders and diseases malignant hyperthermia diabetes and sudden infant death syndrome. Cardiac disorder and diseases include but are not limited to irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases sudden cardiac death exercise induced sudden cardiac death congestive heart failure chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and high blood pressure. Irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include and exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include but are not limited to atrial and ventricular arrhythmia atrial and ventricular fibrillation atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmia atrial and ventricular tachycardia catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia CPVT and exercise induced variants thereof. Skeletal muscular disorder and diseases include but are not limited to skeletal muscle fatigue exercise induced skeletal muscle fatigue muscular dystrophy bladder disorders and incontinence. Cognitive disorders and diseases include but are not limited to Alzheimer s Disease forms of memory loss and age dependent memory loss.

The present invention further provides a method of diagnosis of a cardiac disorder or disease in a subject said method comprising obtaining cardiac cells or tissue sample from the subject incubating the cardiac cells or tissue sample with the compound of Formula I under conditions which increase phosphorylation of RyR2 in cells determining a whether RyR2 bound to calstabin2 is increased in the cells or tissue compared to RyR2 bound to calstabin2 in control cells or tissues said control cells or tissues lacking mutant RyR2 calcium channels or b whether a decrease in release of calcium occurs in RyR2 channels compared to a lack of decrease in release of calcium in the control cells an increase in RyR2 bound calstabin2 in a indicating a disorder or disease in the subject or a decrease in release of calcium in RyR2 channels in b compared to the control cells indicating a cardiac disease or disorder in the subject. The provided method is used to diagnose CPTV. The provided method also is used to diagnose sudden infant death syndrome SIDS . The provided method additionally is used to diagnose cardiac irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases sudden cardiac death exercise induced sudden cardiac death congestive heart failure chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and high blood pressure. Irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include and exercise induced irregular heartbeat disorders and diseases include but are not limited to atrial and ventricular arrhythmia atrial and ventricular fibrillation atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmia atrial and ventricular tachycardia catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia CPVT and exercise induced variants thereof.

In addition to the above mentioned therapeutic uses the compounds of the invention are also useful in diagnostic assays screening assays and as research tools.

The present invention provides in a further aspect processes for the preparation of a compound of Formula I and salts solvates hydrates complexes and pro drugs thereof and pharmaceutically acceptable salts of such pro drugs. More particularly the present invention provides processes for the preparation of compounds selected from the group consisting of S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S9 S11 S12 S13 S14 S19 S20 S22 S23 S36 S37 S38 S40 S43 S44 S45 S46 S47 S48 S49 S50 S51 S52 S53 S54 S55 S56 S57 S58 S59 S60 S61 S62 S63 S64 S66 S67 S69 S70 S71 S72 S73 S74 S75 S76 S77 S78 S79 S80 S81 S82 S83 S84 S85 S86 S87 S88 S89 S90 S91 S92 S93 S94 S95 S96 S97 S98 S99 and S100 and salts solvates hydrates complexes and pro drugs thereof and pharmaceutically acceptable salts of such pro drugs. The various synthetic routes to the compounds are described herein.

Some of the following syntheses utilize solvents. In one embodiment the solvent is an organic solvent. In another embodiment the organic solvent is methylene chloride CHCl chloroform CCl or methanol CHOH . Some of the following syntheses also utilize a base catalyst. In one embodiment the base catalyst is an amine compound. In another embodiment the base catalyst is an alkylamine such as triethylamine TEA . In still another embodiment the base catalyst is pyridine. Some of the following synthesis also utilize basic solutions. In one embodiment the basic solution is sodium bicarbonate or calcium carbonate. In another embodiment the basic solution is saturated sodium bicarbonate or saturated calcium carbonate. Some of the following syntheses use acidic solutions. In one embodiment the acidic solution is a sulfuric acid solution a hydrochloric acid solution or a nitric acid solution. In one embodiment the solution is 1N HCl. One of skill in the art will appreciate still other solvents organic solvents base catalysts basic solutions and acidic solutions that are used in the embodiments according to the description herein. The solvents organic solvents reactants catalysts wash solutions and so forth are added at appropriate temperatures e.g. room temperature or about 20 C. 25 C. 0 C. etc. .

Some of the following syntheses requiring purification of the reaction mixture to yield a final product. Purification of the reaction mixture involves one or more processes such as removal of any solvent crystallization of the product chromatographic separation of the product including HPLC silica gel chromatography column chromatography and so forth washing with basic solution washing with acidic solution re dissolving the product in another solvent and so forth. One of skill in the art will appreciate still other processes that are used in the embodiments according to the description herein.

The reactions are carried out as long as needed e.g. one hour several hours overnight 24 hours etc. to obtain the desired or optimal yields of the desired compounds. Often the reaction mixtures are stirred. The reactions are carried out at appropriate temperatures e.g. room temperature or about 20 C. 25 C. 0 C. 100 C. etc. .

Synthon S26 is prepared according to methods described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 680 988.

S3 S4 S5 and S54 are prepared from S26. S26 is reacted with RSOCl wherein R is CH CH S3 Me S4 p Me CH S5 or NH 2 Py S54 to form a product. The product is purified for example by column chromatography to yield S3 S4 S5 or S54. In one embodiment the reaction occurs in a solvent such as an organic solvent like CHCl so that a reaction mixture is formed and the solvent is removed from the reaction mixture before or during purification of the product. If necessary a base catalyst such as triethylamine is used in the synthesis. Also basic e.g. saturated sodium bicarbonate and acidic washes e.g. 1N HCl are used if needed to purifying the reaction mixture and or product and are accompanied by drying for example over sodium sulfate if needed. Column chromatography for example is used to purifying the residue to isolate the desired product.

S7 S9 S27 and S40 are prepared from S26 by reaction with an alcohol of formula RCOX where X is Cl or NHS and R is ICH S7 Ph S9 CH CH S27 or 4 N 2 OH CH S40 . In one embodiment the reaction occurs in a solvent such as an organic solvent like CHCl so that a reaction mixture is formed and the solvent is removed from the reaction mixture before or during purification of the product. If necessary a base catalyst such as triethylamine is used in the synthesis. Also basic e.g. saturated sodium bicarbonate and acidic washes e.g. 1N HCl are used if needed to purifying the reaction mixture and or product and are accompanied by drying if needed. In another embodiment S40 is formed by reaction with an alcohol of formula RCOX where R is 4 N 2 OH CHand X is NHS. Column chromatography for example is used to purifying the residue to isolate the desired product.

S11 and S12 are prepared from S26 by reaction with a compound of formula CH NCX wherein X is O S11 or S S12 . In one embodiment the reaction occurs in a solvent such as an organic solvent like CHCl so that a reaction mixture is formed and the solvent is removed from the reaction mixture before or during purification of the product. If necessary a base catalyst such as triethylamine or pyridine is used in the synthesis. In another embodiment a base catalyst such as pyridine is used as the solvent in which the reaction takes place and additional solvent such as ethyle acetate or another appropriate organic solvent is added after the reaction occurs. Also basic e.g. saturated sodium bicarbonate and acidic washes e.g. 1N HCl are used if needed to purifying the reaction mixture and or product and are accompanied by drying if needed. Column chromatography for example is used to purifying the residue to isolate the desired product.

The isomers S13 and S14 are prepared from S26 by reaction with phenyl methoxyphosphonyl chloride Ph MeO P O Cl . In one embodiment the reaction occurs in a solvent such as an organic solvent such as methylene chloride. If necessary a base catalyst such as triethylamine may be used for example by adding it to a reaction mixture formed by mixing the reactants in a solvent. Also the reaction mixture is washed with basic solution for example saturated sodium bicarbonate if necessary. The isomers are separated and purified for example using silica gel chromatography.

S19 and 22 are prepared from S26 by reaction with a compound of formula ClOC X COCl where X is CH CH S19 or

S57 is prepared from S26 and methyl chlorooxoacetate. In an embodiment the reaction occurs in the presence of a solvent such as an organic solvent such as methylene chloride. A base catalyst such as pyridine is used as necessary to facilitate or hasten the reaction. The reaction mixture formed by mixing the reactants and a solvent is washed with basic solution e.g. saturated sodium bicarbonate acidic solution e.g. HCl and water. Purification such as silic gel chromatography yields S57.

S36 is prepared from S57 by reaction with sodium hydroxide. In one embodiment the reaction takes place in a solvent such as an organic solvent such as methanol. The solvent is removed from the reaction mixture formed by mixing the reactants and the solvent thereby forming a residue. The residue is dissolved in water and washed with another organic solvent such as ether to remove unwanted hydrophobic compounds. The aqueous phase from the basic washes is acidified and the product is extracted therefrom using an organic solvent such as methylene chloride. Further purification is used if necessary.

S44 is prepared by treating S36 with thionyl chloride to form crude S36 Cl. Excess thionyl chloride if any is removed from the reaction mixture. The crude S36 Cl then is dissolved in a solvent such as an organic solvent like methylene chloride and reacted with mono protected e.g. mono Boc protected cystamine. A base catalyst such as pyridine is used if desired and the reaction mixture is quenched with a basic solution e.g. saturated sodium bicarbonate . The reaction mixture formed by mixing the cystamine and S36 Cl reactants is purified. The protecting groups e.g. Boc are removed using an appropriate acid or base wash e.g. trifluoroacetic acid in an organic solvent in the case of the Boc protecting group . The final product then is purified for example using chromatography techniques.

S43 and S45 are prepared from S36 cystamine which is prepared as disclosed herein. S 36 cystamine is reacted with an NHS activated ester of an appropriate azido compound to yield S43 and S45. The reaction takes place in a solvent such as an organic solvent.

S37 is prepared from S26 by reaction with 4 nitrophenyl chloroformate NOCHOCOCl . The reaction takes place in a solvent and if desired a base catalyst such as triethylamine may be used. The reaction mixture formed by mixing the reactants and a solvent is washed with water to remove unwanted hydrophilic compounds. The solvent is removed from the reaction mixture to form a residue which is purified e.g. using chromatography techniques to yield S37.

S6 S46 53 S64 S66 and S67 are prepared from S37 by reaction with an amine of formula RNH wherein NR is NH S46 NEt S48 NHCHPh S49 NHOH S51 

S6 S46 53 S64 S66 and S67 also are prepared from S26 via the S26 phosgene intermediate. The S26 phosgene intermediate is formed by reacting S26 with triphosgene. Thereafter the S26 phosgene is reacted with an amine of formula RNH where NR is NH

S69 75 are prepared from S68 via the S68 phosgene intermediate. S68 is treated with triphosgene to form the intermediate which in turn is treated with an amine RNH where R is

S76 is prepared from S68 by reaction with methyl chlorooxoacetate. In an embodiment the reaction occurs in the presence of a solvent such as an organic solvent such as methylene chloride. A base catalyst such as pyridine is used as necessary to facilitate or hasten the reaction. The reaction mixture formed by mixing the reactants and a solvent is washed with basic solution e.g. saturated sodium bicarbonate acidic solution e.g. HCl and water. Purification such as silic gel chromatography yields S76.

S77 is prepared from S76 by reaction with sodium hydroxide. In one embodiment the reaction takes place in a solvent such as an organic solvent such as methanol. The solvent is removed from the reaction mixture formed by mixing the reactants and the solvent thereby forming a residue. The residue is dissolved in water and washed with another organic solvent such as ether to remove unwanted hydrophobic compounds. The aqueous phase from the basic washes is acidified and the product is extracted therefrom using an organic solvent such as methylene chloride. Further purification is used if necessary.

S78 S81 are prepared by treating S77 with thionyl chloride to form crude S77 Cl. Excess thionyl chloride if any is removed from the reaction mixture. The crude S77 Cl then is dissolved in a solvent such as an organic solvent like methylene chloride and reacted with HX where X is NHEt S78 NHPh S79 NH S80 and NHCH pyridine S81 . The solvent is removed and the residue is purified.

S82 is prepared from S68. S68 is reacted with CHCHSOCl in a manner analogous to the production of S3. The product then is treated with HNRRin a manner analogous to the production of S1 and S2 except that NRRis

S84 is prepared from S68 by reaction with benzyl bromide. In an embodiment the reaction takes place in a solvent such as an organic solvent like methylene chloride. A base catalyst such as triethylamine is added as necessary to catalyze the reaction. The reaction mixture formed by mixing the reactants and the solvent is purified to yield S84.

S85 is prepared from S26. S26 is reacted with di tert butyl dicarbonate in a solvent for example an organic solvent like methylene chloride. A base catalyst such as triethylamine also is used if necessary. The reaction mixture formed by mixing the reactants and the solvent is washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate solution and the aqueous layer is extracted with an organic solvent. The combined organic layers are dried and concentrated provide S85.

S86 is prepared from S85 in a solvent for example an organic solvent. S85 is treated with BBrto form a reaction mixture. If necessary a base catalyst such as triethylamine is used in the reaction. The reaction is quenched e.g. in the case of triethylamine with methanol and concentrated. Purification for example by column chromatography yields S86.

S87 is prepared by reacting S86 with trifluoromethylsulfonyl anhydride. The reaction is carried out in a solvent such as an organic solvent. A base catalyst such as triethylamine is added if necessary. In the case of triethylamine the reaction mixture formed by mixing the reactants and the solvent is quenched with water after which the aqueous layer is extracted with an appropriate organic solvent. If desired the organic layers are dried e.g. using magnesium sulfate and the organic layers are concentrated. Purification of the concentrated organic layers yields S87.

S88 is prepared from S87 by reaction of morpholine tris dibenzylideneacetone dipalladium 0 2 di tert butylphosphino biphenyl and potassium phosphate. The reaction mixture is diluted with a solvent such as methylene chloride or another appropriate organic solvent and washed with water. The aqueous layers formed by washing with water is extracted with an organic solvent such as methylene chloride. The organic layers then are dried e.g. over magnesium sulfate and concentrated. The residue is purified for example by silica gel flash chromatography to yield S88.

S89 is prepared from S87 by reaction with benzenethiol and i PrNEt in a solvent such as CHCN or another appropriate organic solvent. After reaction an organic solvent such as ethyl acetate is added to the reaction mixture. If necessary the reaction mixture is washed with one or more of acidic e.g. HCl basic e.g. NaOH and water solutions. After drying e.g. with NaSO the solution is concentrated. Purification for example by chromatography yields S89. In an alternative refluxing S87 with benezethiol in an appropriate solvent such as dioxane with a catalyst such as i PrNEt Pd dba xantphos yields S89.

S90 is prepared from S87 reacted with a base phenylboronic acid and a catalyst. In an embodiment the base is KCOand the catalyst is Pd PhP . In one embodiment the reaction occurs in a solvent such as an organic solvent such as dioxane. The reaction mixture formed by mixing the reactants and the solvent is diluted with a solvent e.g. methylene chloride and washed with water to remove unwanted hydrophilic compounds. Concentration and purification of the residue yields S90.

S92 is prepared from S87 reacted with zinc cyanide. In an embodiment the reaction occurs in a solvent such as an organic solvent like DMF. A catalyst such as Pd PhP also is used to facilitate and hasten the reaction. The reaction mixture formed by mixing the reactants and the solvent if necessary is diluted with water and an acidic solution and extacted with an organic solvent. The organic extracts then are washed using a salt solution dred filtered and concentrated. Purification of the residue proceeds for example by silica gel column chromatography.

S94 is prepared for S86 by reaction with acetic anhydride. In an embodiment the reaction takes place in a solvent such as an organic solvent like methylene chloride. Triethylamine or another base catalyst is added as necessary. Washing with water followed by drying e.g. using sodium sulfate is used as desired. Purification of the residue yields S94.

S95 is prepared from S94 by reaction with anhydrous AlCl in a solvent if desired. The solvent is an organic solvent like benzene. The reaction mixture is refluxed and cooled on ice. Extraction with an organic solvent concentration and purification of the residue yields S95.

S96 is prepared from S86 by iodination. For example S86 is added to a solvent such as an organic solvent like methanol with excess NaI and Chloramine T. The reaction mixture is quenched with NaSOsolution. Concentration and purification of the residue yields S96 as a mixture of mono iodinated and di iodinated products.

S97 is prepared from S86 by reaction with an nitric acid. S86 is protected e.g. using the Boc protecting groups and added to concentrated sulfuric acid. Nitric acid is added to the reaction mixture. The reaction mixture is cooled and neutralized e.g. using NaCO to quench the reaction. Organic extraction and subsequent concentration is used to isolate the product. Purification yields S97.

S98 is prepared by hydrogenation of S97. For example S97 is added to a solution such as an organic solution like methanol. Hgas is bubbled through the solution and Pd C catalyst or another applicable catalyst is added. Filtration to remove the catalyst and purification yields S97.

S100 is prepared from S98. S98 is dissolved in acid solution such as aqueous HCl. To this a solution of sodium nitrite and then NaNin water are added. The reaction mixture is extracted using an organic solvent. If needed the extract is washed with a basic solution e.g. saturated sodium bicarbonate and water. Organic layers from the washing are dried using for example anhydrous sodium sulfate and concentrated to form a residue. The residue is purified to yield S100. To prepare S99 NaNis substituted with NaBFin a similar manner.

The compounds of the present invention are prepared in different forms such as salts hydrates solvates complexes pro drugs or salts of pro drugs and the invention includes all variant forms of the compounds.

The term compound s of the invention as used herein means a compound of Formula I and salts hydrates prodrugs and solvates thereof.

A pharmaceutical composition refers to a mixture of one or more of the compounds described herein or pharmaceutically acceptable salts hydrates or pro drugs thereof with other chemical components such as physiologically acceptable carriers and excipients. The purpose of a pharmaceutical composition is to facilitate administration of a compound to an organism.

A pro drug refers to an agent which is converted into the parent drug in vivo. Pro drugs are often useful because in some situations they are easier to administer than the parent drug. They are bioavailable for instance by oral administration whereas the parent drug is not. The pro drug also has improved solubility in pharmaceutical compositions over the parent drug. For example the compound carries protective groups which are split off by hydrolysis in body fluids e.g. in the bloodstream thus releasing active compound or is oxidized or reduced in body fluids to release the compound.

A compound of the present invention also can be formulated as a pharmaceutically acceptable salt e.g. acid addition salt and complexes thereof. The preparation of such salts can facilitate the pharmacological use by altering the physical characteristics of the agent without preventing its physiological effect. Examples of useful alterations in physical properties include but are not limited to lowering the melting point to facilitate transmucosal administration and increasing the solubility to facilitate administering higher concentrations of the drug.

The term pharmaceutically acceptable salt means an acid addition salt which is suitable for or compatible with the treatment of a patient or a subject such as a human patient or an animal such as a dog.

The term pharmaceutically acceptable acid addition salt as used herein means any non toxic organic or inorganic salt of any base compounds represented by Formula I or any of their intermediates. Illustrative inorganic acids which form suitable acid addition salts include hydrochloric hydrobromic sulfuric and phosphoric acids as well as metal salts such as sodium monohydrogen orthophosphate and potassium hydrogen sulfate. Illustrative organic acids that form suitable acid addition salts include mono di and tricarboxylic acids such as glycolic lactic pyruvic malonic succinic glutaric fumaric malic tartaric citric ascorbic maleic benzoic phenylacetic cinnamic and salicylic acids as well as sulfonic acids such as p toluene sulfonic and methanesulfonic acids. Either the mono or di acid salts can be formed and such salts exist in either a hydrated solvated or substantially anhydrous form. In general the acid addition salts of compounds of Formula I are more soluble in water and various hydrophilic organic solvents and generally demonstrate higher melting points in comparison to their free base forms. The selection of the appropriate salt will be known to one skilled in the art. Other non pharmaceutically acceptable salts e.g. oxalates are used for example in the isolation of compounds of Formula I for laboratory use or for subsequent conversion to a pharmaceutically acceptable acid addition salt.

The compounds of Formula I of the present invention form hydrates or solvates which are included in the scope of the claims. When the compounds of Formula I of the present invention exist as regioisomers configurational isomers conformers or diasteroisomeric forms all such forms and various mixtures thereof are included in the scope of Formula I. It is possible to isolate individual isomers using known separation and purification methods if desired. For example when a compound of Formula I of the present invention is a racemate the racemate can be separated into the S compound and R compound by optical resolution. Individual optical isomers and mixtures thereof are included in the scope of Formula I.

The term solvate as used herein means a compound of Formula I or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of a compound of Formula I wherein molecules of a suitable solvent are incorporated in the crystal lattice. A suitable solvent is physiologically tolerable at the dosage administered. Examples of suitable solvents are ethanol water and the like. When water is the solvent the molecule is referred to as a hydrate. 

The term an effective amount sufficient amount or therapeutically effective amount of an agent as used herein is that amount sufficient to effect beneficial or desired results including clinical results and as such an effective amount depends upon the context in which it is being applied. The response is preventative and or therapeutic. The term effective amount also includes that amount of the compound of Formula I which is therapeutically effective and which avoids or substantially attenuates undesirable side effects.

As used herein and as well understood in the art treatment is an approach for obtaining beneficial or desired results including clinical results. Beneficial or desired clinical results can include but are not limited to alleviation or amelioration of one or more symptoms or conditions diminishment of extent of disease stabilized i.e. not worsening state of disease preventing spread of disease delay or slowing of disease progression amelioration or palliation of the disease state and remission whether partial or total whether detectable or undetectable. Treatment can also mean prolonging survival as compared to expected survival if not receiving treatment.

The terms animal subject and patient as used herein include all members of the animal kingdom including but not limited to mammals animals e.g. cats dogs horses etc. and humans.

The present invention further provides a composition comprising radio labeled compounds of Formula I. Labeling of the compounds of Formula I is accomplished using one of a variety of different radioactive labels known in the art. The radioactive label of the present invention is for example a radioisotope. The radioisotope is any isotope that emits detectable radiation including without limitation S I H or C. Radioactivity emitted by the radioisotope can be detected by techniques well known in the art. For example gamma emission from the radioisotope is detected using gamma imaging techniques particularly scintigraphic imaging.

By way of example radio labeled compounds of Formula I are prepared as follows. A compound of Formula I is demethylated at the phenyl ring using BBr. The resulting phenol compound then is re methylated with a radio labeled methylating agent such as H dimethyl sulfate in the presence of a base such as NaH to provide H labeled compounds.

The present invention further provides novel compounds that may be classified as 1 4 benzothiazepines including by way of example and without limitation S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S9 S11 S12 S13 S14 S19 S20 S22 S23 S36 S37 S38 S40 S43 S44 S45 S46 S47 S48 S49 S50 S51 S52 S53 S54 S55 S56 S57 S58 S59 S60 S61 S62 S63 S64 S65 S66 S67 S69 S70 S71 S72 S73 S74 S75 S76 S77 S78 S79 S80 S81 S82 S83 S84 S85 S86 S87 S88 S89 S90 S91 S92 S93 S94 S95 S96 S97 S98 S99 and S100.

These and any other novel compounds of the present invention are associated with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier as described above so as to form a pharmaceutical composition.

In accordance with the method of the present invention the decrease in the level of RyR bound FKBP is limited or prevented in the subject by decreasing the level of phosphorylated RyR in the subject. In one embodiment the amount of the agent effective to limit or prevent a decrease in the level of RyR2 bound FKBP12.6 in the subject is an amount of the agent effective to treat or prevent heart failure atrial fibrillation and or exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia in the subject. In another embodiment the amount of the agent effective to limit or prevent a decrease in the level of RyR2 bound FKBP12.6 in the subject is an amount of the agent effective to prevent exercise induced sudden cardiac death in the subject.

In view of the foregoing the present invention further provides a method for treating or preventing exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia in a subject comprising administering to the subject a novel 1 4 benzothiazepine compound as disclosed herein in an amount effective to treat or prevent exercise induced cardiac arrhythmia in the subject. Similarly the present invention provides a method for preventing exercise induced sudden cardiac death in a subject comprising administering to the subject a novel 1 4 benzothiazepine compound as disclosed herein in an amount effective to prevent exercise induced sudden cardiac death in the subject. Additionally the present invention provides a method for treating or preventing atrial fibrillation or heart failure in a subject comprising administering to the subject a compound as disclosed herein in an amount effective to treat or prevent the atrial fibrillation or heart failure in the subject. In each of these methods the compound is selected from the group of compounds consisting of compounds of the formula 

Examples of such compounds include without limitation S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S9 S11 S12 S13 S14 S19 S20 S22 S23 S36 S37 S38 S40 S43 S44 S45 S46 S47 S48 S49 S50 S51 S52 S53 S54 S55 S56 S57 S58 S59 S60 S61 S62 S63 S64 S66 S67 S69 S70 S71 S72 S73 S74 S75 S76 S77 S78 S79 S80 S81 S82 S83 S84 S85 S86 S87 S88 S89 S90 S91 S92 S93 S94 S95 S96 S97 S98 S99 and S100.

In an embodiment of the present invention if Ris C O R or SOR then R is at positions 2 3 or 5 on the benzene ring.

In another embodiment of the invention if Ris C O R or SOR then each R is independently selected from the group consisting of H halogen OH NH NO CN N SOH acyl alkyl alkylamino cycloalkyl heterocyclyl heterocyclylalkyl alkenyl hetero aryl hetero arylthio and hetero arylamino wherein each acyl alkyl alkoxyl alkylamino cycloalkyl heterocyclyl heterocyclylalkyl alkenyl hetero aryl hetero arylthio and hetero arylamino may be substituted with one or more radicals independently selected from the group consisting of halogen N O S CN N SH nitro oxo acyl alkyl alkoxyl alkylamino alkenyl aryl hetero cycloalkyl and hetero cyclyl.

In another embodiment of the invention if Ris C O R or SOR then there are at least two R groups attached to the benzene ring. Furthermore there are at least two R groups attached to the benzene ring and both R groups are attached at positions 2 3 or 5 on the benzene ring. Still further each R is independently selected from the group consisting of H halogen OH NH NO CN N SOH acyl alkyl alkylamino cycloalkyl heterocyclyl heterocyclylalkyl alkenyl hetero aryl hetero arylthio and hetero arylamino wherein each acyl alkyl alkoxyl alkylamino cycloalkyl heterocyclyl heterocyclylalkyl alkenyl hetero aryl hetero arylthio and hetero arylamino may be substituted with one or more radicals independently selected from the group consisting of halogen N O S CN N SH nitro oxo acyl alkyl alkoxyl alkylamino alkenyl aryl hetero cycloalkyl and hetero cyclyl.

In another embodiment of the invention if Ris C O R then Ris selected from the group consisting of NR NHNHR NHOH OR CONHNHR CONR CHX acyl aryl cycloalkyl cycloalkylalkyl heterocyclyl and heterocyclylalkyl wherein each acyl aryl cycloalkyl cycloalkylalkyl heterocyclyl and heterocyclylalkyl may be substituted with one or more radicals independently selected from the group consisting of halogen N O S CN N nitro oxo acyl alkyl alkoxyl alkylamino alkenyl aryl hetero cycloalkyl and hetero cyclyl.

As demonstrated by embodiments A B C and D S36 is more potent at increasing the binding of FKBP12.6 and RyR2 than JTV 519 and does not block the L type Ca2 channel I or HERG K channel I . In embodiment A PKA phosphorylated RyR2 is generated as follows cardiac SR membrane preparations 5 l 50 g are added to a total of 100 l of kinase buffer 8 mM MgCl 10 mM EGTA 50 mM Tris PIPES pH 6.8 containing 100 M MgATP and 40 units of PKA and incubated at room temperature. Samples are centrifuged at 95 000 g for 10 min and the pellets are washed three times in 0.2 ml imidazole buffer. The final pellets are pooled and resuspended in imidazole buffer final concentration 10 g l . To test for the FKBP12.6 rebinding efficiency of JTV 519 PKA phosphorylated cardiac SR 50 mg is incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature with the test compounds and 250 nM FKBP12.6 in 10 mM imidizol buffer pH 7.0. Samples then are centrifuged at 100 000 g for 10 minutes and pellets washed 3 times with imidizol buffer. After washing proteins are size fractionated on 15 PAGE. Immunoblots are developed using an anti FKBP antibody 1 3 000 dilution . The amount of rebinding is quantified using densitometry of Western blots and is compared to the amount of FKBP associated with RyR in non phosphorylated SR. EC s for the compounds are determined by generating FKBP binding data using concentrations of compounds ranging from 0.5 1000 nM. In embodiment B currents through L type Ca channels in isolated mouse cardiomyocytes are recorded using whole cell patch clamp recording conditions with Ba as the charge carrier. The extracellular solution contains in mM N methyl D glucamine 125 BaCl 20 CsCl 5 MgCl 1 HEPES 10 glucose 5 pH 7.4 HCl . The intracellular solution contains in mM CsCl 60 CaCl 1 EGTA 11 MgCl 1 KATP 5 HEPES 10 aspartic acid 50 pH 7.4 CsOH . Under these conditions it is expected that the measured current was carried by Ba primarily through L type calcium channels which is referred to as I. Drugs are applied by a local solution changer and reach the cell membrane within 1 s. The effects of nifedipine and S36 are tested with 20 ms long voltage clamp steps to 10 or 20 mV peak of current voltage relation for each individual cell from holding potentials of 80 mV or 40 mV. In embodiment C the voltage dependence of L type Ca current blocked by JTV 519 1 M and S36 1 M are measured and presented.

As demonstrated by embodiments A B C and D S36 prevents exercise induced sudden cardiac death at lower plasma levels compared with JTV 519. In embodiment A are shown representative ECGs of an untreated FKBP12.6 mouse and JTV519 treated FKBP12.6and FKBP12.6 mice. Mice are treated with 0.5 mg JTV 519 per kilogram of body weight per hour for 7 days with an implanted osmotic mini pump. JTV 519 has no effect on resting heart rate or other ECG parameters such as heart rate HR . In embodiment B are shown sustained polymorphic ventricular tachycardia recorded by telemetry in an untreated FKBP12.6mouse upper tracing subjected to exercise testing immediately followed by injection with 0.5 mg epinephrine per kilogram of body weight. Representative telemetry ECG recording of a JTV 519 treated FKBP12.6mouse following the same protocol is shown in the bottom tracing. In embodiment C are shown numbers of mice with cardiac death left sustained VTs 10 beats middle and nonsustained VTs 3 to 10 arrhythmogenic beats right in experimental groups of mice subjected to exercise testing and injection with 0.5 mg kg epinephrine. In embodiment D the dose dependence of pharmacological effects of JTV 519 and S36 is shown. Plasma levels of 1 M JTV519 prevent cardiac arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death in FKBP12.6mice. Plasma levels of 1 M and 0.02 M S36 also prevent cardiac arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death in FKBP12.6mice.

As demonstrated by S36 prevents the development of acute heart failure post myocardial infarction. Placebo treated or S36 100 nM or 200 nM plasma concentrations treated mice are subjected to permanent ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery resulting in myocardial infarction. S36 significantly improves fractional shortening assessed by M mode echocardiography 2 weeks post myocardial infarction compared with placebo.

As demonstrated by S36 improves cardiac function in chronic heart failure post myocardial infarction. Wild type mice are subjected to permanent ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery resulting in myocardial infarction. Seven days following myocardial infartion mice are treated with S36 plasma concentration 200 nM or placebo Heart weight to body weight HW BW ratios and pressure volume loops quantifications dP dt slope of the maximum derivative of change in systolic pressure over time show reverse remodeling and improved cardiac contractility in S36 treated mice compared with placebo.

As demonstrated by embodiments A B and C S36 normalizes CPVT associated RyR2 P2328S channel function and structure. In embodiment A are shown representative single channel current traces of unphosphorylated RyR2 P2328S and PKA phosphorylated RyR2 WT treated with S36 showing no influence of JTV 519 on baseline channel function. However in PKA phosphorylated RyR2 P2328S as shown in embodiment B S36 normalizes the single channel closed state to levels approaching those seen in embodiment A reducing the open probability from 14.4 to 0.3 following administration of 0.1 mol L S36. Insets in embodiments A and B show channel openings 1 pA at a higher resolution. Embodiment C shows immunoblot analysis of calstabin 2 binding of RyR2 P2328S in the presence or absence of PKA and 0.1 mol L S36 as indicated. RyR2 P2328S is immunoprecipitated and in vitro PKA was phosphorylated as described above.

As demonstrated by embodiments A and B treatment with JTV 519 reduces PKA phosphorylation of RyR2 in mice with heart failure. Equivalent amounts of RyR2 are immunoprecipitated with an antibody against RyR2 top blot . Representative immunoblots embodiment A and bar graphs embodiment B show the amount of PKA phosphorylated RyR2 at Ser 2808 bound to RyR2 in wild type and calstabin2 FKBP12.6 mice. Treatment with JTV 519 0.5 mg kg h for 28 days post myocardial infarction reduces PKA phosphorylation of RyR2 presumably due to reverse cardiac remodeling in wildtype but not calstabin 2 FKBP12.6 mice.

As demonstrated by embodiments A and B mice in which cardiac RyR2 cannot be PKA phosphorylated RyR2 S2808A knockin mice have improved cardiac function following myocardial infarction. Shown in embodiment A is the quantification of M mode echocardiograms showing improved ejection fraction in RyR2 S2808A knockin mice compared with wildtype 28 days following permanent coronary artery ligation. Shown in embodiments B and C are pressure volume loop quantifications showing embodiment B improved cardiac contractility and decreased cardiac dilation embodiment C in RyR2 S2808A knockin mice compared with wildtype following myocardial infarction.

As shown in embodiments A B C D and E RyR1 channel functioning is increased and normalized in mdx dystrophin deficient mice treated with JTV 519. In channel openings are represented as upward deflections c indicates the closed state and 4 pA current open amplitude is indicated by dash. Upper traces represent 5 secs and lower traces 500 ms dotted lines indicate subconductance states.

Embodiment A of shows a single channel current trace of RyR1 from soleus muscle of control wild type mouse under resting conditions cytoplasmic Ca 150 nM . As seen RyR1 is predominantly closed. Embodiment C of shows that RyR1 channel function in mdx mouse shows significantly increased open probability increased average open and decreased average closed dwell times To and Tc respectively. Increased Po in mdx mice is consistent with intracellular Ca leak. The amplitude histograms in embodiments B D and F show multiple subconductance states consistent with calstabin1 FKBP12 depletion in RyR1 from mdx soleus muscle. Embodiment E of shows an mdx mouse treated with 1.0 M JTV 519. As seen the RyR1 channels JTV 519 treated mouse demonstrates normal activity which is not significantly different from untreated wild type trace thereby indicating that JTV 519 can normalize RyR1 channel function in mdx mice.

The data of are consistent with intracellular SR Ca leak via RyR1 channels as the cause of increased cytosolic Ca leak in skeletal muscles from mdx dystrophin deficient mice.

Embodiments A and B of are F F fluorescence line scan images of representative examples of Ca sparks in myofibers from sham and postmyocardial infarction PMI rats and corresponding Ca spark time course. Embodiment C shows the relative distribution of the spatio temporal properties of the Ca sparks. Charts indicate 25 50 75 percentiles the horizontal lines indicate the range from 1 99 of the distribution. Sham open symbols n 137 three animals postmyocardial infarction PMI gray symbols n 82 two animals . P

In summary JTV 519 treatment improved skeletal muscle fatigability in heart failure animals in vivo. Interestingly in calstabin2 knockout mice fatigue times were also significantly improved in JTV519 treated mice suggesting that the beneficial effects on isolated skeletal muscle function depend on calstabin1 and not calstabin2 binding to RyR1. Indeed calstabin1 appears to be the only isoform of functional significance expressed in skeletal muscles.

In summary the data shows that in vivo JTV519 treatment normalizes skeletal muscle function and RyR1 channel dysfunction consistent with preventing intracellular SR Ca leak as a cause of increased skeletal muscle fatigue.

Using forced swimming as an efficient protocol to increase skeletal muscle aerobic capacity in mice the composition and phosphorylation status of the skeletal RyR1 channel complex have been investigated. Unexpectedly after 3 weeks of 90 mins swimming twice daily C57B16 wild type mice showed significantly increased RyR1 phosphorylation by PKA while Ca calmodulin kinase II CaMKII phosphorylation was not changed indicating specificity of the stress pathway RyR1 protein expression was stable however RyR1 channels were depleted of the stabilizing subunit calstabin1 FKBP12 . It has been shown that RyR1 hyperphosphorylation and calstabin1 depletion are consistent with leaky RyR1 channels that cause intracellular SR Ca leak.

RyR1 channels are PKA hyperphosphorylated and depleted of the stabilizing calstabin1 subunit after 3 weeks of 90 mins swimming twice daily. As seen in Embodiment A the immunoprecipitated RyR1 macromolecular channel complex shows increased PKA phosphorylation at Ser 2844 corresponding to human RyR1 Ser 2843 whereas CaMKII phosphorylation at Ser 2849 corresponding to human RyR1 Ser 2848 is unchanged. Concomitant with increased RyR1 Ser 2844 PKA hyperphosphorylation calstabin1 is depleted from the channel complex. As seen in embodiment B normalization of phosphorylation and calstabin1 content to four subunits of the tetrameric channel complex shows a significant in increase in PKA phosphorylation and depletion of the stabilizing calstabin1 subunit. Control non exercised mice swim mice exercised 90 mins twice daily for 3 weeks preliminary data . P

In embodiment A the immunoprecipitated RyR1 channel complex shows significantly and above physiologic levels increased PKA phosphorylation at Ser 2844 corresponding to human RyR1 Ser 2843 after 7 days of swimming exercise. In embodiment B normalization of RyR2 Ser 2844 phosphorylation within the tetrameric channel complex documents a significant increase in PKA phosphorylation. P

In summary the data of shows that sustained exercise results in significantly increased RyR1 phosphorylation by protein kinase A PKA which contributes to depletion of the stabilizing calstabin1 subunit from the channel complex as the cause of a gain of function defect.

In embodiment A it can be seen that heart failure skeletal muscle fatigues earlier than control. Rat soleus muscle n 5 control n 8 HF was mounted in a tissue bath to assess contractile function. Representative fatigue time tracing is shown for control and HF skeletal muscles. Bar graph shows mean S.D. time to 40 fatigue. P

In summary provides data showing that sustained exercise causes RyR1 PKA hyperphosphorylation and calstabin1 depletion and shows that the identical defect occurs in disease forms with increased sympathetic activity causing intracellular SR Ca leak and significantly accelerated skeletal muscle fatigue.

An additional problem during sustained exercise and stress is skeletal muscle degeneration further contributing to decreased skeletal muscle performance. To assess structural changes during sustained exercise histologic changes in the fast twitch muscles of mice exposed to 3 weeks of exercise by swimming have been characterized. Results are shown in . Cross sections of the mouse EDL showed histologic changes consistent with myofiber degeneration from intracellular Ca overload from defective RyR1 channels. Therefore sustained exercise for 90 mins twice daily triggers a dystrophic phenotype in EDL muscles of normal C57B16 mice.

Trichrome stain shows packed myofibers of similar cross sectional dimension in non exercised control WT mice left . Three weeks swimming results in myofiber degeneration and interstitial collagen deposits with irregular fiber sizes. Hematoxylin eosin H E stain indicates nuclear changes and myofiber death. These changes are consistent with dystrophic remodeling.

The present invention is described in the following Examples which are set forth to aid in the understanding of the invention and should not be construed to limit in any way the scope of the invention as defined in the claims which follow thereafter.

In addition to the compounds disclosed herein other compounds can be discovered that are capable of modulating calcium ion channel activity in particular those channels related to the RyR series of caclium ion channels. Provided herein is a highly efficient assay for high throughput screening of other compounds that are capable of modulating calcium ion channel activity.

By way of example and as shown in Example 5 below a highly efficient assay for high throughput screening for small molecules is developed by immobilizing FKBP either FKBP12 or FKBP12.6 e.g. wild type FKBP12.6 or a fusion protein such as GST FKBP12.6 onto a 96 well plate coated with glutathione using standard procedures. PKA phosphorylated ryanodine receptor RyR specifically RyR1 or RyR3 in the case of FKBP12 and RyR2 in the case of FKBP12.6 is loaded onto the FKBP coated plate and incubated with compounds at various concentrations 10 100 nM for 30 min. Thereafter the plate is washed to remove the unbound RyR and then incubated with anti RyR antibody e.g. for 30 min . The plate is washed again to remove unbound anti RyR antibody and then treated with florescent labeled secondary antibody. The plate is read by an automatic fluorescent plate reader for binding activity.

Alternatively RyR is PKA phosphorylated in the presence of P ATP. Radioactive PKA phosphorylated RyR is loaded onto an FKBP coated 96 well plate in the presence of JTV 519 analogues and other compounds at various concentrations 10 100 nM for 30 min. The plate is washed to remove the unbound radiolabeled RyR and then read by an automatic plate reader. PKA phosphorylated RyR also is coated to the plate and incubated with S labeled FKBP in the presence of the compounds.

Cardiac SR membranes are prepared as previously described Marx et al. PKA phosphorylation dissociates FKBP12.6 from the calcium release channel ryanodine receptor defective regulation in failing hearts. 101 365 76 2000 Kaftan et al. Effects of rapamycin on ryanodine receptor Ca release channels from cardiac muscle. 78 990 97 1996 . S labelled FKBP12.6 was generated using the TNT Quick Coupled Transcription Translation system from Promega Madison Wis. . H ryanodine binding is used to quantify RyR2 levels. 100 g of microsomes are diluted in 100 l of 10 mM imidazole buffer pH 6.8 incubated with 250 nM final concentration S FKBP12.6 at 37 C. for 60 min then quenched with 500 l of ice cold imidazole buffer. Samples are centrifuged at 100 000 g for 10 min and washed three times in imidazole buffer. The amount of bound S FKBP12.6 is determined by liquid scintillation counting of the pellet.

Immunoblotting of microsomes 50 g is performed as described with anti FKBP12 12.6 1 1 000 anti RyR 5029 1 3 000 Jayaraman et al. FK506 binding protein associated with the calcium release channel ryanodine receptor . 267 9474 77 1992 or anti phosphoRyR2 P2809 1 5 000 for 1 h at room temperature Reiken et al. Beta blockers restore calcium release channel function and improve cardiac muscle performance in human heart failure. 107 2459 66 2003 . The P2809 phosphoepitope specific anti RyR2 antibody is an affinity purified polyclonal rabbit antibody custom made by Zymed Laboratories San Francisco Calif. using the peptide CRTRRI pS QTSQ which corresponds to RyR2 PKA phosphorylated at Ser. After incubation with HRP labeled anti rabbit IgG 1 5 000 dilution Transduction Laboratories Lexington Ky. the blots are developed using ECL Amersham Pharmacia Piscataway N.J. .

Single channel recordings of native RyR2 from mouse hearts or recombinant RyR2 are acquired under voltage clamp conditions at 0 mV as previously described Marx et al. PKA phosphorylation dissociates FKBP12.6 from the calcium release channel ryanodine receptor defective regulation in failing hearts. 101 365 76 2000 . Symmetric solutions used for channel recordings are trans compartment HEPES 250 mmol L Ba OH 53 mmol L in some experiments Ba OH is replaced by Ca OH pH 7.35 and cis compartment HEPES 250 mmol L Tris base 125 mmol L EGTA 1.0 mmol L and CaCl 0.5 mmol L pH 7.35. Unless otherwise indicated single channels recordings are made in the presence of 150 nM Ca and 1.0 mM Mg in the cis compartment. Ryanodine 5 mM is applied to the cis compartment to confirm identity of all channels. Data is analyzed from digitized current recordings using Fetchan software Axon Instruments Union City Calif. . All data is expressed as mean SE. The unpaired Student s t testis used for statistical comparison of mean values between experiments. A value of p

Synthon S26 was prepared according to methods described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 680 988.

Synthesis of S3 Scheme 1 To a stirred solution of vinylsulfonic acid 22 mg 0.2 mmol in anhydrous CHCl 5 ml is added thionyl chloride 2M in CHCl 0.1 ml 0.2 mmol The reaction mixture is stirred at room temperature overnight and evaporated under vacuum. The residue is dissolved in CHCl 5 ml . To this solution a solution of S26 20 mg 0.1 mmol in CHCl 3 ml is added drop wise at 0 C. The reaction mixture is stirred at 0 C. for one hour and at room temperature for another hour and washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate and 1N HCl. After removal of the solvent the product S3 is purified by SiOcolumn chromatography as a colorless oil 18 mg 65 .

Synthesis of S4 Scheme 1 To a stirred solution of S26 20 mg 0.1 mmol in CHCl 5 ml is added methylsulfonyl chloride 26 mg 0.2 mmol and triethylamine 30 mg 0.3 mmol at 0 C. The resulting mixture is stirred at 0 C. for one hour and at room temperature overnight. The organic phase is washed with aqueous saturated sodium bicarbonate and dried over sodium sulfate. After filtration and evaporation of the organic solvents the product S4 is purified by SiOcolumn chromatography 25 mg oil yield 90 . Similarly S5 and S54 are synthesized in 95 and 91 yields respectively.

Synthesis of S1 and S2 Scheme 2 To a solution of S3 28 mg 0.1 mmol in chloroform 5 ml is added 4 benzylpiperidine 18 mg 0.1 mmol . The resulting mixture is stirred at room temperature for 1 day. After removal of organic solvent the residue is purified on silica gel column. Product S1 is obtained as a colorless oil 34 mg yield 75 . S2 is synthesized similarly from S3 and dibutylamine in 78 yield.

Synthesis of S7 S9 S27 and S40 Scheme 3 To a stirred solution of iodoacetic acid 37 mg 0.2 mmol in CHCl 10 ml is added thionyl chloride 2 M solution in CHCl 0.1 ml 0.2 mmol . The resulting mixture is stirred at 0 C. for one hour and at room temperature overnight. After removal of solvent the crude acid chloride is added to a stirred solution of S26 20 mg 0.1 mmol and triethylamine 30 mg 0.3 mmol in CHCl2 10 ml at 0 C. The mixture is stirred at 0 C. for one hour and at room temperature overnight. The organic phase is washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate and 1N HCl. The crude product is purified by column chromatography to give S7 as a colorless oil 34 mg yield 95 . Similarly S9 is synthesized in 95 yield synthon S27 is synthesized in 96 yield and S40 is synthesized in 91 yield using N hydroxysuccinimidyl 4 azidosalicylic acid NHS ASA .

Synthesis of S11 and S12 Scheme 4 To a solution of S26 20 mg 0.1 mmol in pyridine 1 ml is added phenyl isocyanate 18 mg 0.15 mmol . The resulting mixture is stirred at room temperature for 24 hours. Then ethyl acetate 10 ml is added and the organic phase is washed with 1N HCl and saturated sodium bicarbonate. The product S11 is purified by SiOcolumn chromatography as a white solid 27 mg yield 86 . Similarly S12 is synthesized from S26 and phenyl isothiocyanate in 85 yield.

Synthesis of S13 and S14 Scheme 5 To S26 20 mg 0.1 mmol in CHCl 5 ml is added triethylamine 30 mg 0.3 mmol and phenyl methoxyphosphonyl chloride 38 mg 0.2 mmol at 0 C. After stirring for 2 hours at room temperature the reaction mixture is washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate. Isomers are separated and purified by silica gel column to yield S13 14 mg yield 40 and S14 16 mg yield 45 .

Synthesis of S19 Scheme 6 To a stirred solution of S26 20 mg 0.1 mmol and triethylamine 30 mg 0.3 mmol in CHCl 5 ml is added 1 4 butyldiacid chloride 8 mg 0.05 mmol at 0 C. The resulting mixture is stirred at 0 C. for one hour and at room temperature overnight. The organic phase is washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate and 1N HCl and water. After removal of solvent product S19 is purified by column chromatography oil 19 mg 80 yield . Similarly S22 is prepared from 2 6 pyridyl dicarboxylic acid dichloride.

Synthesis of S20 and S23 Scheme 7 S27 25 mg 0.1 mmol in MeOH 5 ml is treated with HO 30 0.5 ml at room temperature for 1 day. After treatment with sodium thiosulfate solution methanol is removed by evaporation. The resulting residue is dissolved in ethyl acetate 10 ml and washed with saturated sodium carbonate. After drying over sodium sulfate solvent is evaporated to provide a crude product which is purified by silica gel column chromatography to yield S20 as colorless oil 16 mg 60 yield . Similarly S23 is synthesized from S10.

Synthesis of S36 and S57 Scheme 8 To a stirred solution of S26 0.85 g 4.4 mmol and pyridine 0.70 g 8.8 mmol in CHCl 50 ml at 0 C. is added drop wise methyl chlorooxoacetate 0.81 g 6.6 mmol . The reaction mixture is stirred at 0 C. for 2 hours then washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate 1N HCl and water. Silica gel column chromatography provides S57 as a white solid 1.1 g 90 yield . S57 1.1 g 3.9 mmol is dissolved in methanol 10 ml and then a solution of sodium hydroxide 0.3 g 7.5 mmol in water 10 ml is added. The reaction mixture is stirred at room temperature for one hour. After solvent is removed the residue is dissolved in water 10 ml and washed with ether 2 10 ml . The aqueous phase is acidified with 1N HCl to pH 2. The product is extracted with CHCl 2 10 ml . Removal of solvent yields product S36 as a white solid 1.0 g yield 100 . The product can be further purified by recrystalization. S38 is similarly synthesized see Structure List .

Synthesis of S43 S44 S45 and S59 Scheme 8 S36 150 mg 0.56 mmol is treated w thionyl chloride 5 ml at room temperature overnight. After removal of the excess thionyl chloride the crude product S36 Cl is dissolved in CHCl 10 ml and to this solution mono Boc protected cystamine and pyridine 0.2 ml 196 mg 2.48 mmol are added at 0 C. The reaction mixture is stirred at 0 C. for one hour and at room temperature overnight and quenched with saturated sodium bicarbonate. The organic phase is separated and the solvent is removed to give intermediate S36 cystamine which is purified by SiOcolumn chromatography in 80 yield. Deprotection of the Boc group is achieved with trifluoroacetic acid in CHCl and the deprotected S36 cystamine is used for the synthesis of S43 and S45 by reaction with NHS activated ester of azido compounds. Yield is 75 for S43 and 80 for S45.

S44 is synthesized as a by product of the following reaction S36 50 mg 0.19 mmol is treated with thionyl chloride 2 ml at room temperature overnight. After removal of the excess of thionyl chloride the crude product is dissolved in CHCl 5 ml . To this solution cystamine 134 mg 0.88 mmol and pyridine 98 mg 1.23 mmol in CHCl 10 ml is added and the reaction mixture is stirred at room temperature overnight. S44 is purified by column as a white solid 20 mg 16 . Similarly S57 and S59 are synthesized by reaction of S36 Cl with methanol or ethylamine Scheme 8 .

Synthesis of urea based analogs S6 S46 53 S64 S66 S67 Scheme 9 . S26 195 mg 1.0 mmol in CHCl 20 ml is added 4 nitrophenyl chloroformate 220 mg 1.1 mmol and triethylamine 120 mg 1.2 mmol at 0 C. The reaction mixture is stirred for 2 hours at room temperature and washed with water. Removal of the solvents followed by purification using column chromatography provides compound S37 330 mg 91 . Reaction of S37 36 mg 0.1 mmole with one equivalent of amine in DMF 3 ml overnight provides urea based compounds in 60 yield after purification by SiOcolumn chromatography. Alternatively the urea based compounds can be synthesized through a versatile and more reactive intermediate S26 phosgene shown in Scheme 9.

Synthesis of S55 S56 S58 S60 S63 Scheme 10 The reaction mixture of S27 25 mg 0.1 mmol and 4 4 aminobenzyl piperidine 19 mg 0.1 mmol in chloroform 5 ml is stirred at room temperature for 2 days. After removal of solvent the product S60 is purified by silica gel column chromatography as a white solid 36 mg yield 90 . S55 S56 S58 and S61 S63 similarly are synthesized according to method described above.

Analogs S69 S75 having no methoxyl groups on the benzene ring R H in Formula I are synthesized as shown in Scheme 11 in a similar manner to that employed in the synthesis of S46 S53 see Scheme 9 . The synthesis starts with commercially available S68 and involves a versatile intermediate S68 phosgene to provide S69 S75 in 60 95 yield.

By analogy to the syntheses of S36 S43 S45 S57 and S59 Scheme 8 S76 S81 are synthesized from commercially available S68 as shown in Scheme 12 in 70 95 yield. Using S68 as starting material the compounds S82 S83 and S84 as shown in Scheme 13 also are synthesized similarly to the compounds which have a methoxy group on the benzene ring R 4 OCHin Formula I .

Synthesis of S85 S93 is accomplished as shown in Scheme 14. The following are examples of the synthesis.

Synthesis of S85 A solution of S26 10 mmol di tert butyl dicarbonate 11 mmol and triethylamine 12 mmol in dichloromethane 100 ml is stirred at room temperature for 5 hours. The reaction mixture is washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate solution 10 ml and the aqueous layer is extracted with dichloromethane 2 15 ml . The combined organic layers are dried over magnesium sulfate and concentrated under vacuum to provide S85 as colorless oil 2.90 g 98 yield .

Synthesis of S86 To a solution of S85 2.36 g 8 mmol in dichloromethane 100 ml at 78 C. is added BBr 1.0 M solution in dichloromethane 18 ml 18 mmol drop wise. The solution is warmed to room temperature and the reaction mixture is quenched with methanol 100 ml and concentrated under vacuum. The product S86 is purified by column chromatography.

Synthesis of S87 To a solution of S86 6 mmol in dichloromethane 40 ml at 0 C. is added triethylamine 7 mmol followed by trifluoromethylsulfonyl anhydride 7 mmol . The solution is stirred at room temperature for 30 minutes and the reaction mixture is quenched with water 10 ml . The aqueous layer is extracted with dichloromethane 2 15 ml and the combined organic layers are dried over magnesium sulfate and concentrated under vacuum. The crude product is purified by silica gel flash chromatography to provide S87 in 75 yield.

Synthesis of S88 A mixture of S87 1 mmol morpholine 8 ml tris dibenzylideneacetone dipalladium 0 5 mol 2 di tert butylphosphino biphenyl 20 mol and potassium phosphate 1.2 mmol is heated at 80 C. in a sealed tube for 12 hours. The reaction mixture is cooled to room temperature diluted with dichloromethane 50 ml and washed with water 10 ml . The aqueous layer is extracted with dichloromethane 2 15 ml and the combined organic layers are dried over magnesium sulfate and concentrated under vacuum. The crude product is purified by silica gel flash chromatography to give S88 in 81 yield.

Synthesis of S89 A solution of S87 1 mmol benzenethiol 2 mmol and i PrNEt 2 mmol in CHCN 20 ml is heated at 80 C. for 18 hours. After cooling ethyl acetate 30 ml is added and then washed with 1N HCl water and then 1N NaOH. After drying with NaSO the solution was concentrated. The product S89 was purified by chromatography in 59 yield. Alternatively S89 is synthesized by refluxing of S87 with benzenethiol in dioxane for 10 hours using i PrNEt Pd dba xantphos as catalyst.

Synthesis of S90 To a solution of S87 1.0 mmol in dioxane 10 mL are added KCO 2 mmol phenylboronic acid 1 mmol and Pd PhP 0.11 mmol and the mixture is stirred at 90 C. for 16 hours. The reaction mixture is cooled to 25 C. diluted with CHCl 30 mL washed with water 10 mL and the organic phase is evaporated to dryness under vacuum. Purification by column chromatography gives S90 in 40 yield.

Synthesis of S92 To a solution of S87 1.0 mmol in DMF 5 mL are added zinc cyanide 1 mmol and Pd PhP 0.11 mmol . The reaction mixture is stirred and heated at 100 C. for 1 hour followed by cooling dilution with water 50 mL and 2 M sulfuric acid 5 mL and extraction with EtOAc 3 . The combined organic extracts are washed with brine 2 dried over magnesium sulfate filtered and evaporated under vacuum. The product S92 is purified by silica gel column chromatography in 80 yield.

Synthesis of S94 To a solution of S86 1 mmol in CHCl 10 ml is added at 0 C. acetic anhydride 1.2 mmol and triethylamine 1.3 mmol . The reaction mixture is stirred at room temperature overnight then washed with HO. After drying with NaSO the solvent is evaporated and the product S94 98 yield by NMR is used for the next reaction without further purification.

Synthesis of S95 To a stirred solution of S84 0.5 mmol in benzene 20 ml is added anhydrous AlCl 0.6 mmol drop wise. The reaction mixture is refluxed for 5 hours and poured on to crushed ice 10 g . After extraction and concentration the product S95 is purified by silica gel column chromatography in 83 yield.

Synthesis of S96 To a solution of S86 0.1 mmol in methanol 5 ml is added NaI 10 mg excess and Chloramine T 0.3 mmol . The reaction mixture is stirred for 30 minutes and quenched with NaSOsolution. The solvent is evaporated. The product is purified by silica gel column chromatography as a mixture of mono iodinated or di iodinated products in a combined yield of 60 .

Synthesis of S97 S86 3 mmol is added to concentrated HSO 2 ml . To the stirred mixture is added slowly concentrated HNO 2 ml drop wise. After 10 minutes the reaction mixture is poured on to crushed ice 5 g and neutralized with NaCOto pH 7. The Boc deprotected nitro intermediate is collected by extraction with EtOAc and converted back to S97 by reaction with BocO. Purification by silica gel column chromatography provides S97 in 78 yield.

Synthesis of S98 A mixture of S97 2 mmol and 10 Pd C 0.1 g in methanol 20 ml is bubbled through with Hgas for 2 hours. After filtration and concentration the amine product is used for the next reactions without further purification.

Synthesis of S99 and S100 S98 1 mmol is dissolved in aqueous HCl 2 mmol HCl 10 ml HO . To this solution is added at 0 C. slowly a solution of sodium nitrite 1 mmol in water 5 ml . The reaction mixture is stirred at 0 C. for 1 hour then NaN 2 mmol in water 2 ml is added drop wise at 0 C. The resulting mixture is stirred at 0 C. for 1 hour and at room temperature overnight. The product is extracted with ethyl acetate and washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate and water. The organic layer is dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate and concentrated to give crude product S98. Column purification on silica gel provide the product in 71 yield. Similarly S99 is synthesized in 60 yield.

Assays for screening biologically active small molecules have been developed. These assays are based on rebinding of FKBP12 protein to RyR.

A highly efficient assay for high throughput screening for small molecules is developed by immobilization of FKBP12.6 GST fusion protein onto a 96 well plate coated with glutathione. PKA phosphorylated ryanodine receptor type 2 RyR2 is loaded onto the FKBP12.6 coated plate and incubated with JTV 519 analogues at various concentrations 10 100 nM for 30 min. Thereafter the plate is washed to remove the unbound RyR2 and then incubated with anti RyR2 antibody for 30 min. The plate is again washed to remove unbound anti RyR2 antibody and then treated with florescent labeled secondary antibody. The plate is read by an automatic fluorescent plate reader for binding activity.

In an alternative assay RyR2 is PKA phosphorylated in the presence of 32P ATP. Radioactive PKA phosphorylated RyR2 is loaded onto an FKBP12.6 coated 96 well plate in the presence of JTV 519 analogues at various concentrations 10 100 nM for 30 min. The plate is washed to remove the unbound radiolabeled RyR2 and then read by an automatic plate reader.

All publications references patents and patent applications cited herein are incorporated by reference in their entirety to the same extent as if each individual application patent or patent application was specifically and individually indicated to be incorporated by reference in its entirety.

While the foregoing invention has been described in some detail for purposes of clarity and understanding it will be appreciated by one skilled in the art from a reading of the disclosure that various changes in form and detail can be made without departing from the true scope of the invention in the appended claims.

