---

title: Systems, methods, interfaces and software for automated collection and integration of entity data into online databases and professional directories
abstract: An information-retrieval system includes a server that receives queries for documents from client devices and means for outputting results of queries to the client devices, with the results provided in association with one or more interactive control features that are selectable to invoke display of information regarding entities, such as professionals, referenced in the results.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07571174&OS=07571174&RS=07571174
owner: Thomson Reuters Global Resurces
number: 07571174
owner_city: Zug
owner_country: CH
publication_date: 20050103
---
This application claims priority to U.S. provisional application No. 60 533 588 filed on Dec. 31 2003. The provisional application is incorporated herein by reference.

A portion of this patent document contains material subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office patent files or records but otherwise reserves all copyrights whatsoever. The following notice applies to this document Copyright 2003 Thomson Global Resources AG.

Various embodiments of the present invention concerns information retrieval systems such as those that provide legal documents or other related content.

In recent years the fantastic growth of the Internet and other computer networks has fueled an equally fantastic growth in the data accessible via these networks. One of the seminal modes for interacting with this data is through the use of hyperlinks within electronic documents.

More recently there has been interest in hyperlinking documents to other documents based on the names of people in the documents. For example to facilitate legal research West Publishing Company of St. Paul Minn. doing business as Thomson West provides thousands of electronic judicial opinions that hyperlink the names of attorneys and judges to their online biographical entries in the West Legal Directory a proprietary directory of approximately 1 000 000 U.S. attorneys and 20 000 judges. These hyperlinks allow users accessing judicial opinions to quickly obtain contact and other specific information about lawyers and judges named in the opinions.

The hyperlinks in these judicial opinions are generated automatically using a system that extracts first middle and last names law firm name city and state and court information from the text of the opinions and uses them as clues to determine whether to link the named attorneys and judges to their corresponding entries in the professional directory. See Christopher Dozier and Robert Haschart Automatic Extraction and Linking of Person Names in Legal Text Proceedings of RIAO 2000 Content Based Multimedia Information Access. Paris France. pp. 1305 1321. Apr. 2000 which is incorporated herein by reference. An improvement to this system is described in Christopher Dozier System Methods And Software For Automatic Hyperlinking Of Persons Names In Documents To Professional Directories WO 2003 060767A3 Jul. 24 2003.

The present inventors have recognized still additional need for improvement in these and other systems that generate automatic links.

This description which references and incorporates the above identified Figures describes one or more specific embodiments of an invention. These embodiments offered not to limit but only to exemplify and teach the invention are shown and described in sufficient detail to enable those skilled in the art to implement or practice the invention. Thus where appropriate to avoid obscuring the invention the description may omit certain information known to those of skill in the art.

Databases include a set of one or more databases. In the exemplary embodiment the set includes a caselaw database an expert witness directory professional directories or licensing databases a verdict and settlement database an court filings database .

Caselaw database generally includes electronic text and image copies of judicial opinions for decided cases for one or more local state federal or international jurisdiction. Expert witness directory which is defined in accord with one or more aspects of the present invention includes one or more records or database structures such as structure . Structure includes an expert identifier portion A which is logically associated with one or more directory documents or entries B one or more verdict documents or entries C and one or more articles D. Some embodiments logically associate the expert identifier with court filings documents such as briefs and expert reports and or other documents.

Professional directories or licensing databases include professional licensing data from one or more state federal or international licensing authorities. In the exemplary embodiment this includes legal medical engineering and scientific licensing or credentialing authorities. Verdict and settlement database includes electronic text and image copies of documents related to the determined verdict assessed damages or negotiated settlement of legal disputes associated with cases within caselaw database . Articles database includes articles technical medical professional scientific or other scholarly or authoritative journals and authoritative trade publications. Some embodiments includes patent publications. Court filings database includes electronic text and image copies of court filings related to one or more subsets of the judicial opinions caselaw database . Exemplary court filing documents include briefs motions complaints pleadings discovery matter. Other databases includes one or more other databases containing documents regarding news stories business and finance science and technology medicine and bioinformatics and intellectual property information. In some embodiments the logical relationships across documents are determined manually or using automatic discovery processes that leverage information such as litigant identities dates jurisdictions attorney identifies court dockets and so forth to determine the existence or likelihood of a relationship between any pair of documents.

Databases which take the exemplary form of one or more electronic magnetic or optical data storage devices include or are otherwise associated with respective indices not shown . Each of the indices includes terms and or phrases in association with corresponding document addresses identifiers and other information for facilitating the functionality described below. Databases and are coupled or couplable via a wireless or wireline communications network such as a local wide private or virtual private network to server .

Server which is generally representative of one or more servers for serving data in the form of webpages or other markup language forms with associated applets ActiveX controls remote invocation objects or other related software and data structures to service clients of various thicknesses. More particularly server includes a processor a memory a subscriber database one or more search engines and software module .

Processor which is generally representative of one or more local or distributed processors or virtual machines is coupled to memory . Memory which takes the exemplary form of one or more electronic magnetic or optical data storage devices stores subscription database search engines and interface module .

Subscription database includes subscriber related data for controlling administering and managing pay as you go or subscription based access of databases . Subscriber database includes subscriber related data for controlling administering and managing pay as you go or subscription based access of databases .

Interface module which among other things defines one or portion of a graphical user interface that helps users define searches for databases . Software includes one or more browser compatible applets webpage templates user interface elements objects or control features or other programmatic objects or structures. More specifically software includes a search interface and a results interface .

Server is communicatively coupled or couplable via a wireless or wireline communications network such as a local wide private or virtual private network to one or more accesses devices such as access device .

Access device is not only communicatively coupled or couplable to server but also generally representative of one or more access devices. In the exemplary embodiment access device takes the form of a personal computer workstation personal digital assistant mobile telephone or any other device capable of providing an effective user interface with a server or database.

Specifically access device includes one or more processors or processing circuits a memory a display a keyboard and a graphical pointer or selector . Memory stores code machine readable or executable instructions for an operating system a browser and a graphical user interface GUI . In the exemplary embodiment operating system takes the form of a version of the Microsoft Windows operating system and browser takes the form of a version of Microsoft Internet Explorer. Operating system and browser not only receive inputs from keyboard and selector or mouse but also support rendering of GUI on display . Upon rendering GUI presents data in association with one or more interactive control features or user interface elements . The exemplary embodiment defines one or more portions of interface using applets or other programmatic objects or structures from server . 

Specifically graphical user interface defines or provides one or more display control regions such as a query region and a results region . Each region or page in some embodiments is respectively defined in memory to display data from databases and or server in combination with one or more interactive control features elements or widgets . In the exemplary embodiment each of these control features takes the form of a hyperlink or other browser compatible command input.

More specifically query region includes interactive control features such as an query input portion A for receiving user input at least partially defining a profile query and a query submission button B for submitting the profile query to server for data from for example experts database .

Results region which displays search results for a submitted query includes a results listing portion A and a document display portion B. Listing portion A includes control features A and A for accessing or retrieving one or more corresponding search result documents such as professional profile data and related documents from one or more of databases such as expert database via server . Each control feature includes a respective document identifier or label such as EXP EXP identifying respective name and or city state and subject matter expertise data for the corresponding expert or professional.

Display portion B displays at least a portion of the full text of a first displayed or user selected one of the profiles identified within listing portion A EXP in the illustration. Some embodiments present regions A and B as selectable tabbed regions. Portion B also includes features B B B and B. User selection of feature B initiates retrieval and display of the profile text for the selected expert EXP selection of feature B initiates retrieval and display of licensing data for any licenses or other credentials held by the selected expert or professional image copy of the document displayed in region B in a separate window selection of feature B initiates display and retrieval of verdict data related to the expert or professional and selection of feature B initiates retrieval and display of articles from database that are related to for example authored by the expert or professional. Other embodiments include additional control features for accessing court filing documents such as briefs and or expert reports authored by the expert or professional or even deposition and trial transcripts where the expert or testimony was a participant. Still other embodiments provide control features for initiating an Internet search based on the selected expert and other data and for filtering results such search based on the profile of the expert or professional.

Block entails presenting a search interface to a user. In the exemplary embodiment this entails a user directing a browser in an client access device to internet protocol IP address for an online information retrieval system such as the Westlaw system and then logging onto the system. Successful login results in a web based search interface such as interface in or one or more portions thereof being output from server stored in memory and displayed by client access device . Execution then advances to block .

Block entails receipt of a query. In the exemplary embodiment the query defines one or more attributes of an entity such as person professional. In some embodiments the query string includes a set of terms and or connectors and in other embodiment includes a natural language string. Also in some embodiments the set of target databases is defined automatically or by default based on the form of the system or search interface. show alternative search interfaces and which one or more embodiments use in place of interface in . Execution continues at block .

Block entails presenting search results to the user via a graphical user interface. In the exemplary embodiment this entails the server or components under server control or command executing the query against one or more of databases for example expert database and identifying documents such as professional profiles that satisfy the query criteria. A listing of results is then presented or rendered as part of a web based interface such as interface in or interface in . Execution proceeds to block .

Block entails presenting additional information regarding one or more one or more of the listed professionals. In the exemplary embodiment this entails receiving a request in the form of a user selection of one or more of the professional profiles listed in the search results. These additional results may be displayed as shown in interface in or respective interfaces and in and . Interface shows a listing of links and for additional information related to the selected professional. As shown in selection of link initiates retrieval and display of a verdict document or in some case a list of associated verdict documents in interface . And as shown in selection of link initiates retrieval and display of an article or in some cases a list of articles in interface .

In flow chart shows an exemplary method of building an expert directory or database such as used in system . Flow chart includes blocks .

At block the exemplary method begins with extraction of entity reference records from text documents. In the exemplary embodiment this entails extracting entity references from approximately 300 000 jury verdict settlement JVS documents using finite state transducers. JVS documents have a consistent structure that includes an expert witness section or paragraph such as that exemplified in Table 1.

Block entails defining profile records from the entity reference records In the exemplary embodiment defining the profile records entails merging expert witness reference records that refer to the same person to create a unique expert witness profile record for the expert. To this end the exemplary embodiment sorts the reference records by last name to define a number of lastname groups. Records within each last name group are then processed by selecting an unmerged expert reference record and creating an new expert profile record from this selected record.

The new expert reference record is then marked as unmerged and compared to each unmerged reference record in the group using Bayesian matching to compute the probability that the expert in the profile record refers to the same individual referenced in the record. If the computed match probability exceeds a match threshold the reference is marked as merged. If unmerged records remain in the group the cycle is repeated.

Note that it is still possible for duplicate records to reside in the profile file if two or more reference records pertain to one individual for example because of a misspelled last name . To address this possibility a final pass is made over the merged profile file and record pairs are flagged for manual review. Table 3 shows an exemplary expert profile record created from expert reference records.

Block entails adding additional information to the expert reference records. In the exemplary embodiment this entail harvesting information from other databases and sources such as from professional licensing authorities telephone directories and so forth. References to experts in JVS documents the original entity record source in this embodiment often have little or no location information for experts whereas professional license records typically include the expert s full name and the full current home and or business address making them a promising source for additional data.

One exemplary licensing authority is the Drug Enforcement Agency which licenses health care professionals to prescribe drugs.

In determining whether a harvested license record analogous to a reference record and expert person refer to the same person the exemplary embodiment computes a Bayesian match probability based on first name middle name last name name suffix city state information area of expertise and name rarity. If the match probability meets or exceeds a threshold probability one or more elements of information from the harvested license record are incorporated into the expert reference record. If the threshold criteria is not met the harvested license record is stored in a database for merger consideration with later added or harvested records. Some embodiments perform an extraction procedure on the supplemental data similar to that described at block to define reference records which are then sent as a set for merger processing as in block with the expert reference records. 

Block entails categorizing expert profiles by area of expertise. In the exemplary embodiment each expert witness record is assigned one or more classification categories in an expertise taxonomy. Categorization of the entity records allows users to browse and search expert witness or other professional profiles by area of expertise. To map an expert profile record to an expertise subcategory the exemplary embodiment uses an expertise categorizer and a taxonomy that contains top level categories and subcategories.

The exemplary taxonomy includes the following top level categories Accident Injury Accounting Economics Computers Electronics Construction Architecture Criminal Fraud and Personal Identity Employment Vocational Engineering Science Environmental Family Child Custody Legal Insurance Medical Surgical Property Real Estate Psychiatry Psychology Vehicles Transportation Equipment Machines. Each categories includes one or more subcategories. For example the Accident Injury category has the following subcategories Aerobics Animals Apparel Asbestos Boating Bombing Burn Thermal Child Care Child Safety Construction Coroner Cosmetologists Beauticians Barbers Tattoos Dog Bites Entertainment and Exercise.

Assignment of subject matter categories to an expert profile record entail using a function that maps a professional descriptor associated with the expert to a leaf node in the expertise taxonomy. This function is represented with the following equation where T denotes a set of taxonomy nodes and S is the professional descriptor. The exemplary function fuses a lexicon of 500 four character sets that map professional descriptors to expertise area. For example experts having the onco professional descriptor are categorized to the oncology specialist oncologist and pediatric oncologist subcategories. Other taxonomies are also feasible. The exemplary embodiment allows descriptors to map to more than one expertise area that is category or subcategory in the taxonomy. For example pediatric surgeon can be mapped to both the pediatrics node and surgery nodes. Table 5 shows an example of an expert profile record in which the expertise field has been mapped to the category Medical Surgical and to the subcategories pediatrics blood plasma and oncology. 

Block entails associating one or more text documents and or additional data sets with one or more of the professional profiles. To this end the exemplary embodiment logically associates or links one or more JVS documents and or Medline articles to expert witness profile records using Bayesian based record matching. Table 6 shows a sample Medline article.

To link JVS documents and medline abstracts to expert profile records expert reference records are extracted from the articles using one or more suitable parsers through parsing and matched to profile records using a Bayesian inference network similar to the profile matching technology described previously. For JVS documents the Bayesian network computes match probabilities using seven pieces of match evidence last name first name middle name name suffix location organization and area of expertise. For medline articles the match probability is based additionally on name rarity as described in the previously mentioned Dozier patent application.

At block the exemplary method begins with receipt of a document. In the exemplary embodiment this entails receipt of an unmarked document such an a judicial opinion or brief. However other embodiments receive and process other types of documents. Execution then advances to block .

Block entails determining the type of document. The exemplary embodiments uses one or more methods for determining document type for example looking for particular document format and syntax and or keywords to differentiate among a set of types. In some embodiments type can be inferred from the source of the document. Incoming content types such as case law jury verdicts law reviews briefs etc. have a variety of grammar syntax and structural differences. After type or document description is determined execution continues at block .

Block entails extracting one or more entity reference records from the received document based on the determined type of the document. In the exemplary embodiment four types of entity records are extracted personal names such as attorneys judges expert witnesses organizational names such as firms and companies product names such as drugs and chemicals and fact profiles vernacular of subject area . Specialized or configurable parsers finite state transducers which are selected or configured on the basis of the determined document type and the entity record being built identify and extract entity information for each type of entity.

Parsers extract information by specifically searching for a named entity person address company etc. or by relationships between entities. Parser text extraction is based on the data s input criteria. For example the more structured tagged data enables a tighter set of rules to be built within a parser. This set of rules allows more specific information to be extracted about a particular entity. A more free data collection such as a web site is not as conducive to rule based parsers. A collection could also include a combination of structured semi structured and free data. More specifically parsers are developed through regular expression methods. The regular expressions serves are rules for parsers to find entity types and categories of information.

Block attempts to link or logically associate each extracted entity reference record with one or more existing authority directories. In the exemplary embodiment this entails computing a Bayesian match probability for each extracted entity reference and one more corresponding candidate records in corresponding directories or databases that have been designated as authoritative in terms of accepted accuracy. If the match probability satisfies match criteria the records are merged or associated and the input document. Execution then proceeds to block .

Block entails enriching unmatched entity reference records using a matching process. In the exemplary embodiment this enriching process entails operating specific types of data harvesters on the web other databases and other directories or lists to assemble a cache of new relevant profile information for databases such as expert database in . The unmatched or unmarked entity records are then matched against the harvested entity records using Bayesian matching. Those that satisfy the match criteria are referred to a quality control process for verification or confirmation prior to addition to the relevant entity directory. The quality control process may be manual semi automatic or fully automatic. For example some embodiments base the type of quality control on the degree to which the match criteria is exceeded.

In some embodiments blocks operates in parallel with blocks continually retrieving new entity related data using any number of web crawlers relational databases or CDs and attempting to building new entity records.

The embodiments described above are intended only to illustrate and teach one or more ways of practicing or implementing the present invention not to restrict its breadth or scope. The actual scope of the invention which embraces all ways of practicing or implementing the teachings of the invention is defined only by the following claims and their equivalents.

