---

title: Vehicle entertainment system incorporated within the armrest/console of a vehicle with a swivel monitor mounting structure
abstract: A vehicle entertainment system includes a video system mounted within an automobile armrest/console, the armrest/console including an upper support surface. The video system includes an integrated housing supporting a video monitor and a video source.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07604291&OS=07604291&RS=07604291
owner: 
number: 07604291
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050810
---
This application is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 173 058 filed Jul. 5 2005 entitled VEHICLE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM INCORPORATED WITHIN THE ARMREST CONSOLE OF A VEHICLE which is currently pending and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 172 937 filed Jul. 5 2005 entitled DETACHABLE VEHICLE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM FOR THE ARMREST CONSOLE OF A VEHICLE which is currently pending both of which are based upon U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 672 883 filed Apr. 20 2005 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM INCORPORATED WITHIN THE CENTRAL ARMREST CONSOLE OF AN AUTOMOBILE .

The invention relates to a vehicle entertainment system. More particularly the invention relates to an entertainment system integrating a video source and video monitor within the central armrest console of an automobile.

Entertainment systems for automobiles are well known. As such many advances have been made in the development of entertainment systems that make the otherwise tedious task of riding in an automobile mote bearable. In addition to the development of overhead systems pioneered by the present inventor a variety of systems and techniques for integrating entertainment systems within an automobile have been developed.

For example headrest entertainment systems have been developed and allow multiple individuals to view a variety of different video sources within the same vehicle. However some automobiles are not suited for the utilization of headrest entertainment systems and therefore are unable to take advantage of this advancement in technology. Similarly only larger vehicles can take advantage of the overhead systems commonly found in automobiles.

With this in mind alternate techniques for implementing entertainment systems within automobiles are needed. The present invention attempts to add to the choices consumers have by providing an automobile entertainment system that may be integrated within the central armrest console of an automobile.

It is therefore an object of the present invention to provide a vehicle entertainment system including a video system mounted within an automobile armrest console the armrest console including an upper support surface. The video system includes an integrated housing supporting a video monitor wherein the video monitor is mounted upon the housing for rotation relative thereto.

It is also a further object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the video system includes a video source which is a DVD player or hard drive.

It is also an object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the upper support surface is an armrest module.

It is another object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the armrest module is selectively removable from the armrest console.

It is a further object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the housing includes a first surface upon which the video monitor is mounted and the video monitor selectively rotates about an axis substantially perpendicular to the surface.

It is also another object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein RCA ports are located on the first surface of the housing.

It is a further object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the video monitor swivels between a use first position and a storage second position and the RCA ports are only visible when the video monitor is in its use first position.

It is another object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the video monitor swivels between a use first position and a storage second position and the control buttons are only visible when the video monitor is in its use first position.

It is yet a further object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein a swivel couples the video monitor to the housing.

It is still another object of the present invention to provide an entertainment system wherein the housing includes a storage compartment and a video source is housed within the storage compartment.

It is also an object of the present invention to provide an armrest console incorporating a vehicle entertainment system. The armrest console includes an upper support surface with a video system mounted therein. The video system includes an integrated housing supporting a video monitor wherein the video monitor is mounted upon the housing for rotation relative thereto.

Other objects advantages and salient features of the invention will become apparent from the following detailed description which taken in conjunction with the annexed drawings discloses a preferred but non limiting embodiment of the subject invention.

The detailed embodiments of the present invention are disclosed herein. It should be understood however that the disclosed embodiments are merely exemplary of the invention which may be embodied in various forms. Therefore the details disclosed herein are not to be interpreted as limiting but merely as the basis for the claims and as a basis for teaching one skilled in the art how to make and or use the invention.

With reference to and in accordance with a first embodiment of the present invention an automobile entertainment system is disclosed. The automobile entertainment system is composed of a series of video and audio components integrated within a central armrest console of a traditional automobile. In particular the entertainment system includes a video system mounted within an armrest module adapted for connection with the armrest console of a traditional automobile. Although the present invention is described herein with reference to an automobile those skilled in the art will readily appreciate the system may be employed in a variety of vehicles for example boats or planes without departing from the spirit of the present invention. The video system generally includes a housing in which a video monitor and video source are supported. The housing with the video monitor and video source is integrated with the armrest module which functions as both a support for the video monitor video source and the upper support surface of the armrest console . Although the present invention is adapted for use in conjunction with the center armrest console of a vehicle the concepts underlying the present invention could readily be applied to other support storage and or console type structures for example within a door of a vehicle found within an automobile.

The armrest module is modular in design and is adapted for use within a variety of automobiles by simply changing the appearance and shape of the armrest module so it matches the armrest console . In particular many automobiles today include an armrest console with a storage compartment not shown formed therein. The storage compartment is commonly accessed via a hinged upper support surface that is pivoted toward the rear seat of the automobile to expose the contents of the storage cavity formed within the armrest console . It is this upper support surface which is replaced by the present entertainment system for conveniently installing an entertainment system within an automobile.

By employing the present entertainment system a video system may be installed within a variety of vehicles regardless of the ceiling height or headrest dimensions by simply replacing the upper support surface of the factory installed armrest console with the present armrest module . As those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate the present armrest module is provided with a hinge structure adapted for ready attachment to the existing structure of the automobile. Further and as those skilled in the art will also certainly appreciate the hinge structure may be varied to suit the automobile for which the armrest module is designed.

In accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention the video source is a DVD player coupled to the video monitor for the transmission of video content thereto. That is the DVD player or other video source is integrated within the same housing as the video monitor . It is also contemplated that a hard drive video source may also be integrated with the video monitor . As those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate the hard drive will include an input s for receiving video content and an output s for transmitting video content to the video monitor both of which are well known to those skilled in the art. The video system is further provided with RCA ports for connection of other video sources. However and as discussed below in greater detail the video source may take a variety of forms without departing from the spirit of the present invention for example and not limited to satellite video systems and Bluetooth wireless based systems. In addition and as discussed below the video source may be housed at a location separate from the video monitor without departing from the spirit of the present invention.

The video system is pivotally mounted to the armrest module in a manner permitting storage and retrieval thereof. More particularly the base of the video system is pivotally mounted to the armrest module in a manner that permits rotation of the video system about multiple axes. A first hinge facilitates rotation of the video monitor from its storage position within a recess formed in the armrest module to an upstanding position for viewing thereof. The second hinge permits rotation of the video monitor about an axis substantially perpendicular to the axis of the first hinge . As such the second hinge allows for rotation of the video monitor in a manner that facilitates both viewing and protection of the video monitor . The first hinge is further provided with a lock out pin shaped and dimensioned for preventing rotation of the video monitor to a storage position when it is rotated rearwardly see for viewing by those in the back seat of the vehicle. Although a specific hinge structure is disclosed in accordance with a preferred embodiment various hinge structures could be employed without departing from the spirit of the present invention.

In particular the base of the video monitor is pivotally secured to the armrest module at a position adjacent to the rear of the armrest module . When the video monitor is in its storage position within the recess of the armrest module it is oriented with the video screen facing downward and the back of the video monitor facing upward. As such the back of the video monitor functions as part of the armrest console when the video monitor is in its storage position.

When one wishes to watch a presentation on the video system from the back seat of the automobile the video monitor is lifted from the recess within the armrest module rotated upward about the first hinge and then rotated approximately 180 degrees about the second hinge such that the video screen faces the back seat of the automobile.

The video monitor DVD player and associated control components are mounted within the housing of the video system . In accordance with a preferred embodiment the video monitor is a TFT LCD screen. However it is contemplated that other monitor constructions for example plasma Ultra High Definition VGA touch screen VGA organic LED fabric based monitors e.g. flexible TFT etc. may be used without departing from the spirit of the present invention.

With regard to the DVD player it is structured as a top slot loading DVD player known to those skilled in the art. It is integrally molded within the housing and positioned for insertion of DVDs behind the video monitor . By mounting the DVD player in this way a stable structure is developed that is well adapted for the automobile environment. It is contemplated the DVD player may also be a side loaded design with the slot located either on the left or right side of the housing.

While the DVD player is disclosed as being a slot loaded design with insertion behind the video monitor in accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention the DVD player could take a variety of other forms while still being integrated with the video monitor and or the armrest module. For example and with reference to the broken lines labeled shown in the DVD player may be formed within the armrest module for access by those in the back seat of the vehicle. In addition and with reference to the DVD player may be positioned beneath the pivotally mounted video monitor and video monitor housing and within the recess of the armrest module allowing for insertion of DVDs beneath the video monitor when the video monitor is in an open position. As the video monitor housing includes a top bottom first and second sides front surface and rear surface the DVD player is mounted within the recess of the armrest module such that the DVD player may be accessed for loading and unloading of DVDs when the video monitor housing is pivoted forward. This embodiment includes a pivotally supported cover providing selective access for the retrieval and insertion of new DVDs. With reference to the DVD player may be integrated with the backside or rear surface of the video monitor housing that includes a top bottom first and second sides front surface and rear surface . DVDs are snapped into the DVD player allowing for insertion of DVDs behind the video monitor when the video monitor housing is in an open position. As with the DVD player disclosed with reference to the DVD player is provided with a pivotally supported cover allowing for selective access for the retrieval and insertion of new DVDs. The slot loaded design may also be varied to allow for slot loading on either the right or left side of the video system. In addition the DVD player may be designed with a built in TV tuner for providing the user with a choice of video sources.

Control of the video system including the video monitor DVD player hard drive and other components of the video system is facilitated by the provision of control buttons along the outer surface of the video system . In accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention the control buttons take the form of a multifunction controller permitting movement of a cursor shown upon various interfaces displayed upon the video monitor. In addition conventional control buttons may also be provided for control of traditional functions. In addition to the provision of manual control buttons the video system may further include a remote control not shown such that an individual need not actually touch the video system to control the video content or the volume generated by the video system. Once again and as those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate a variety of remote control systems may be utilized without departing from the spirit of the present invention. The system may also be provided with inputs for audio visual content coming from remote sources for example gaming units video players etc.

Specific wiring arrangements and linking of various video systems within an automobile in accordance with preferred embodiments of the present invention are disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 920 425 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Aug. 18 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 895 111 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Jul. 21 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 895 110 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM LINKING MULTIPLE VIDEO SYSTEM FOR COORDINATED SHARING OF VIDEO CONTENT filed Jul. 21 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 895 086 entitled HOUSING FOR AN AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Jul. 21 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 895 099 entitled INSTALLATION APPARATUS FOR AN AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Jul. 21 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 920 431 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Aug. 18 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 920 430 entitled AUTOMOBILE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM filed Aug. 18 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference.

In addition to contemplated hardwiring of the present video system within an automobile the system may be designed for quick installation by a vehicle owner. With this in mind and as those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate the present video system may be designed for simply plugging it into a power source for example a cigarette lighter commonly found in vehicles. In accordance with such an embodiment the video system would be provided with a pass through for access to wires linking the video system to a power source and or external speakers.

The present video system is provided with the ability to offer a variety of functionalities. These functionalities may be hardwired or programmed within the video system or the functionalities may be added in a modular manner via an expansion slot provided within the video system . Contemplated functionalities include but are not limited to satellite radio for example Serius XM Pictel phone satellite television for example DirecTV GPS guidance systems quick release battery packs memory cards wireless internet access for example Wi Fi Bluetooth digital video recorders digital video reception and recording digital video inputs video conferencing cellular digital cellular digital with a camera USB capabilities Blue sphere hot swap hard drive satellite video import card wireless video import card etc. Additional details regarding the implementation of such features are found in commonly owned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 153 364 entitled VEHICLE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM INCLUDING A DETACHABLE FUNCTIONAL MODULE HOUSED WITHIN A DETACHABLE VIDEO SYSTEM filed Jun. 16 2005 which is incorporated herein by reference.

In addition and in accordance with a preferred embodiment a broadcast television receiver is integrated with the video monitor and or the armrest module . More particularly and with reference to the housing is provided with a rear recess shaped and dimensioned for receiving a television receiver . The television receiver may therefore be wired for use in conjunction with the video monitor in a manner known to those skilled in the art.

The television receiver is further provided with an antenna . The antenna is electrically connected to the television receiver for the transmission of over the air signals. As those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate the antenna may take a variety of forms without departing from the spirit of the present invention. In addition and as those skilled in the art will certainly appreciate the antenna may be wired or wirelessly connected to the television receiver and take a variety of forms without departing from the spirit of the present invention.

Although the present invention is disclosed herein as including a single monitor it is contemplated the system could be designed with dual monitors for viewing from opposite sides of the vehicle. Such a system could include distinct DVD players associated with each monitor or a single DVD player linked to both monitors.

In accordance with yet a further embodiment of the present invention the video monitor is mounted to permit swivel thereof for optimizing the viewing area provided to a vehicle occupant. In particular recent developments have made viewing of videos in a letterbox format very popular. However this necessitates that the video monitor also be letterbox shaped to optimize the usable viewing area along the video monitor. Since the space between front seats in an automobile is oftentimes limited the present swivel mechanism has been developed to allow for the use of an optimal screen size despite small spaces between the automobile seats.

As with the prior embodiments and with reference to the automobile entertainment system is composed of a series of video and audio components integrated within a central armrest console of a traditional automobile. In particular the entertainment system includes a video system mounted within an armrest module adapted for connection with the armrest console of a traditional automobile. The video system generally includes a housing which supports a video monitor and video source . The housing with the video monitor and video source is integrated with the armrest module which functions as both a support for the video monitor video source and the upper support surface of the armrest console .

In accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention the video source is a DVD player coupled to the video monitor for the transmission of video content thereto. That is the DVD player or other video source is integrated within the same housing as supports the video monitor . It is also contemplated that a hard drive video source may also be integrated with the video monitor . The video system is further provided with RCA ports for connection of other video sources.

The housing is specifically structured to permit rotation of the video monitor about an axis perpendicular to the plane in which the housing lies. More particularly the housing is constructed with a storage compartment having a front surface and a rear surface . Within the storage compartment is housed the DVD player for example a slot loaded DVD player as discussed above although and as described above a variety of DVD player constructions may be employed without departing from the spirit of the present invention hard drive and other electronic components requited for operation of the present video system . As discussed above the rear surface of the housing is a flat surface preferably padded which functions as part of the upper support surface when the video system is in its storage position.

The video monitor is mounted along the front surface of the housing . The video monitor is mounted on a swivel which permits the video monitor to rotate about an axis substantially perpendicular to the plane in which the housing lies. With the ability to swivel the video monitor the size of the video monitor may be optimized based upon the desired use in a letterbox configuration see and the spacing between the automobile seats between which the video system sits. More particularly the video monitor may be selectively swiveled between a use first position see and a storage second position see .

Enhance used is further provided by placing control buttons of the video system and RCA ports along the front surface of the housing such that they are only exposed when the video monitor is rotated to its letterbox configuration that is use first position. With this in mind the control buttons and RCA ports are positioned along the upper and lower extents of the front surface of the housing .

The video system is pivotally mounted to the armrest module in a manner permitting storage and retrieval thereof. More particularly the base of the video system is pivotally mounted to the armrest module in a manner that permits rotation of the video system about multiple axes. A first hinge facilitates rotation of the video monitor from its storage position within a recess formed in the armrest module to an upstanding position for viewing thereof. The second hinge permits rotation of the video monitor about an axis substantially perpendicular to the axis of the first hinge . As such the second hinge allows for rotation of the video monitor in a manner that facilitates both viewing and protection of the video monitor . As with the prior embodiment a lockout pin may also be provided.

In particular the base of the video monitor is pivotally secured to the armrest module at a position adjacent to the rear of the armrest module . When the video monitor is in its storage position within the recess of the armrest module it is oriented with the video screen facing downward and the back of the video monitor facing upward. As such the back of the video monitor functions as part of the armrest console when the video monitor is in its storage position.

When one wishes to watch a presentation on the video system from the back seat of the automobile the video monitor is lifted from the recess within the armrest module rotated upward about the first hinge and then rotated approximately 180 degrees about the second hinge such that the video screen faces the back seat of the automobile. The video monitor is thereafter rotated to its first use position. It is further contemplated the video monitor may be designed to allow for vertical adjustment for example from approximately 4 inches to approximately 10 inches to allow for improved user viewing. It is contemplated this will be accomplished through the use of a sprocket mechanism integrated with the video system.

Control of the video system including the video monitor DVD player hard drive and other components of the video system is facilitated by the provision of control buttons along the outer surface of the video system . In accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention the control buttons take the form of a multifunction controller permitting movement of a cursor shown upon various interfaces displayed upon the video monitor.

In addition and as discussed above in accordance with the prior embodiments a broadcast television receiver not shown is integrated with the video monitor and or the armrest module . The housing is provided with a rear recess shaped and dimensioned for receiving a television receiver. The television receiver may therefore be wired for use in conjunction with the video monitor in a manner known to those skilled in the art. The television receiver is further provided with an antenna.

In addition to the preferred embodiment disclosed above it is contemplated the video system may be designed for quick release and at various remote locations. Such a variation would be contemplated by using techniques similar to those disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 172 937 filed Jul. 5 2005 entitled DETACHABLE VEHICLE ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM FOR THE ARMREST COSOLE OF A VEHICLE which is incorporated herein by reference.

While the preferred embodiments have been shown and described it will be understood that there is no intent to limit the invention by such disclosure but rather is intended to cover all modifications and alternate constructions failing within the spirit and scope of the invention as defined in the appended claims.

