---

title: System and method for finding and serving consumer product related information to consumers using internet-based information servers and clients
abstract: A system for and method of delivering manufacturer-specified consumer product information to consumers within a marketplace. Manufacturers and/or their agents remotely and actively manage UPN/TM/PD/URL data links for registered consumer products by updating information elements stored in a relational database so as to compose a menu of URLs for each consumer product registered in the relational database. Using an Internet-enabled client computer, a consumer transmits a request for information resources about a UPN-labeled consumer product registered with the relational database, using one or more of the UPN, TM and/or PD that are symbolically linked to the UPN assigned to a registered UPN-labeled consumer product. In response to the request, the UPN, TM and/or PD contained in the request are automatically recovered and used to access the URLs stored in the relational database and the accessed URLs are then transmitted back to the Internet-enabled client computer.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07441710&OS=07441710&RS=07441710
owner: IPF, Inc.
number: 07441710
owner_city: Stamford
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050419
---
This is a Continuation of U.S. application Ser. No. 10 040 176 filed Oct. 25 2001 now abandoned which is a Continuation of U.S. application Ser. No. 08 936 375 filed Sep. 24 1997 now abandoned which is a Continuation in Part of U.S. application Ser. No. 08 871 815 filed Jun. 9 1997 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 143 055 which is a Continuation in Part of U.S. application Ser. No. 08 854 877 filed May 12 1997 now U.S. Pat. No. 5 950 173 which is a Continuation in Part of U.S. application Ser. No. 08 826 120 filed Mar. 27 1997 now abandoned which is a Continuation of U.S. application Ser. No. 08 752 136 filed Nov. 19 1996 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 064 979 which is a Continuation in Part of U.S. application Ser. No. 08 736 798 filed on Oct. 25 1996 now U.S. Pat. No. 5 918 214 each said Application being assigned to IPF Inc. and incorporated herein by reference in its entirety as if set forth fully herein.

The present invention generally relates to a novel system and method for collecting consumer product related information and transmitting and delivering the same along the consumer product supply and demand chain using the National Information Infrastructure e.g. the Internet and more particularly to a novel system and method for delivering consumer product related information to consumers within retail environments using Internet based information servers and sales agents.

Dissemination of consumer product information between manufacturers and their retail trading partners must be accurate and timely. The traditional methods of phone calls and faxes are time consuming and resource intensive. An electronic Universal Product Code UPC Catalog i.e. database system accessible 24 hours a day is a solution. In 1988 QuickResponse Services QRS Inc. Of Richmond Calif. introduced the first independent product information database using the retail industry standard UPC numbering system. Today the QRSolutions Catalog contains information on over 52 million products from over 1500 manufacturers. The QRSolutions Catalog is a Window s based application providing a critical information flow link between the retailers and the manufacturers along the supply and demand chain.

After assigning a UPC number to each item the manufacturer organizes and sends the data via an electronic data interchange i.e. EDI transmission or a tape to QRS Inc. to be loaded into the UPC Catalog database. Changes to the data can be made on a daily basis. Retailers with access to a manufacturer s data can view and download the data once it has been added or updated. Automatic update capabilities ensure the most recent UPC data will be in the EDI mailbox of each retailer customer quickly.

The effect of a centralized database such as QRS s UPC Catalog improves the flow of merchandise from the manufacturer to the retailer s selling floor and ultimately to the consumer. With the UPC Catalog accurate up to date product information is available when the retailer needs it eliminating weeks from the order cycle time.

In addition to the electronic UPC based product information subsystem i.e. UPC Catalog described above a number of other information subsystems have been developed for the purpose of providing solutions to problems relating to electronic commerce EC merchandising and logistics within the global supply chain. Such ancillary information subsystems include for example Sales and Analysis and Forecasting Subsystems for producing and providing retailers with information about what products consumers are buying Collaborative Replenishment Subsystems for determining what products retailer can be buying in order to satisfy consumer demand at any given point of time and Transportation and Logistics Information Subsystems for producing and providing retailers with information about when products purchased by them at wholesale will be delivered to the their stores. Typically such information subsystems are connected to various value added information networks in order to efficiently offer such information services to retailers on a global basis.

While the above described information systems collectively cooperate to optimize the process of moving raw materials into finished products and into the hands of consumers such information systems simply fail to address the information needs of the consumers of retail products who either require or desire product related information prior to as well as after the purchase of consumer products.

Presently an enormous amount of time money and effort is being expended by companies in order to advertise and sell their products and services and after product purchase has taken place to provide product related information product warranty service and the like. For decades various types of media have been used to realize such fundamental business functions.

In recent times there has been a number of significant developments in connection with the global information network called the Internet which has greatly influenced many companies to create multi media Internet Web sites in order to advertise sell and maintain their products and services. Examples of such developments include for example the World Wide Web WWW based on the Hypertext Markup Language HTML and the Hypertext Transmission Protocol HTTP by Tim Berners Lee et al. easy to use GUI based Internet navigation tools such as the Netscape browser from Netscape Communications Inc. the Internet Explorer browser from MicroSoft Corporation and the Mosaic browser from Spyglass Corporation and the Virtual Reality Modelling Language VRML by Mark Pecse. Such developments in recent times have made it very easy for businesses to create 2 D Hypermedia based Home Pages and 3 D VR Worlds i.e. 3 D Web sites for the purpose of projecting a desired corporate image and providing a backdrop for financial investment solicitation as well as product advertising sales and maintenance operations.

Presently a person desiring to acquire information about any particular product has a number of available search options. In particular he or she may attempt to directly contact the manufacturer wholesaler or reseller by telephone US mail e mail or through the company s World Wide Web site WWW if they have one. In the event one decides to acquire product information through the seller s WWW site he or she must first determine the location of its WWW site i.e. Internet address which often times can involve using Internet Search engines such as Yahoo AltaVista WebCrawler Lycos Excite or the like. This can be a very time consuming process and sometimes leads to a dead end. Once the Internet address is obtained one must then review the home page of the company s Web site in order to find where if at all information about a particular product resides on the Website. This search process can be both time consuming and expensive in terms of Internet time and may not turn up desired information on the product of interest.

In some instances product brochures bear a preprinted Internet address designed to direct or point prospective customers to a particular Web site where more detailed product information can be found. A recent example of this preprinted Web Address pointing technique is the 1996 product brochure published by the Sony Corporation for its Sony PCV 70 Personal Computer which refers prospective customers to the Sony Web Address http www.sony.com pc . While this approach provides a direct way of finding product related information on the Internet it is not without its shortcomings and drawbacks.

In particular when a company improves changes or modifies an existing Web site which publishes product and or service advertisements and related information it is difficult if not impossible not to change the Internet locations e.g. Web addresses at which such product and or service advertisements and related information appear. Whenever a company decides or is forced to change any of its advertising marketing and or public relations firms there is a substantial likelihood that new Web sites will be created and launched for particular products and services and that the Web addresses of such new Web sites will no longer correspond with the Web addresses on preprinted product brochures in currently circulation at the time. This can result in pointing a consumer to erroneous or vacant Web sites that present either old or otherwise outdated product and or service information possibly adversely influencing the consumers purchasing decision.

Moreover when a company launches a new Web site as part of a new advertising and marketing campaign for a particular product any preprinted advertising or marketing material relating to such products will not reflect the new Web site addresses which the campaign is attempting to get consumers to visit. This fact about preprinted advertising media renders it difficult to unify new and old advertising media currently in circulation into an advertising and marketing campaign having a coherent theme. In short the inherently static nature of the preprinted Web address pointing technique described above is wholly incapable of adjusting to the dynamic needs of advertising marketing and public relations firms alike.

In addition to the above described techniques I World by Mecklermedia has recently launched a commercial product finding database on the Internet called Internet Shopper . Notably the Internet Shopper database is organized by specific types of product categories covering computer and telecommunication related technologies. While this product information finding service may be of help to those looking to buy computer or communication equipment it fails to provide an easy way to find information on previously purchased products or on products outside of the field of communication or computer technology. Consequently the value of this prior art technique is limited to those considering the purchase of products catalogued within the taxonomy of the Internet Shopper directory.

In view of the inherent limitations of I World s Internet Shopper and other product finding directories on the Internet such as NetBuyer by Computer Shopper at http www.netbuyer.com the National Information Infrastructure Testbed NIIT organization has recently formed a confidential committee of NIIT members under the title Universal Product and Service Code Project . The stated problem addressed by this Project is how to locate specific goods and services on the Internet and compare prices and other critical market information. As publicized in a NIIT Project Abstract the Universal Product and Service Code Project seeks to make it easier to electronically locate goods and services on the Internet using universal product and services identifiers and locators. As stated in the Project Abstract the NIIT believes that changing the way in which Internet information is organized is fundamental to solving this problem. In the Universal Product and Service Code Project NIIT members are currently exploring how coding structures can help organize information about products accessible using the Internet. NIIT s goal is to inform the development of formalized coding standards that can be used nationally and internationally so that users can locate good and services through simple searching and browsing methods. In turn more advanced features such as comparison shopping can be added as intelligent agent software programs are refined to enable users to search and retrieve products linked to these structures. 

While the NIIT s Universal Product and Service Code Project seeks ways of locating specific goods and services on the Internet all proposals therefor recommend the development of formalized coding standards and searching and browsing methods which are expensive and difficult to develop and implement on a world wide basis. Moreover such sought after methods will be virtually useless to consumers who have already purchased products and now seek product related information on the Internet.

In summary prior art demand chain management systems have provided i procurement services consisting of UPC Catalogs accessible through the Internet and EDI networks ii inventory management services consisting of replenishment sales analysis and forecasting services and iii distribution management services consisting of EDI and logistics management services. However prior art demand chain management systems have fail to address the information needs of the consumers of retail products who either require or desire product related information prior to as well as after the purchase of consumer products.

Consequently prior art demand chain management systems operate in an open loop mode with a break in information flow cycle disabling the manufacturers from communicating with the consumers in an efficient manner to satisfy consumer needs.

Thus it is clear that there is great need in the art for an improved system and method for collecting product related information and transmitting and delivering the same between the manufacturers and retailers of products to the consumers thereof in various environments while avoiding the shortcomings and drawbacks of prior art systems and methodologies.

Accordingly a primary object of the present invention is to provide a novel method and apparatus for collecting product related information and transmitting and delivering the same between the manufacturers and retailers of products to the consumers thereof in retail shopping environments as well as at home work and on the road while overcoming the shortcomings and drawbacks of prior art systems and methodologies.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such apparatus in the form of novel consumer product information collection transmission and delivery system.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system with an Internet based product information database subsystem which for each commercially available consumer product stores number of information elements including the name of the manufacturer the Universal Product Code UPC assigned to the product by the manufacturer one or more URLs specifying the location of information resources e.g. Web pages on the Internet relating to the UPC labelled consumer product and the like.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system in which the URLs stored in the Internet based product information database are categorically arranged and displayed according to specific types of product information e.g. product specifications and operation manuals product wholesalers and retailers product advertisements and promotions product endorsements product updates and reviews product warranty servicing related or complementary products product incentives including rebates discounts and or coupons etc. that relates to the kind of information required desired or otherwise sought by consumers wholesalers retailers and or trading partners product price at which the product is being offered for sale by a particular retailer and the like.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system wherein the information maintained within the Internet based product information database subsystem provides a manufacturer defined consumer product directory that can be used by various persons along the retail supply and demand chain.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system wherein the manufacturers of consumer products are linked to the retailers thereof in the middle of the supply and demand chain by allowing either trading partner to access consumer product information from the Internet based product information database virtually 24 hours a day seven days a week.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system wherein consumer product manufacturers their advertisers distributors and retailers are linked to the consumers of such products at the end of the supply and demand chain by allowing such parties access consumer product information from the Internet based product information database subsystem virtually 24 hours a day seven days a week.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method of using the same which will accelerate the acceptance of electronic commerce on the Internet and the development of the electronic marketplace which can be used by consumers and small and large businesses alike.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a novel system and method for finding and serving consumer product related information on the Internet.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method wherein virtually any type of product can be registered with the system by symbolically linking or relating i its preassigned Universal Product Number e.g. UPC or EAN number or at least the Manufacture Identification Number MIN portion thereof with ii the Uniform Resource Locators URLs of one or more information resources on the Internet e.g. the home page of the manufacturer s Web site related to such products.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method wherein a Web based document transport subsystem is provided for use by manufacturers as well as their advertisers and agents in registering the UPNs e.g. UPC numbers of their products and the URLs of the information resources related to such products.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method with an improved Internet browser or Internet application tool comprising an number of different modes namely an Internet based Consumer Product Information IPI Finding Button for entering the IPI Finding Mode of the system when it is selected a Universal Product Number UPN Search Button for entering the UPN Search Mode when the UPN Search button is selected and a Product Registration Button for the Product Registration Mode of the system when the Product Registration Button is selected.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system wherein when the system is in its IPI Finder Mode a predesignated information resource e.g. advertisement product information etc. pertaining to any commercial product registered with the system can be automatically accessed from the Internet and displayed from the Internet browser by simply entering the registered product s UPN into the Internet browser manually or by bar code symbol scanning.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system wherein when the system is in its UPN Search Mode a predesignated information resource e.g. advertisement product information etc. pertaining to any commercial product registered with the system can be automatically accessed from the Internet and displayed from the Internet browser by simply entering the registered product s trademark s and or associated company name into the Internet browser.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system wherein a predesignated information resource pertaining to any commercial product having been assigned a Universal Product Number UPN can be accessed from the Internet and displayed from the Internet browser by simply selecting its IPI Find button and then entering the UPN numeric string into a dialogue box which pops up on the display screen of the Internet browser program.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system in which a relational database referred to as an Internet Product Directory IPD is realized on one or more data synchronized IPD Servers for the purpose of registering product related information namely i information representative of commercial product descriptions the trademarks used in connection therewith the company names providing and or promoting such products the E mail addresses of such companies and the corresponding URLs on the Internet specifying current i.e. up to date Internet Web site locations providing product related information customized to such products.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a product information finding and serving system wherein the URLs symbolically linked to each registered product in the IPD Servers thereof are categorized as relating primarily to Product Advertisements Product Specifications Product Updates Product Distributors Product Warranty Servicing and or Product Incentives e.g. rebates discounts and or coupons and that such URL categories are graphically displayed to the requester by way of easy to read display screens during URL selection and Web site connection.

A further object of the present invention is to provide a Internet based System wherein 1 manufacturers and their agents are enabled to simply link i.e. relate manage and update within a centralized database the UPC and or UPC EAN numbers on their products and the Uniform Resource Locators URLs of HTTP encoded document i.e. Web pages containing particular kinds of consumer product related information published on the Internet by the manufacturers their agents and or third parties and 2 consumers in retail stores at home in the office and on the road are enabled to simply access such consumer product related information using such UPC and or UPC EAN numbers and or by scanning UPC or UPC EAN bar code symbols encoded with such product identification numbers.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a novel method of carrying out electronic type commercial transactions involving the purchase of products which are advertised on the Internet at uniform resource locations URLs that are registered with the IPI system of the present invention.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a novel system and method of finding the UPN or USN associated with any particular registered product respectively by simply selecting a GUI button on the Internet browser display screen in order to enter a UPN Search Mode whereby i a dialogue box is displayed on the display screen requesting any known trademarks associated with the product and or the name of the company that makes sells or distributes the particular product and ii the corresponding UPN i.e. UPC number or EAN number registered with the IPD Servers is displayed to the user for acceptance whereupon the Internet Uniform Resource Locators URLs are automatically accessed from the IPD Servers and displayed on the display screen of the Internet browser for subsequent URL selection and Web site connection.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method wherein during the UPN Search Mode the UPN e.g. UPC or EAN number associated with any registered product can be found within the database of the IPD Server using any trademark s and or the company name commonly associated with the product.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a novel system and method for serving consumer product related information to Internet users in retail shopping environments e.g. departments stores supermarkets superstores home centers and the like as well as at home work or on the road.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method wherein one or more computer based kiosks are installed within retail shopping environments and each such kiosk has an automatic bar code symbol reader for reading the UPC numbers on consumer products being offered for sale in the store and also a LCD touch type display screen for displaying product related information accessed from hyper linked Web sites on the Internet.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such an consumer product information kiosk wherein the laser scanning bar code symbol reader projects its 3 D laser scanning pattern over the LCD touch screen panel thereof and also includes a telephone handset for carrying out telephone calls and a credit card transaction terminal for conducting consumer purchase transactions and other forms of electronic commerce while using the consumer product information finding system of the present invention.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a consumer product information kiosk wherein the laser scanning bar code symbol reader can be easily removed from its support stand to scan large consumer products that might difficult to present within the scanning field while the bar code symbol reader is supported above the LCD display panel.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a consumer product information kiosk wherein the laser scanning bar code symbol reader has a cordless interface with the kiosk so that it may be moved about within a retail store in a portable manner to scan UPC labels and access consumer product related information.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a consumer product information kiosk for use with the system hereof that is completely transportable within the store by hand or may be mounted upon a shopping cart or other vehicle for the convenience of shoppers and the like.

Another object of the present invention is to provide virtual or Cyber sales and service agents within retail shopping environments by installing the computer based kiosks of the present invention therein.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a Web based information delivery system and method wherein the computer based kiosks employed therein throughout the hosting retailer s store are capable of displaying the price of products offered for sale in the store upon reading the UPC bar code symbol thereon.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a novel method of constructing a relational database for use within the product information finding and serving subsystem of the present invention.

Another method of the present invention is to provide such a method of database construction wherein the relational database is initially seeded with i the Manufacturer Base UPC Numbers based on the six digit UPC Manufacturer Identification Numbers MIN assigned to the manufacturers by the UCC and incorporated into the first six characters of each UPC number applied to the products thereof and ii the URLs of the Web site home pages of such manufacturers.

Another method of the present invention is to provide such a method of database construction wherein the seeded relational database is then subsequently extended and refined with the participation of each registered manufacturer and or agents thereof by adding to the seeded database iii the 12 digit UPC numbers assigned to each product sold thereby and the menu of URLs symbolically linked to each such corresponding product.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method in which Web site based advertising campaigns can be changed modified and or transformed in virtually any way imaginable by simply restructuring the symbolic links between the products and or services in the campaign using current i.e. up to date Web site addresses at which Web site advertisements and information sources related thereto are located on the Internet.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a novel system and method of automatically soliciting companies to register their products within the databases of such IPD Servers in order that product related information of a multimedia nature e.g. Web sites once registered therewith can be easily found on the Internet by anyone using the system and method of the present invention.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a novel system and method for finding and serving consumer product related information on the Internet accessible from the Websites of each manufacturer who has registered its UPC URLs with the system s central IPD Database.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method wherein as part of the consumer product registration process the manufacturer or retailer maintains a limited version of UPC URL database which contains a list of catorogized URLs for each UPC encoded product that it sells.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method wherein the consumer product related information links contained within the limited version of the UPC URL database of each registered manufacturer or retailer can accessed from the manufacturer s or retailer s company Website and served to consumers requesting such information by way of UPC or EAN number entry.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method wherein input forms for searching the limited version of the UPC URL database of each registered manufacturer or retailer can accessed by selecting a predesignated radio button on the manufacturer s or retailer s company Website.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method wherein the limited version of the UPC URL database of each registered manufacturer or retailer is used to update a central or master UPC URL database which is continously maintained and made accessible to consumers i through Web based kiosks installed in licensed retail environments and ii through Internet enabled client systems located at home work and in school.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method wherein at the time of registering each manufacturer or retailer with the system an Internet based registration server automatically transmits a computer program to the manufacturer s or retailer s computer system for use in constructing and maintaining the limited version UPC URL database related to the manufacturer s retailer s products.

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method wherein the limited version UPC URL database of each registered manufacturer or retailer can be served from the manufacturer s or retailer s Internet information server using a Common Gateway Interface CGI .

Another object of the present invention is to provide such a system and method wherein the limited version UPC URL database of each registered manufacturer or retailer is realized using a cross platform compatible relational database management system RDBMS .

These and other objects of the present invention will become apparent hereinafter and in the Claims to Invention

Referring to the figures shown in the accompanying Drawings like structures and elements shown throughout the figures thereof shall be indicated with like reference numerals.

As illustrated in the consumer product information collection transmission and delivery system of the present invention is generally indicated by reference numeral and comprises an integration of information subsystems namely an IPI finding and serving subsystem for allowing consumers to find product related information on the Internet e.g. WWW at particular Uniform Resource Locators URLs using UPC numbers and or trademarks and tradenames symbolically linked or related thereto a UPC Product Information Subsystem UPC Catalog for providing retailers with accurate up to date product information on numerous consumer products offered for wholesale to retailers by manufacturers registering there products therewith a Electronic Trading Information Subsystem for providing trading partners e.g. a manufacturer and a retailer to sell and purchase consumer goods by sending and receiving documents e.g. purchase orders invoices advance slip notices etc. to consummate purchase and sale transactions using either Value Added Network VAN based EDI transmission or Internet e.g. HTTP SMTP etc. based electronic document communications a Sales Analysis and Forecasting Information Subsystem for providing retailers with information about what products consumers are currently buying at retail stores or expect to be buying in the near future Collaborative Replenishment Information Subsystem for determining what products retailers can be buying in order to satisfy consumer demand at any given point in time a Transportation and Logistics Information Subsystem for providing retailers with information about when ordered products purchased by retailers at wholesale will be delivered to the retailer s stores and Input Output Port Connecting Subsystems for interconnecting the input and output ports of the above identified subsystems through the infrastructure of the Internet and various value added EDI networks of global extent. Notably unlike prior art supply chain management systems the consumer product information collection transmission and delivery system of the present invention embraces the manufacturers retailers and consumers of UPC encoded products and not simply the manufacturers and retailers thereof. As will become apparent hereinafter this important feature of the present invention allows manufacturers and retailers to deliver valuable product related information to the consumers of their products thereby increasing consumer purchases consumer satisfaction and consumer loyalty. Prior art supply chain management systems simply have no way or means of providing such information services to the consumers of UPC encoded products along the consumer product supply and demand chain.

As shown in the consumer product information collection transmission and delivery system illustrated in is realized as an arrangement of system components namely a central UPC URL Database Management Subsystem for storing and serving various types of consumer product information to retailers and consumers alike e.g. the name of the product s manufacturer the Universal Product Code UPC assigned to the product by the manufacturer one or more URLs specifying the location of information resources on the Internet at which particular kinds of information relating to the consumer product can be found merchandise classification style number tradename information specifying the size color and other relevant characteristics of the consumer product where applicable ordering criteria availability and booking dates etc. a globally based packet switched digital telecommunications network such as the Internet having an infrastructure including Internet Service Providers ISPs Network Service Providers NSPs routers telecommunication lines channels etc. for supporting packet switched type digital data telecommunications using the TCP IP networking protocol well known in the art one or more Internet Product Finding Directory IPD Servers each indicated by reference numeral and being connected to the Internet at strategically different locations via the Internet infrastructure and data synchronized with each other in order that each such Server maintains mirrored a database structure as represented in a plurality of Internet Product Information IPI Servers each indicated by reference numeral and being connected to the Internet via the Internet infrastructure a plurality of User or Client Computers each indicated by reference numeral being connected to the Internet via the Internet infrastructure and available to consumers C C C . . . C one or more data communication i.e. EDI networks comprising data collection nodes and communication links operably connected to the centralized UPC URL Database Management Subsystem each Client Computer available to a Manufacturer M M M . . . M and Retailer R R R . . . R within the retail supply and demand chain a Web based Document Server connected to at least one of the IPD Servers and the Internet infrastructure for transferring documents and messages to remote Client Computer Systems during the registration of manufacturers and consumer products with the system hereof and periodically updating product related information with the IPD Servers in an automatic manner and an Web based Document Administration Computer connected to the Web based Document Server by way of a TCP IP connection for administrating the registration of manufacturers and products with the system initiating the transfer of consumer product related information e.g. menu of URLs between the remote Client Computer Systems and Web Based Document Server transferring such information to the IPD Servers and maintaining local records of such information transfers and the like. As will become apparent hereinafter Web based Document Server and Web based Document Administration Computer provide a subsystem for i managing the process of registering qualified manufacturers and their consumer products and related Web pages e.g. UPC numbers and URLs and ii updating the product related information with the IPD Servers in an automatic manner. Thus this subsystem can be referred to as the Manufacturer Product Registration Management Subsystem of the consumer product information finding system.

Preferably the central UPC URL Database Management Subsystem and at least one of the IPD Servers are located at a secured information storage processing center along with a multiprocessor or mainframe computer system information servers routers data communication lines disk storage devices e.g. RAIDs tape drives and tape library system uninterrupted power supplies UPS and other peripheral technology to provide on line batch and back up operations. However the IPI Servers the Client Computers and the other IPD Servers if provided for database mirroring purposes typically will be located throughout the world as the distribution of manufacturers retailers and consumers who are encouraged to use the system are scattered across the Planet.

In the illustrative embodiment the Web based Document Server is a Windows NT Server running WebDox Server software from Premenos Corporation of Concord Calif. The Windows NT Server can be realized using a suitable computer system having a Pentium or higher CPU 64 MB of RAM or higher running i Microsoft Windows NT Server 4.0 or higher Operating System software from Microsoft Corporation ii Microsoft Internet Information Server 2.0 or higher from Microsoft Corporation and iii Microsoft SQL Server 6.5 or higher software from Microsoft Corporation. Also the WebDox Server is provided with a dedicated Internet connection i.e. ISDN or better to the Internet infrastructure .

The EDI administration computer is either a Windows 95 or Windows NT Computer system running WebDox Admin software from Premenos Corporation of Concord Calif. The Windows 95 or Windows NT computer system can be realized using a suitable computer system having an Intel 486 or higher CPU 12 MB of RAM or higher running Microsoft Windows 95 or Windows NT 4.0 or higher and having a TCP IP connection to the WebDox Server .

In order to use the WebDox system each remote Client Computer System includes either a Windows 95 or Windows NT Computer system running WebDox Remote software from Premenos Corporation of Concord Calif. The Windows 95 or Windows NT computer system can be realized using a suitable computer system having a Intel 486 or higher CPU 16 MB of RAM or higher and a VGA monitor or better and running i Microsoft Windows 95 or Windows NT 3.51 or higher Operating System OS software and ii Microsoft Internet Explorer 3.0 or higher from Microsoft Corporation. Also the WebDox Remote Server is provided with a dial up Internet connection i.e. 14 400 bps or better to the Internet infrastructure. The function of the Web based Document Server Web based Administration System and remote client systems running the Premenos WebDox Remote software is to provide a Web based Document Transport System for automatically transferring information e.g. UPC URLs from manufacturers to the IPD Servers of the system in order to periodically update the same. While the illustrative embodiment of this Web based Document Transport System has been described in terms of its implementation using the WebDox system from Premenos it is understood that other commercially available electronic document transport systems e.g. COMMERCE FORMS Electronic Business Forms Package from Sterling Commerce Inc. http www.stercomm.com can be used to carry out this subsystem. The operation of this Web Based Document Transport System will be described in detail hereinafter with respect to the collection and delivery of consumer product related information to the IPDs hereof.

The major subsystem components comprising the consumer product information collection transmission and delivery system of the present invention will be described in greater detail below.

In the illustrative embodiment of the present invention the UPC Product Information Subsystem is realized using the UPC URL Database Management Subsystem and data communication networks of the enabling technology platform shown in . Preferably the product procurement services delivered by the UPC URL Database Management Subsystem are provided by modifying the prior art QRSolutions UPC Catalog currently implemented by QuickResponse Services Inc. so that this subsystem includes the database structures i.e. information fields and data elements of the IPD Database Server which are neither found in or suggest by the prior art QRSolutions UPC Catalog. The structure and operation of the UPC URL Database Management Subsystem and IPD Server of the present invention will be described in greater detail hereinafter. The information services supported by the UPC Product Information Subsystem include those provided by the prior art QRSolutions UPC Catalog and also a number of additional information services that can be used to carry out Product Registration within the IPI finding and serving subsystem of the present invention. These additional information services will be described in greater detail hereinafter with reference to .

The Electronic Trading Information Subsystem is realized using the UPC URL Catalog Database Subsystem Client Computer Systems and data communication networks of the enabling technology platform shown in . Preferably the inventory procurement services delivered by the Electronic Trading Subsystem are provided by the prior art QRSolutions Econnect and Electronic Data Interchange Services currently being implemented by QuickResponse Services Inc.

Sale Analysis and Forecasting Information Subsystem is realized using information storage processing center Client Computer Systems and the data communication networks of the enabling technology platform shown in . Preferably the product inventory management services delivered by the Sale Analysis and Forecasting Information Subsystem are provided by the prior art QRSolutions Sale Analysis and Forecasting Information Services currently being implemented by QuickResponse Services Inc.

The Collaborative Replenishment Information Subsystem is realized using information storage processing center Client Computer Systems and the data communication networks of the enabling technology platform shown in . Preferably the product inventory management services delivered by the Collaborative Replenishment Information Subsystem are provided by the prior art QRSolutions Replenishment Services currently being implemented by QuickResponse Services Inc.

The Transportation and Logistics Information Subsystem is realized using information storage processing center Client Computer Systems and the data communication networks of the enabling technology platform shown in . Preferably the product distribution management services delivered by the Transportation and Logistics Information Subsystem are provided by the prior art QRSolutions EDI and Logistics Management Services currently being implemented by QuickResponse Services Inc.

In the illustrative embodiment of the system of the present invention each Client Computer has a conventional GUI based web browser program e.g. Netscape Internet Explorer Mosaic etc. with a plug in type module such as CyberFinder navigational software by Aladdin Systems Inc. of Watsonville Calif. that provides an on screen graphical icon for a IPI Web site Find function. An exemplary display screen produced by such a GUI based web browser program is set forth in . Alternatively the URL of the home page of the IPI Web site can be recorded as a browser bookmark for easy recall and access through a conventional GUI based Internet browser. Once at the home page of the IPI Web site an Internet user can find product related information on the Internet in essentially the same way as when using the web browser program of . As shown the on screen IPI Web site Find Icon functions as an IPI Web site Find Button for instantly connecting the Client System to the IPI Web site i.e. hosted on each mirrored IPD Server and carrying out the IPI finding and serving method of the present invention. The URL for the home page of the IPI Web site can be selected with marketing considerations in mind for example http www.ipf.com or http www.upcrequest.com similar in form with the URLs of other information search engines and directories currently available on the Internet. Upon selecting the IPI Web site Find Button e.g. by a clicking of the mouse thereon shown in the user is automatically connected to the home page of the IPI Web site hosted on each mirrored IPD Server which as shown in supports a Netscape style framework within which web pages accessed through the IPI web site are displayed. An excellent tutorial on framing entitled THE Netscape Frames Tutorial 2nd edition by Charlton D. Rose set forth at the URL http www.newbie.net frames last visited by Applicant on Mar. 26 1997.

As shown in the IPS Web site of the illustrative embodiment has a framework characterized by three display fields A B and C for displaying web pages. In alternative embodiments there many be more or less display frames than that shown in . Each frame acts as a separate display screen where variables such as web pages scrolling page colors etc. are independently controllable. In practice it is suggested that the physical layout of the Netscape style browser framework be designed to simultaneously accommodate the needs of the consumers using the particular Client Subsystems of the present invention as well as the needs of the retailers who typically will host client subsystems hereof either 1 physically within their stores and or 2 electronically on their WWW sites using Web browser framing techniques as well.

In the case of Client Subsystems physically hosted i.e. located within the environment of retail stores a three field browser framework as shown in will be highly effective in meeting the needs of the retailer consumer and business organization delivering the IPI finding and serving subsystem of the present invention hereinafter the IPI Provider . As shown in the first top most display field A can be used to display to the consumer a Web page containing a message that the IPI finding and serving subsystem is being delivered to the consumer by the IPI Provider under for example the sponsorship of either 1 the hosting retailer 2 one or more advertisers posting advertising banners in the display frame A or 3 the consumer him or her self by paying a subscription fee or the like. Understandably the method of sponsorship employed will vary from embodiment to embodiment of the present invention. An exemplary message for this display screen might read for example as follows 

As shown in the second left most display field B is used to display a GUI based control panel for the IPI finding and serving subsystem of the present invention. In the illustrative embodiment this control panel includes the IPI Find Button A the UPN e.g. UPC Search Button B and the Product Registration Button C which are activatable whenever the IPI Web Site i.e. IPD Server has been accessed through an Internet browser program running on a Client Computer Subsystem. When selected the IPI Find Button A activates the IPI Finding Mode of the IPI finding and serving subsystem. When selected the UPC Search Button B activates the UPN Search Mode of the IPI finding and serving subsystem. When selected the Product Registration Button C activates the Product Registration Mode of the IPI finding and serving subsystem. Each of these modes will be described in great detail hereinafter.

As shown in the third display field C occupying a substantial portion of the entire browser display screen is used to display 1 Web pages that are served from the IPD Server and are associated with the operation of either the IPI Find Mode the UPC Search Mode or the Product Registration Mode of the system and 2 Web pages that are served from the IPI Servers and are associated with products registered with the IPI finding and serving subsystem.

As will become apparent hereinafter the three field Netscape style display framework employed within the IPI finding and serving subsystem of the illustrative embodiments provides a unique way to satisfactorily address the needs of consumers hosting retailers manufacturers and the IPI Provider s alike. It is understood however that in some embodiments of the present invention Client Computers may not employ framed browser display screens without detracting from the present invention.

In the illustrative embodiment each synchronized IPD Server can be realized by for example the PowerMac 8550 200 Internet Server from Apple Computer Inc. the Origin Server or the ODesktop Workstation from Silicon Graphics Inc or any other suitable computing machine that can perform the function of a HTTP server in the web based client server type computer system architecture of the illustrative embodiment. As shown in each IPD Server is interfaced with an ISP A in a conventional manner. The actual number of IPD Servers used in any particular application will depend on various factors including for example user demand Internet traffic conditions network router capacity and performance etc. Each such IPD Server is assigned a static IP address and a common domain name on the Internet according to the Domain Name System DNS well known in the art. Each IPD Server is also provided with i Website development software for creating HTML encoded pages for the IPI Web site hereof ii database software for creating and maintaining the IPI Registrant Database and the Non IPI Registrant Database schematically illustrated in respectively and iii Web Server software for supporting HTTP and serving information pages from the IPI Web site and database requests from the IPI and Non IPI Registrant Databases. Such databases in practice realized as relational database management systems RDBMS can be constructed using a database programming language such as the 4th Dimension SQL Language the Sybase language or any other suitable database language which allows for database programming and database connectivity over the Internet. A suitable development program for creating a dynamic Web site with the integrated database structures of is the 4D Web SmartServer or 4D Version 6.0 both from ACI Inc. It is understood however that database development programs such as Oracle Sybase SQL Powersoft Microsoft Access 97 etc. can be used to construct and maintain the relational database management subsystems of the type illustrated in . Data synchronization among such databases can be achieved using conventional data synchronization techniques well known in the art. In addition a backup and mirroring program can be used to maintain data security. Preferably the synchronized IPD Servers are maintained by a team of network managers under supervision of one or more webmasters.

Similarly each IPI Server can be realized by for example the PowerMac 8550 200 Internet Server from Apple Computer Inc. the Origin 200 Server or O2 Desktop Workstation from Silicon Graphics Inc. or any other computing machine that can perform the function of a Server in a web based client server type computer system architecture of the illustrative embodiment. As shown in each IPI Server is interfaced with an ISP A in a conventional manner. Each such IPI Server is assigned a static IP address and a unique domain name on the Internet. Each IPI Server is also provided with i Web site development software for creating HTML encoded multi media pages for Web site development and ii Web site server software for supporting HTTP and serving HTML formatted pages of hypermedia type Web sites containing product related information of a multi media nature. Such Web sites can be expressed in HTML and or VRML or any other suitable language which allows for Web site construction and Web site connectivity. Web site management software such as Adobe SiteMill can be used to maintain correct hyper links for any particular Web site. Preferably the IPI Servers are maintained by a team of network managers under supervision of one or more webmasters.

Each Client Computer Subsystem hereinafter Client System can be realized by any computing system employing operating system OS software e.g. Macintosh Windows 95 Windows NT Unix etc. which supports an Internet browser program e.g. Netscape Navigator MicroSoft Internet Explorer NCSC s Mosaic etc. which includes 1 Internet networking software that supports the TCP IP networking protocol required by HTTP FTP and the like and provides a GUI based Web browser interface and 2 Electronic Data Interchange EDI networking software that supports EDI between two or more Client Systems over the VAN based EDI network illustrated in . Alternatively Client Systems may also be realized by any of the following systems i a Newton MessagePad running the Newton 2.0 Operating System and NetHopper Internet Software ii a Pippin computer system from Apple Computer Inc. iii a network computer NC that supports the Java programming language and Java applets expressed therewith iv a Sony WebTV Internet Terminal supported by the WebTV Service provided by WebTV Network Inc. or the like. As shown in each Client Computer is interfaced with an ISP A in a conventional manner. Each such Client System may be assigned a static IP address and a unique domain name on the Internet or one may be dynamically assigned thereto by way of its ISP depending on its connectivity. Optionally any Client System may include Web site server software for creating and maintaining one or more hypermedia type Web sites in a manner well known in the art.

Typically each Client System will be maintained by either present or future manufacturers retailers and or consumers of products about which information can be found on the Internet. As shown in FIG. A any Client System of the present invention may be realized as a desktop computer workstation comprising a processor and memory a visual display monitor a keyboard a GUI mouse and a bar code symbol reader for reading UPC and other types of bar code symbols printed on products brochures documents and the like.

As shown in FIG. A any Client Computer may also be realized in the form of a Web based multi media kiosk designed for use as a virtual sales agent within retail shopping environments. As shown the Web based kiosk of the present invention comprises a floor wall or ceiling supported housing an onmidirectional laser bar code symbol reader e.g. Metrologic MS 6720 Laser Scanner for reading UPC and other type of symbols printed on products brochures documents and the like an active matrix LCD type visual display screen for viewing product related information automatically displayed thereon in response to the entry of the UPC numbers scanned into the UPC Number Entry Window D below the IPI Finder button A of Control Strip B displayed on the Client System as shown in a touch screen type keyboard and pointing device for clicking on anchored links on Web pages entering information into Client System during its use audio speakers A for supporting multimedia Web site that may be visited when using the Client System a color or black white printer for printer B for printing out Web pages under consumer command during an information finding session using the system and also one or more floppy disc or otherwise removable drive units C accessible to the consumer for recording promotional and trial versions of information based consumer products e.g. video an audio recordings computer softeware products and the like on removable information storage media e.g. 1.44 MB floppy discs 100 MB Zip floppy discs 1 GB Jazz floppy discs etc. supplied by either the retailer or consumer. Optionally the kiosk can be provided with a steroscopic micropolaring LCD panel from Vrex Inc. of Elmsford N.Y. so that micropolarized spatially multiplexed images SMIs of 3 D objects represented with VRML encoded Web pages can be stereoscopically perceived by consumers when viewed through either an electrically passive polarizing visor structure supported from the housing of the kiosk or a pair of polarizing eyeglasses tethered to the kiosk housing and doned by the consumer. Notably by virtue of its compact size and low power requirements this Web based kiosk can be easily located in supermarkets department stores superstores home centers discount retail outlets or any other public location where consumer products are being sold offered for sale and or serviced.

As shown in FIG. A any Client Computer within the system hereof may be realized in the form of the Web based multi media kiosk also designed for use as a virtual sales agent within retail shopping environments. As shown the Web based kiosk comprises an ultra compact housing capable of being supported upon a pair of support rods A a vertical support surface e.g. wall a horizontal support surface e.g. countertop or supported from a ceiling or pedestal an onmidirectional laser bar code symbol reader e.g. Metrologic MS 6720 Laser Scanner modified with handle A for reading UPC and other type of symbols printed on products brochures documents and the like an active matrix LCD type visual display screen for viewing product related information automatically displayed thereon in response to the entry of the UPC numbers scanned into the UPC Number Entry Window D displayed on the Client System a touch screen type keyboard and pointing device for clicking on anchored links on Web pages entering information into Client System during its use audio speakers A for supporting multimedia Web site that may be visited when using the Client System a color or black white printer for printer B for printing out Web pages under consumer command during an information finding session using the system a scanner support stand with guide flanges A and B for guidably receiving and supporting the scanner as shown in FIG. A a recoilable scanner cable dispensed from cable cartridge and guided through hole in scanner support bridge a telephone handset and associated communication apparatus for making telephone call over a public telecommunications switching network PSTN independent of the operation of the Web browser of the kiosk and a mag stripe card reader and associated credit transaction terminal for automatically dialing up consumer credit and like databases over the PSTN or Internet upon scanning mag stripe card through reader . Optionally the kiosk may also include one or more floppy disc or otherwise removable drive units not shown accessible to the consumer for recording promotional and trial versions of information based consumer products e.g. video an audio recordings computer softeware products and the like on removable information storage media e.g. 1.44 MB floppy discs 100 MB Zip floppy discs 1 GB Jazz floppy discs etc. supplied by either the retailer or consumer. Also the kiosk can be provided with a steroscopic micropolaring LCD panel from VRex Inc. of Elmsford N.Y. so that micropolarized spatially mulitplexed images SMIs of 3 D objects represented with VRML encoded Web pages can be stereoscopically perceived by consumers when viewed through either an electrically passive polarizing visor structure supported from the housing of the kiosk or a pair of polarizing eyeglasses tethered to the kiosk housing and doned by the consumer. Notably by virtue of its compact size and low power requirements this Web based kiosk can be easily located in supermarkets department stores superstores home centers discount retail outlets or any other public location where consumer products are being sold offered for sale and or serviced.

As shown in FIG. A the bar code symbol reader is supported within its support stand bridge . In this configuration the laser scanning field of the reader is projected downwardly upon the surface of the LCD touch screen display panel. By virtue of the angle of tilt of the display panel relative to the ground surface of the retail store and the projection angle of the laser scanning field relative to the display panel surface will enable the consumer to easy read the bar code symbol on most consumer product by simply presenting the bar code symbol to the scanning window. In the event the product is too large to lift from the floor to the scanning window the consumer can simply remove the bar code symbol reader from its support stand as shown in FIG. A by pulling cord out of its takeup compartment so that the reader is positioned to read the bar code symbol on the retail consumer product . When symbol scanning is completed the bar code symbol reader is lifted back into its stand support position between support guides A and B while the cord is automatically recoiled back into storage compartment as shown in FIG. A. While the consumer uses the kiosk to scan UPC or UPC EAN symbols on products to find access and display consumer product related information on the display panel he or she may choose or need to use telephone to speak with a manufacturer s representative and engage in electronic commerce and or use the magstripe card reader to read magstripe cards e.g. credit cards to pay for consumer purchases made over the Internet using the kiosk of the present invention. Where the Web browser of the client system is provided with a bar code symbol reader the consumer may at particular EC oriented Web sites scan UPC and or UPC EAN numbers on products with his or her home e.g. in the pantry in order to remotely order products for purchase and direct shipment to the consumer s home by a particular delivery service. The consumer product information delivery system of the present invention shall enable an infinite array of applications with regard to electronic commerce and home shopping now made possible by the present invention.

As shown in FIG. A the Web enabled kiosk of FIG. A is modified to include a bar code symbol reader having a cordless type scanner interface thereby eliminating the need for the communication scanner cable shown in FIG. A. RF based wireless interfaces as disclosed in US Letters Patents and Published International Patent Applications incorporated herein by reference can be used to realize this cordless type scanner interface arranged between the bar code symbol reader and the Web enabled access terminal integrated within the information kiosk. In all other respects the kiosk shown in FIGS. A and A is similar to the kiosk shown in FIGS. A and A and described above.

In alternative embodiments any Client Computer can be realized as a network computer NC a Web TV type Internet Terminal a Newton MessagePad PDA or any other device providing Internet access to the IPI Web site i.e. mirrored IPD Servers of the present invention. Notably the same functionalities provided within the Web based kiosk described above can be embodied with such alternative embodiments of client computer system.

In the illustrative embodiment of the present invention each data synchronized IPD Server of the preferred embodiment maintains at least two different relational type databases namely a IPI Registrant Database for storing information about manufacturers whose products are registered with the system and a Non IPI Registrant Database for storing information about manufacturers whose products are not registered with the system. A schematic representation of the IPI Registrant Database is shown in FIG. A whereas a schematic representation of the Non IPI Registrant Database is shown in .

As shown in FIG. A the relational type IPI Registrant Database maintained by each IPD Server comprises a plurality of labelled information fields for each product registered therewith namely an IPN Information Field for storing information e.g. numeric or alphanumeric string representative of the Universal Product Number e.g. twelve digit UPC Version A number eight digit UPC Version E number thirteen digit UPC EAN number or twelve digit UPC Version A number plus five digit Add On Code Segment number frequently used in the publishing industry assigned to the consumer product a Company Name Information Field for storing information e.g. numeric or alphanumeric string representative of the name of the company making selling or distributing the corresponding product a URL Information Field s for storing information e.g. numeric or alphanumeric string representative of the Universal Resource Locator URL or Universal Resource Locators URLs at which information resource s of the multimedia type can be found on the Internet relating to the corresponding consumer product a Trademark Information Field for storing information e.g. text and or alphanumeric strings representative of each trademark or Domain Name used in connection with the promotion sale distribution and or use of the corresponding product and preferably registered with the United States Patent and Trademark Office USPTO or other governmental or quasi governmental agency e.g. INTERNIC or Network Solutions Inc. a Product Description Information Field for storing information e.g. text strings descriptive of the corresponding product an E mail Address Information Field for storing information e.g. numeric or alphanumeric string representative of the e mail address of the corresponding company e.g. manufacturer on the Internet and a Status Information Field for storing information e.g. numeric or alphanumeric string representative of whether the company e.g. manufacturer associated registered product has paid their monthly quarterly or annual registration fees associated with registration within the IPD Servers of the information finding and serving subsystem hereof. Notably each information item contained with the information field shown along the same horizontal line of FIG. A are related or linked.

In general the URL stored in the URL Information Field specifies the address of an information resource on the Internet e.g. Web and thus may point to any one of the following types of information resources a HTML document or file on the World Wide Web expressed in the HyperText Markup Language a single record in a database the front end of an Internet program such as Gopher or the results of a query made using another program. In accordance with convention the syntactic structure of each URL generally comprises a Protocol Specifier such as http ftp gopher news or mailto and specifies the type of resource that the URL is pointing i.e. connecting to a Host Indicator represented by double slashes if the URL is requesting information from a Web Server Server Name comprising a Internet Domain Name e.g. www. the address of the Web Server e.g. ibm. and a designator e.g. com edu int mil net org etc. identifying who owns the server or where it is located a Path Name such as Products Computers indicating a path to the destination information file on the identified Server and a Resource Name including file extension e.g. .html such as aptiva.html identifying the actual named information file that contains actual information resource specified by the URL.

As used herein as well as in the Claims to Invention the term registered and the variants thereof shall be understood to mean listed or having an entry within a database. Such listing or entry can be achieved in a variety of ways including but not limited to i by specific request of the associated company or business or ii by the system administrator without a request and or authorization of the corresponding company or business linked to the product.

Notably each information item contained with the information field shown along the same horizontal line of FIG. A are symbolically related or linked. Different products of the same registrant or related registrant may also be linked together so that a user looking for information about a particular product is automatically provided URLs which are assigned to related products of the registrant which may satisfy the goals or objectives of a particular advertising and or marketing campaign or product promotion program of the registrant company. As it may be desired to relate particular products at particular points in time the relationships therebetween can be dynamically changed within the IPI Registrant Database by a straightforward database updating operation carried out by a system administrator or manager who in theory can be located virtually anywhere throughout the world. Expectedly such database updating operations would be carried out using appropriate system access and security procedures well known in the art.

Inasmuch as the UPC data structure is presently employed as a universal product identifier i.e. a primary data structure in a majority of industries throughout the world its twelve digit numeric string for UPC Version A or eight digit numeric string for UPC Version E will be a preferred UPN in many applications for purposes of carrying out the principles of the present invention. This twelve 12 digit human readable number printed on the bottom of each UPC label and encoded within the bars and spaces of the UPC label itself comprises i a six digit manufacturer number assigned to the manufacturer by the Uniform Code Council Inc. UCC of Dayton Ohio and consisting of a one digit number system number and a five digit manufacturer code ii a five digit product number assigned to the product by the manufacturer and iii a one digit modulo check digit mathematically calculated and added to each UPC number to check that the code has been read correctly by the bar code symbol reader.

In order to provide the requester greater control over what information is actually displayed on its Client System the URL Information Field of the IPI Database shown in FIG. A contains a number of information subfields. As shown in FIG. A these information subfields comprise a Product Advertisement Information Field for storing information representative of URLs pointing to information on the Internet relating to advertising and or promotion of the product a Product Specification i.e. Description Information Field for storing information representative of URLs pointing to information on the Internet relating to specifications on the product a Product Update Information Field for storing information representative of URLs pointing to information on the Internet relating to product updates recalls notices etc a Product Distributor e.g. Wholesaler and or Resaler Information Field for storing information representative of URLs pointing to information on the Internet relating to distribution sale and or ordering of the product a Product Warranty Servicing Information Field for storing information representative of URLs pointing to information on the Internet relating to warranty extended warranty offerings servicing and maintenance of the product a Product Incentive Information Field e.g. rebates discounts and or coupons for storing information representative of URLs pointing to information on the Internet relating to rebates discounts and sales on the product a Product Review Information Field for storing information representative of URLs pointing to information on the Internet relating to reviews analysis testing inspection and or comparison of the product and Miscellaneous Information Field s for storing information representative of URLs pointing to information on the Internet relating to miscellaneous aspects of the product e.g. direct product sales on the WWW product installation set up and operating manuals company reports 10 Ks annual reports etc. and the like. Each URL symbolically linked to a UPC labelled product registered in the Registered IPI Database is categorized within one or more of these URL categories.

The list of URLs recordable in the IPI Registrant Database for each registered UPC labelled product is virtually unlimited. Below are just a few examples of how the IPI finding and serving subsystem hereof can be used as a virtual sales agent that provides value added services to consumers retailers and the like.

For each CD sound recording the URL list may contain a URL that points to a promotional QuickTime video recording or the like on the WWW for reviewing and evaluation by the consumer. The promotional song can be by a commissioned or endorsing artist as is typically done in conventional advertising programs. The same can be done for video recordings on tape and digital video discs DVDs . The URL may also provide the consumer with a down loadable trial version of the product for a limited time period.

For each computer software product the URL list may contain a URL that points to a multi media clip on the WWW that provides a demonstration of the solutions that the software product provides as well as the functions and development tools that it enables. It may also provide the consumer with a down loadable version of the software product for a time limited trial period.

For electronic consumer products the URL list may contain a URL that points to a multi media clip on the WWW that provides an audio visual demonstration of the product in various user environments. Also the URL can contain a URL that points to a Web based Specification Sheet that can printed out in an retail environment at home work or on the road.

For groceries and like articles the URL list may contain a URL that points to a multi media clip on the WWW that provides an QuickTime video recording or the like of the product illustrating various cooking recipes and uses to which the product can be put. Also the URL can contain a URL that points to a Web based Discount Coupon that can printed out in the store at home or work.

For toys the URL list may contain a URL that points to a multi media clip on the WWW that provides an audio visual demonstration of the toy along with promotional endorsements by the various characters used in its advertising campaign.

For clothing garments or accessories e.g. wearing apparel the URL list may contain a URL that points to a multi media clip on the WWW that provides an QuickTime video recording or the like of the clothing clothing garments and or accessories being modeled by stunning fashion models. Ideally such video recordings linked to particular articles of wearing apparel by their UPC number can be used to extend and augment the advertising campaign being carried out in other forms of media e.g. Television radio print billboards etc. .

Preferably the manufacturer its marketing personnel and advertising agents will actively participate in the creation of the product related information resources as well as the placement of their URLs into the above defined or like URL categories maintained within the Database of the IPI finding and serving subsystem hereof. Through such active participation the business objectives of any particular manufacturers or retailer can be promoted by way of the IPI finding and serving subsystem of the present invention. In this way the information requesting consumer is provided with only the kinds of product related information which he or she seeks.

As shown in the Non IPI Registrant Database maintained by each IPD Server comprises a plurality of labelled information fields for each product that is not currently registered with the IPD Server namely an IPSN i.e. IPN information Field for storing information e.g. numeric or alphanumeric string representative of the Universal Product Number e.g. a UPC number from a UPC numbering system or an EAN numbering system assigned to the non registered product a Company Name Information Field for storing information e.g. numeric or alphanumeric string representative of the name of the company making selling or distributing the corresponding non registered product a Trademark Information Field for storing information e.g. text and or alphanumeric strings representative of each trademark used in connection the promotion sale distribution and or use of the corresponding product and preferably registered with the USPTO or other governmental agency a Product Description Information Field for storing information e.g. text strings descriptive of the corresponding product and an E mail Address Information Field for storing information e.g. numeric or alphanumeric string representative of the e mail address of the corresponding company e.g. manufacturer on the Internet a Status Information Field for storing information e.g. numeric or alphanumeric string representative of whether the company associated non registered product has been solicited by the IPD Server and on what dates registration solicitation has occurred. Notably each information item contained with the information field shown along the same horizontal line of FIG. A are related or linked. The information required to construct the Non IPI Registrant Database shown in can be readily obtained from a number of commercially or publicly available information sources e.g. the Universal Code Council Inc. Dayton Ohio Quickresponse Services Inc. Of Richmond. Calif. General Electric Information Services GEIS of Delaware Md. etc.

Communication Protocols for Carrying out the IPI Finding and Serving Subsystem and Method of the Present Invention

In general there are a number of possible communication protocols that can be used to carry out the IPI Subsystem and method of the present invention. In and B a first communication protocol is schematically depicted for a first system having both the IPI Find and UPN Search Modes of operation whereas the basic operations carried out thereby are shown in . In a second communication protocol is schematically depicted for both the IPI Find and UPN Search Modes of operation whereas the basic operations carried out thereby are shown in . The details of such protocols will be described below.

Referring to the high level structure is shown for a first type of communication protocol that can be used among a Client System C an IPD Server S and an IPI Server Sof the IPI finding and serving subsystem hereof when the GUI browser program on the Client System is in its IPI Find Mode of operation. provides a high level flow chart illustrating the steps involved in carrying out this communication protocol when the Client System is in its IPI Find Mode of operation.

In order to enter the IPI Find mode of the system the user selects the IPI Find Button A on the control strip of the framed Internet browser screen. Then at Block A of a UPN e.g. UPC number is provided as input to IPD Server S and in response thereto the Client System Crequests the IPD Server Sto provide each registered URLstored in the IPI Registrant Database.

At Block B in the IPD Server Sanalyses the IPI Registrant Database shown in FIG. A to determines whether or not a symbolically linked URLhas been registered with UPNthat has been provided as input. If so then the IPD Server sends the symbolically linked URLto the Client System C. If not then the IPD records in the URL request in the Non IPI Registrant Database shown in .

At Block C in the Client System Creceives the URLfrom the IPD Server. Then in response to a URL selection query based on the content of information subfields shown in FIG. A and displayed on the screen of the Client System C the Client System Crequests the IPI Server identified by the user selected URL to provide the product information located by the registered URL. Having accessed and displayed such product related information at the Client System the user can review the information at the specified URL acquire knowledge about the product and may if the option is provided at the URL specified Web site purchase the product by way of an on screen electronic commercial transaction. Such commercial transaction can involve product ordering delivery specification and financing through the use of credit or debit card transactions COD arrangements or any other financial arrangement acceptable to the vendor of the product.

Referring to the high level structure is shown for the first type of communication protocol that can be used among a Client System C an IPD Server S and an IPI Server Sof the IPI finding and serving subsystem hereof when the GUI browser program on the Client System is in its UPN Search Mode of operation. provides a high level flow chart illustrating the steps involved in carrying out this communication protocol when the Client System is in its UPN Search Mode of operation.

In order to enter the UPN Search Mode of the system the user selects the UPN Search Button B on the control strip of the framed Internet browser display screen. Then at Block A of a trademark TMand or a company name CNis provided as input to IPD Server Sby way of the browser display screen. Then in response thereto the Client System Crequests the IPD Server Sto provide each registered UPNstored in the IPI Registrant Database and if so then also its URLto the Client Computer System.

At Block B in the IPD Server Sanalyses the IPI Registrant Database shown in FIG. A to determines whether or not a symbolically linked UPNhas been registered with a TMand or a company name CNthat have been provided as input to the IPD Server Sby way of the browser display screen. If so then the IPD Server sends to the Client System C the URLthat is symbolically linked to the registered UPN. If not then the IPD records in the URL request in the Non IPI Registrant Database shown in for future registration request operations related to the TMsent by the Client System.

At Block C in the Client System Creceives the URLfrom the IPD Server. Then in response to a URL selection query based on the contents of the information subfields shown in FIG. A and displayed on the screen of the Client System C the Client System requests the IPI Server identified by the user selected URL to provide the product information. Having accessed and displayed such product related information at the Client System the user can review the information at the specified URL acquire knowledge about the product and may if the option is provided at the URL specified Web site purchase the product by way of an on screen electronic commercial transaction as described hereinabove.

Referring to the high level structure is shown for a second alternative type of communication protocol that may be used among a Client System C an IPD Server S and an IPI Server Sof the IPI finding and serving subsystem hereof when the GUI browser program on the Client System is in its IPI Find Mode of operation. provides a high level flow chart illustrating the steps involved in carrying out this communication protocol when the Client System is in its IPI Find Mode of operation.

In order to enter the IPI Find mode of the system the user selects the IPI Find Button A on the control strip of the browser display screen. Then at Block A of a UPN is provided as input to IPD Server S and in response thereto the Client System Crequests the IPD Server Sto provide each registered URLstored in the IPI Registrant Database.

At Block B in the IPD Server Sanalyses the IPI Registrant Database shown in FIG. A to determines whether or not a symbolically linked URLhas been registered with UPNthat has been provided as input. If so then in response to a URL selection query based on the contents of the information subfields shown in FIGS. A and displayed on the screen of the Client System C the IPD Server sends to the IPI Server Shosting the user selected URL a request for the IPI Server Sto send product information at the selected URLto the requesting Client System C. If the IPD Server Sdetermines that there does not exist a URLin the IPI Registrant Database symbolically linked with the UPNprovided as input to the Client System C then the IPD Server Srecords the URL request in the Non IPI Registrant Database for future registration operations with the company related to the input UPN.

At Block C in the IPI Server Sreceives the user selected URLsent from the IPD Server Sand then provides to the Client System C the product information located by the registered URL. Having accessed and displayed such product related information at the Client System the user can review the information at the selected URL acquire knowledge about the product and may if the option is provided at the URL specified Web site purchase the product by way of an on screen electronic commercial transaction.

Referring to the high level structure is shown for the second type of communication protocol that can be used among a Client System C an IPD Server S and an IPI Server Sof the IPI finding and serving subsystem hereof when the GUI browser program on the Client System is in its UPN Search Mode of operation. provides a high level flow chart illustrating the steps involved in carrying out this communication protocol when the Client System is in its UPN Search Mode of operation.

In order to enter the UPN Search Mode of the system the user selects the UPN Search Button B on the control strip of the browser display screen. Then at Block A of a trademark TMand or a company name CNis provided as input to IPD Server Sby way of a dialogue box displayed on the browser display screen. In response thereto the Client System Crequests the IPD Server Sto determine whether or not a registered UPN and thus symbolically linked URL is stored in the IPI Registrant Database. If so then in response to a URL selection query based on the content of the information subfields shown in FIG. A and displayed on the display screen of the Client System C the IPD Server Ssends the IPI Server Shosting the user selected URL a request for the IPI Server Sto send product information at the selected URLto the requesting Client System C. If the IPD Server Sdetermines that there is no registered UPN and thus no symbolically linked URL stored in the IPI Registrant Database then the IPD Server records the URL request in the Non IPI Registrant Database for future registration operations with the company related by the UPNsent by the Client System C.

At Block C in the IPI Server hosting the user selected URLreceives the request from the IPD Server Sand then provides the product information identified by the registered URL. Having accessed and displayed such product related information at the Client System the user can review the information at the specified URL acquire knowledge about the product and may if the option is provided at the URL specified Web site purchase the product by way of an on screen electronic commercial transaction.

The communication protocols described above can be realized using any suitable programming language including for example an object oriented programming language such as the Java programming language.

The utility of the product finding functionalities of the system of the present invention depends in large part of the number of consumer products registered with the IPI Finding and Serving Subsystem thereof.

In principle numerous techniques may be employed separately and in combination with each other in order to construct the IPI and Non IPI Registrant Databases supported by the network of IPD Servers of the present invention. Six such techniques will be detained below.

According to a first database construction technique the administrator of the IPI Registrant Database would transmit Product Registration Requests PRRs in the form of electronic documents to each and every the manufacturer having been issued for example a six digit UPC Manufacturer Identification Number MIN by the UCC Inc. Such electronic documents can be transmitted using conventional MIME protocols such as for example STMP. The Product Registration Request document would seek to ascertain from the manufacturers the various information items including the menu of URLs identified in the IPI Registrant Database of FIG. A. In response to the Product Registration Request each solicited manufacturer would send back to the administrator of the IPI Registrant Database for each of its consumer products its UPC number and a menu of URLs indicating the location of the information resources identified in the Product Registration Request document. This information can then be used to readily construct the IPI Registrant Database of the illustrative embodiment.

According to a second database construction technique a global advertising campaign would launched over various media in order to solicit the various information elements identified in the IPI Registrant Database of FIG. A and thus register the products of the manufacturers selling UPC labelled products. Preferably such information would be collected by way of an electronic document transfer subsystem set up to cooperate with the system of the present invention in order to facilitate database construction operations.

According to a third database construction technique the IPI system itself would continuously solicit consumer product registrations over time in order to collect information from companies responding favorably to the solicitations. While such solicitation efforts can involve the issuance of product registration requests using various types of media it is preferred that the information collection operations are carried out using electronic document transfer techniques described hereinabove.

According to a fourth database construction technique a number of commercial on line Internet search engines such as Altavista Yahoo WebCrawler Lycos Excite as well as powerful off line parallel processing search engines would be enlisted to analyze i.e. mine information on the World Wide Web in order to collect and link the information elements specified in the IPI Registrant Database of FIG. A.

Once an initial IPI Registrant Database has been constructed using any one or more of the four database construction techniques described hereinabove manufacturers registered therewith can be periodically contacted using Web based electronic document i.e. message transfer techniques in order to request updating and confirmation of the UPC URL listings contained within the database of the IPI subsystem of the present invention.

According to a fifth database and preferred construction technique of the present invention the Registrant IPI Database of the system would be initially seeded with several items of information obtained and related without the assistance of manufacturers of UPC labelled products. Such information items include 1 the six digit UPC Manufacturer Identification Numbers encoded in the UPC symbols and numbers applied to the products of such UCC registered manufacturers and 2 the URLs of the Web home pages of such manufacturers.

The first step of this database construction method involves obtaining the six digit Manufacturer Identification Numbers MINs uniquely issued to manufacturers by the Uniform Code Council Inc. of Dayton Ohio. Such MINs can be obtained from various commercial sources including GE Information Services QuickResponse Services Inc. as well as the UCC. At present about 180 000 Manufacturers Identification Numbers have been issued to manufacturers by the UCC. A string of six zeros i.e. 000000 may be added to each one of these 180 000 or so six digit Manufacturer Identification Number in order to produce 180 000 or so 12 digit numbers i.e. hereinafter referred to as Manufacturer s Reference Numbers for the 180 000 or so manufacturers listed in the IPI Registrant Database under construction. As each such Manufacturer Reference Number has the same length as a UPC number of its manufacturer this number can be conveniently thought of as the Manufacturer Reference UPC Number which can be stored in the UPN Information Field of the Database along with the corresponding manufacturers name being stored in the Company Name Information Field.

The second step of the method involves finding the URL of the Web home page of each of the 180 000 manufacturers who have been assigned a Manufacturers Identification Code and are listed in the Database. Such URL information can be found using a number of available techniques i using a commercially available search engine to search the WWW in order to find the URL of the home page of each manufacturer s Web site if it has one using the name and address thereof obtained during the first step above or ii using a commercially available INTERNIC enabled Domain Name search service that uses the names and addresses of the manufacturers obtained during the first step above in order to determine whether a particular manufacturer has a registered domain name on the Internet and if so is the domain name being actively used in a URL that points to the home page of the manufacturer s Web site. Once obtained such URLs are then added to the IPI Database along with the e mail and or other address of the manufacturer symbolically linked thereto if available .

Having constructed the seeded Database it can then be used to connect the Client System of users to the home page of Web sites of manufacturers of particular products. Initially when an Internet user provides the UPC number of a particular product as input to the UPC Number Entry Window D of the Control Strip of the Client System operated in its UPN Search Mode then the IPD Server need only compare the first six digits of the entered UPC number against the first six digits of the Manufacturer Reference UPC Numbers i.e. Manufacture Identification Numbers listed in the seeded Database. The corresponding home page URL of the matching manufacturer is returned to the Client System Cfor display. In instances of an initially seeded Database in which only the Manufacturer Reference UPC Numbers are listed therein the requesting Client Systems are provided with the URLs of the home pages of the symbolically linked manufacturers. Then as manufacturers begin to register their consumer products with the system e.g. in response to mass e mailings advertisements and or marketing and promotional efforts etc. the IPD Database will return a menu of hot linked URLs for each registered product pointing to various types of product related information resources on the Internet described above that can be easily accessed by simply clicking thereon in a conventional manner. Over time Manufacturer Reference UPC Numbers and the URLs of the home pages of such manufacturers will become replaced by the UPC numbers of registered products and the menu of URLs on the WWW symbolically linked thereto by the manufacturers thereby allowing consumers and users of the system to precisely pinpoint consumer product related information on the WWW which has been specified by the manufacturer its marketing department and or advertising agency. With manufacturer s and advertiser s participation and feedback the initially seeded Database described hereinabove will quickly grow into a robust relational database richly filled with the various information items described in FIGS. A and A including the symbolically linked UPCs and URLs that point to very specific consumer product related information resources i.e. files stored within IPI Servers of the system located across the global expanse of the Internet.

According to a sixth database construction technique of the present invention the Registrant IPI Database of the system would be constructed by allowing each manufacturer to construct a limited or restricted version of the master UPC URL database Registrant IPI Database of the system wherein only UPC encoded products of the registered manufacturer and Web based information items related thereto are entered into the database. As will be described in greater detail below in connection with the third method of Product Registration in the system of the present invention the creation of such limited version UPC URL databases can be carried out by providing each registered manufacturer with a computer program that allows its administrators to construct and manage a limited UPC URL database in a turn key manner. Also from its Website the manufacturer can serve the limited UPC URL database over the Internet to consumers. As part of the registration process each registered manufacturer transmits its limited UPC URL database to Web server which then integrates all such databases in order to update the master UPC URL database IPI Registrant Database of the system.

In the illustrative embodiments of the present invention the data synchronized IPD Servers of the system hereof are also provided with an Automated Registration Solicitation Mode programmed by the webmaster or administrator of the IPI Web site. In this mode each IPD Server analyzes the data collected within its Non IPI Registrant Database. The data analysis procedure seeks to determine 1 which unregistered products in the Non IPI Registrant Database were the subject of an information request at the IPD Server 2 how many hits requests where made for the product within a predetermined length of time e.g. one week by Internet users and 3 whether the number of requests exceeds a particular request threshold e.g. 100 requests in week period . Then for each unregistered product which has exceeded the request threshold the IPD Server automatically sends an E mail message to the associated company. Preferably the E mail message is designed to i inform the company of recent information requests for their products and ii solicit the registration of such products with the IPD Server. Once registered with the system such products can be easy found on the Internet by anyone wishing to use the product information finding techniques of the present invention.

In the illustrative embodiments of the present invention the IPI finding and serving subsystem of the present invention is also provided with an Product Registration Mode that can be activated by simply selecting the Product Registration Button C on the control panel of the framed Internet browser of any Client System . In general there are a number of different ways of carrying out the Product Registration Mode of the subsystem. Each of these techniques will be described below.

The first method illustrated in involves by carrying out FTP between a Client System of the registering manufacturer or its agent Mand an IPD Server in order to update the IPI Registrant Database associated therewith. This can be carried out by the manufacturer s officer or agent surfing to the IPI Website selecting the Product Registration Mode from the control strip and then following the instructions displayed on the various screens of the Website in this mode. When using the first method product UPCs URLs and other information elements can be formatted within suitable Product Registration Forms and transmitted by FTP from the Client System or Database Server of a registering manufacturer to the IPD Server so that the IPI Registrant Database thereof can be updated accordingly. The first method will be desirable typically when registering a few consumer products.

The second method illustrated in involves first carrying out EDI between a Client System of the registering manufacturer or its agent and the UPC URL Database Subsystem and then carrying out FTP or SMTP between the Client System and an IPD Server in order to update the IPI Registrant Database maintained therein. The second method will be desirable when a manufacturer needs or desires to register a large number of consumer products. The details of these information transmission methods will be described below.

When using the second method conventional EDI protocols can be used to transmit product UPCs URLs and other information elements from Client Systems or Database Servers of manufactures to the UPC URL Database Subsystem of the present invention. FTP can be used to transmit UPCs and URLs from the UPC URL Database Subsystem to each IPD Server in the system so that the IPI Registrant Database thereof can be updated accordingly. Once registered with the system using either of these methods in the Product Registration Mode such consumer products can be easy found on the Internet by anyone wishing to use the product finding techniques of the present invention.

The third method involves by carrying out electronic document interchange over the Internet between the WebDox Remote Computer System and the WebDox Server of the system of the present invention and communication between the WebDox Server and the WebDox Admin computer system of the system hereof. The various steps involved in this embodiment of the consumer product registration process will be described in detail below.

When the manufacturer selects the Product Registration Mode of the system a Manufacturer Registration Form is automatically downloaded from the WebDox Server to the Manufacturer s client computer system i.e. the WebDox Remote Computer System . At the end of the downloading process a Manufacturer Registration Form is presented i.e. displayed and the manufacturer then enters some requested identification information e.g. Manufacturer s Company Name Address Name of CEO and President phone number 6 digit Manufacturer Identification Number assigned by the UCC etc. and presses the Send button on the Manufacturer Registration Form. The form is then transmitted immediately via the Internet and received by the WebDox Server . At the WebDox Server an automated process takes the information in the Manufacturer Registration Form and registers the Manufacturer with the system.

Upon registering the manufacturer with the system the manufacturer is asked to select which version of customized WebDox Remote software i.e. the UPC URL Registration Application the manufacturer would like downloaded to its client computer system e.g. WebDox Remote with UPC URL Database and CGI for MacOS WebServer WebDox Remote with UPC URL Database and CGI for UNIX Web Server or WebDox Remote with UPC URL Database and CGI for NT Web Server . Once the manufacturer makes its selection the customized WebDox Remote software is automatically downloaded to the manufacturer s client computer system . This downloaded software includes a computer program that automatically generates on the manufacturer s client system a relational database management system RDBMS which allows the manufacturer or its agents to easily construct and maintain a UPC URL database akin to that specified in FIG. A but restricted to containing information relating only to the manufacturer s products. Thus when the manufacturer attempts to enter a UPC number into the manufacturer s UPC URL database that does not contain the 6 digit Manufacturer Identification Number assigned to the manufacturer by the UCC the RDBMS automatically blocks all such information entries. Consequently the UPC URL database can only maintain information pertaining to the registered manufacturer s products and information relating thereto on the Internet. As the manufacturer adds or removes products from its retail or wholesale line the database administrator simply adds or removes the UPC and URL information relating thereto from the RDBMS. As will be described in greater detail hereinafter such database changes are periodically transmitted to the WebDox Server so that the IPI Registrant Database i.e. master UPC URL database of the system maintained on the IPD Servers thereof can be updated in a timely manner.

Preferably the limited or restricted version of the UPC URL database maintained by each registered manufacturer on its client system is connected to the manufacturer s Internet Server by a Common Gateway Interface CGI or other suitable means as shown in . In this way the manufacturer s limited version of the UPC URL database can be made accessible to consumers world wide from the manufacturer s Website which in the illustrative embodiment is assumed hosted on an Internet information server that is similar to an IPI Server described in detail hereinabove. In order to simply the process of serving of the manufacturer s limited version of the UPC URL database on the WWW it is preferred that the CGI and input and output forms and methods for searching and the displaying the results from the limited version UPC URL database are predesigned for use with manfacturer s Internet Server taking into consideration its operating system and the like . This way prior to registration the manufacturer need only make a selection of the type of customized WebDox Remore software it needs for its computing and Internet serving platform s . Then during software download the WebDox Server simply transmits the suitable version of the customized WebDox Remote software to the manufacturer so that it can create maintain and serve on the WWW its limited version of the UPC URL database in a turn key manner.

In the illustrative embodiment of the present invention the homepage of each registered manufacturer s Website will display a visually conspicuous radio button labelled UPC Request Product Finder or the like. Moreover whenever a consumer attempts to search the manufacturer s limited version UPC URL database for products not registerable to the manufacturer i.e. using UPC numbers not containing the manufacturer s 6 digit UCC Manufacturer Identification Number the limited version of the UPC URL database will automatically display an HTML encoded message from the manufacturer s Website urging the consumer to surf to the IPI Registrant Database of the system maintained on the network of IPD servers . Preferably such HTML encoded messages will have a hot linked URL i.e. anchor to Website s providing consumer access to the master UPC URL database.

The WebDox Remote computer system available to each registered manufacturer has both online and offline modes of operation. In the offline mode the manufacturer responds to a UPC URL Registration Request from the WebDox Server in the following manner. First the WebDox Remote software analyzes the limited version of the UPC URL database that it has been currently created and maintained by the manufacturer or its designee. Thereafter the WebDox software automatically creates a UPC URL Registration Response document which contains a set of currently active URLs specifying the address location of Web based information resources associated with each UPC encoded product of the manufacturer. Then WebDox Remote program establishes an Internet connection with the WebDox Server through a Get Send Mail option. This delivers the UPC URL Registration Response document to the WebDox Server and retrieves any documents which are waiting thereat for the manufacturer. These new documents are listed by WebDox Remote program and presented in the InBasket of the manufacturer s WebDox Remote computer system .

In the online mode WebDox Remote under the control of the Form Application can also send UPC URL Registration Request documents immediately. For very sensitive applications i.e. Just in Time this ensures that the UPC URL Registration Response document is received at the WebDox Server the moment that the manufacturer completes the document.

In general the WebDox Server provides a high volume document processing and mailboxing environment between the WebDox Server and the WebDox Remote system of each registered manufacturer. WebDox Server performs permanent storage and tracking of all UPC URL Registration Request documents sent and UPC URL Registration Response documents received automatic reconciliation of acknowledgments from WebDox Remote program Automatic creation of user friendly receipt messages to the manufacturer mailboxing of outbound UPC URL Registration documents for retrieval by manufacturer and automatic manufacturer and profile creation based on forms received from manufacturers. The WebDox Server consists of online components that run as extensions to Microsoft s Internet Information Server IIS using the ISAPI interface. This provides higher performance and lower hardware requirements than a conventional CGI Web Interface. Processing intensive tasks are performed asynchronosly from the Web server. An integrated queuing and dispatching system manages the processing of documents and interaction with the corresponding application. For large volume situations the WebDox Server components can be deployed on different machines the WebDox Server components ISAPI extensions on one machine the processing components and database on another machine.

Data for UPC URL Registration Request documents to be sent to manufacturers is extracted from the IPI Registrant Database using an interface or utility program. The document data e.g. information fields associated with UPC URL registration can then be accepted by WebDox in a direct manner after formatting. The UPC URL Registration Request document should be formatted to a file structure created during the design of the UPC URL Registration Application. The WebDox Server then converts the application data into a UPC URL Registration request document i.e. data package . The data package for each manufacturer is then stored as a message in an assigned Mailbox of the WebDox Server . These messages are then available to be retrieved by the registered manufacturers using WebDox Remote s Get Send Mail feature.

As discussed above the WebDox Remote program transmits messages e.g. UPC URL Registration Response documents to the WebDox Server where after passing security checks they are placed in the WebDox Mailbox system. Incoming document messages are received from the Mailbox processed and converted into data files for direct transfer to the database management system handling the IPI Registrant Database.

For each document received the WebDox Server will return a message to the manufacturer confirming receipt of the document. WebDox Remote system also returns delivery confirmations to the WebDox Server. These messages are used by the WebDox Server to track the status of messages. WebDox Server maintains Mailbox Files for all inbound and outbound messages. The status of messages is updated on an ongoing basis as acknowledgement messages are received allowing timely and precise audits.

WebDox Admin Computer system provides an easy to use tools to manage the community of manufacturers review the status of documents and configure the WebDox Server including ad hoc maintenance of manufacturer information online display of the Mailbox permitting inquiry into document status or document activity for particular manufacturers and the ability to reset document status creation and maintenance of UPC URL Registration Profiles preparation of releases of new and updated UPC URL Registration Applications Distribution of new and updated UPC URL Registration Applications and automatic inventory and tracking of UPC URL Registration Applications distributed to manufacturers.

In the preferred embodiment UPC URL Registration Application design and development is carried out on a Windows 95 or NT workstation. The UPC URL Registration Application is developed tested and then fully implemented for production with manufacturers. New or updated UPC URL Registration Applications are registered with the WebDox Admin computer system and are then distributed to the manufacturers as described herein above.

In the preferred embodiment UPC URL Registration Applications are developed using Microsoft Visual Basic and related software tools. These products provide rapid design and creation of the screen based forms that the manufacturer uses. In addition the intelligence behind the form in the UPC URL Registration Application can be very powerful making the manufacturer s work easier while ensuring that the user and Server application receive high quality data.

The WebDox Admin system handles the distribution of UPC URL Registration Applications to manufacturers. New UPC URL Registration Applications can be sent to some or all of the existing manufacturers assigned UPC Manufacturer Identification Numbers. Updates to UPC URL Registration Applications can be sent to manufacturers who are currently using that UPC URL Application. The actual update is distributed by sending a small notification message to each manufacturer which then results in the remote site downloading the new forms from the WebDox Server as hereinbefore described above.

In the above described embodiments of the system hereof each Client System is provided with two independent modes of operation relating to information access namely the IPI Find Mode and the UPN Search Mode .

When the IPI Find button is selected from the control panel displayed in frame B the system i.e. the Internet browser program enters its the IPI Find Mode. Preferably the user is provided with a choice of language e.g. English German French Japanese Chinese etc. by way of an appropriate menu selection screen. After the desired language selection is made the home page is displayed upon the Client System s display screen. A typical display screen produced from the IPD Server might read as follows 

When the system is in its IPI Find Mode as illustrated in A and A A a Web based information resource pertaining to any commercial product registered with the system can be displayed and selected by the user in order to automatically access the same from the Internet. Such information resources can include advertisements specifications operation descriptions product simulations purchase information maintenance information warranty and servicing information product updates distributor reseller information incentives e.g. discounts rebates coupons etc. electronic data transaction screens etc. In this mode desired product information is obtained by simply entering the registered product s UPN e.g. its UPC s 12 digit numerical string into the dialogue box of the Internet browser or Internet communication tool. Such data entry can be carried out manually using a keyboard data entry techniques or automatically using an bar code symbol reader connected to the Client System as discussed in detail above. When using the seeded IPI Database described hereinabove only the first six digits of the UPC number need be entered into the dialogue box. An exemplary display screen produced from the IPD Server might be as follows 

In response to such data entry operations a list or menu of URLs organized according to information subfield classifications as set forth for example in FIG. A are displayed on Client System Cmaking the request of the IPD Server. At this stage another display screen would appear with an exemplary message as follows 

Upon selecting a particular URL from the displayed URL menu video and audio information content are automatically served from the IPI Server hosting the selected URL and thereafter displayed on the Client System.

When the UPN Search button is selected the system enters its UPN Search Mode . Preferably the user is provided with a choice of language e.g. English German French Japanese Chinese etc. by way of an appropriate menu selection screen.

When the system is in its UPN Search Mode as illustrated in B and B B a predesignated information resource pertaining to any commercial product registered with the system can be automatically accessed from the Internet and displayed from the Internet browser of a Client System. Such information resources can include advertisements specifications operation descriptions productsimulations product upgrade information purchase information maintenance information warranty and servicing information etc. In this mode desired product information is obtained by simply entering the registered product s trademark s and or associated company name into the dialogue box of the Internet browser or Internet communication tool. An exemplary display screen produced from the IPD Server might be as follows 

In response to such data entry operations a list of URLs organized according to the information subfield classifications set forth in FIG. A are displayed on Client System placing the request. Upon selecting a particular URL from the displayed list thereof video and audio information content are automatically served from the IPI Server hosting the selected URL and thereafter displayed on the Client System.

In an alternative embodiment of the present invention the IPI Find Mode and the UPN Search Mode can be integrated into a single server application so that there is no need or desire to manually select IPI Find and UPN Search Mode buttons A and B respectively. In such an embodiment the interaction between the IPD Server and the requesting Client System can be designed to support the following Web server display screens and script underlying the same 

In instances when the IPI Website is being served to consumers in retail environments using a computer based kiosk as shown in FIG. A the consumer is presented with the option of ascertaining the price of an product in the store. This is achieved by simply depressing the Price Display button E on Control Strip B shown in to engage the system in its price lookup display mode. In this mode of operation the consumer then need only scan the UPC bar code symbol on the product using bar code scanner in order for the price to be looked up in the Product Price Database maintained in the Retailer s Price Server RPS and displayed on the kiosk display screen. In general the Product Price Database of the hosting retailer can be made accessible by the computer based kiosk in several possible ways. As shown in one way is to place the retailer s RPS on Internet by using an HTTP server and connect the RPS to the IPD Server of the system by way of a CGI well known in the art. The CGI can be made accessible only by authorized client systems e.g. computer based kiosks installed in the hosting retailer s store and possibly administrators of the information delivery system of the present invention . An alternative technique of connecting the Product Price Database to each computer based kiosk would involve providing the RPS with a direct interface to each computer based kiosk in the hosting retailer s store s . This alternative technique may require the use of computer networking technology well known in the art.

The IPI finding subsystem i.e. system of the present invention can be realized on the Internet in a variety of different ways. Each embodiment of the system will provide manufacturers retailers consumers and sponsors with various benefits hitherto unachievable using prior art systems and methodologies. A best mode embodiment of the system will now be described below with reference to Intent to Use ITU servicemarks that Applicant has sought to register under the Lanham Act and ultimately use in reducing the Internet based consumer product information finding system to commercial practice in the near future. The inventive subject matter hereindisclosed can be readily applied to carry out such an Internet based information finding and delivery system.

According to the best mode embodiment the IPI Finding and Serving Subsystem referred to as the UPC REQUEST Consumer Product Information Finding System comprises an integration of several subsystems including for example the UPC REQUEST Manufacturer Product Registration Subsystem e.g. Web Document Server and Workstation including Wed based and Value Added Networks VAN based infrastructure and processes for supporting EDI and UPC URL database management operations by manufacturers and or their agents the UPC REQUEST Database Management Subsystem interfaced with the UPC REQUEST Manufacturer Product Registration Management Subsystem numerous UPC REQUEST kiosks e.g. Client systems installed in retail stores retail outlets and the like each having a bar code symbol driven Internet browser providing access to the Internet through an Internet Service Provider ISP and all of the Web enabled client systems located in consumer homes in consumer offices and on the road having access to the Internet through an ISP.

The function of the UPC REQUEST Database Management Subsystem is to maintain the UPC REQUEST Database e.g. IPI Database shown in FIG. A containing various information items regarding registered manufacturers subscribing retailers and registered products including UPC and or UPC EAN numbers of consumer products and corresponding URLs pointing to published HTTP encoded documents i.e. Web pages containing particular types of information related to such products.

The function of the UPC REQUEST Manufacturer Product Registration Subsystem is two fold to enable qualified manufacturers to quickly and easily register with the System by way of Web based and or VAN based EDI and 2 enable manufacturers and or their agents to manage their UPC numbers and URLs in back offices using a Web enabled computer system running EDI and UPC URL Database Management software and automatically transmit such information to the UPC REQUEST Database Management Subsystem and subsequently update the UPC REQUEST Database.

The function of each UPC REQUEST kiosk is to provide consumer access to the UPC REQUEST Retailer Website e.g. UPC REQUEST Wal Mart UPC REQUEST CompUSA UPC REQUEST Home Depot etc. served within the retail store in which the kiosk is located and which subscribes to the UPC REQUEST Consumer Product Information Service.

The function of each Web enabled client system is to provide consumer access to the UPC REQUEST Central Website freely served over the Internet and accessible to any consumer at home in the office and on the road using a Web enabled client system.

When installed in retail stores the UPC REQUEST System will provide three revolutionary Internet based consumer information services under the servicemarks HOME PAGE INFO LINK and CYBER SERVICE respectively.

In retail stores subscribing to the UPC REQUEST System HOME PAGE will enable customers and shoppers to automatically access the WWW Home Page of any registered manufacturer by scanning the UPC or UPC EAN bar code symbol on any product thereof using the bar code symbol reader associated with a UPC REQUEST kiosk . In retail stores the UPC REQUEST kiosk can be realized by any Web enabled computer system having an Internet browser program on line access to the UPC REQUEST Retailer Website and optionally a touch screen display panel.

At home in the office or on the road HOME PAGE will enable customers and shoppers to automatically access the WWW Home Page of any registered manufacturer by manually entering the UPC or UPC EAN number on any product into the search screen served up by a particular UPC REQUEST Retailer Website or by the UPC REQUEST Central Website.

INFO LINK realized using Web based and VAN based EDI subsystems operably connected to the UPC REQUEST Database Management Subsystem will enable manufacturers to simply link manage and update therein i the UPC or UPC EAN number on any product with ii the Internet address i.e. URL of product related Web pages published on the Internet by the manufacturer its agents or others for subsequent access and display by customers and shoppers using CYBER SERVICE . While the INFO LINK service would be made accessible through UPC REQUEST kiosks in retail stores i.e. for the sake of vendors who frequent the same the actual UPC URL database management operations associated with the INFO LINK service will typically occur in the back offices of registered manufacturers using Internet enabled computer systems accessing INFO LINK through a hot linked URL posted on a particular UPC REQUEST Retailer Website or the UPC REQUEST Central Website.

CYBER SERVICE accessible through a particular UPC REQUEST Retail Website or the UPC REQUEST Central Website will enable customers and shoppers at home in the office on the road and in retail stores to quickly access particular types of product related information which have been published on the WWW by registered manufacturers their agents and others about consumer products that have been registered with the UPC REQUEST Database Management System. Such product related information is displayed in a menu like format organized by particular information types e.g. Product Advertisements Product Endorsements Product Reviews Product Rebates and Incentives Product Description Product Manual Instructions Product Updates at FTP Sites Warranty and Repair Service Direct Product Purchase Retailers Wholesalers Complementary Products Company Annual Report Stock Purchase etc. .

When CYBER SERVICE is selected from a particular UPC REQUEST Retail Website each product related Web page listed in the displayed information menu can be accessed and displayed simply by touching the corresponding Internet address i.e. URL displayed on the touch screen display panel of the UPC REQUEST kiosk in the retail store. When CYBER SERVICE is selected from the UPC REQUEST Central Website each product related Web page listed in the displayed information menu can be accessed and displayed simply by clicking the display screen thereof accessed by an Internet enabled computer system.

To maximize value to a particular retail store s customers each UPC REQUEST Retail Website served at each retail store subscriber would be made accessible to consumers outside their retail stores e.g. at home in the office or on the road by several Internet access methods including for example through a hot linked URL posted on the retail store s Website pointing to the UPC REQUEST Retail Website through a publicly accessible URL e.g. http www.upcrequest.com retail store etc.

To constantly remind the public at large of the fee paying sponsors of the UPC REQUEST System all Web pages displayed by the UPC REQUEST System in a retail store e.g. on UPC REQUEST Home Depot Website or on the UPC REQUEST Central Website will be displayed within a three frame display framework comprising a sponsor frame A a control frame B and an information frame C as shown in FIGS. A and A.

The sponsor frame A located on the upper most portion of the Internet browser screen displays the sponsor s greeting such as for example Welcome to UPC REQUEST sponsored by Visa 

The control frame B located on the left most side of the Internet browser screen will provide four control buttons A B C and D as shown in FIG. A. The first control button A enables consumers to request the HOME PAGE service. The second control button B enables consumers to request the INFO LINK service. The third control button C enables consumers to request CYBER SERVICE . The fourth control button D enables the download a free plug in software module which automatically installs a Product Information button on the graphical user interface of the consumer s Internet browser so that the UPC REQUEST Central Website can be accessed anywhere in the world with a single click of the mouse button. Optionally a fifth control button E enables the consumer to request that product related information on a particular product accessed from HOME PAGE or CYBER SERVICE be directly sent to the him or her by the manufacturer through e mail or air mail .

The information frame C occupying the balance of the Internet browser screen will display all HTTP i.e. Web and FTP pages launched either by in store scanning of UPC labelled products during HOME PAGE or CYBER SERVICE or by clicking on hypertext links embedded within Web pages accessed through a particular UPC REQUEST Retail System in retail stores or from the UPC REQUEST Central Website.

HOME PAGE and CYBER SERVICE will foster customer loyalty and patronage with sponsors by providing consumers with valuable product related information before and after product purchases.

CYBER SERVICE will provide sponsors with an economical and effective way of marketing products and services to their customers and shoppers worldwide.

HOME PAGE will provide sponsors with valuable advertising space on the UPC REQUEST Central Website for subleasing to retailers manufacturers and business concerns.

INFO LINK will provide sponsors with an effective way of promoting their products and or services among manufacturers retailers and consumers using the UPC REQUEST System.

HOME PAGE will allow customers to automatically access Home Page of any manufacturer s Website by simply scanning the UPC bar code symbol on any product thereof at any UPC REQUEST information kiosk in a retailer s store.

CYBER SERVICE will allow customers to quickly access by touch screen URL selection particular types of product related information that have been published on the World Wide Web WWW by manufacturers their agents or others and registered within the UPC REQUEST Database through INFO LINK .

HOME PAGE will allow customers to automatically access the Home Page of any manufacturer s Website by simply entering the UPC or UPC EAN number on any consumer product into a UPC REQUEST search screen served from the UPC REQUEST Central Website and accessible to anyone using an Internet enabled computer system at home in the office or on the road.

CYBER SERVICE will allow customers to quickly access from the UPC REQUEST Database particular types of product related information that have been published on the WWW by manufacturers their agents or others and registered within the UPC REQUEST Database through the INFO LINK service.

HOME PAGE and CYBER SERVICE will foster customer loyalty and patronage with retailers by providing shoppers with valuable product related information before and after product purchases.

CYBER SERVICE will provide retailers with an economical and effective way of marketing its products to customers and shoppers within its stores.

CYBER SERVICE will provide retail sales personnel with an opportunity to learn about a retailer s products by scanning the UPC bar code symbols on such products and selecting product related Web pages for in store review and sales training sessions whenever customer demand allows.

HOME PAGE and CYBER SERVICE will provide retailers with valuable advertising space in their stores for subleasing to manufacturers and others e.g. local sponsors in order to self finance the store wide delivery of the UPC REQUEST Service.

Under one proposed scheme the UPC REQUEST System will generate revenue from at least four sources Manufacturer Fees paid by manufacturers who want to register their products and product related Web pages with the UPC REQUEST Database Retailer Fees paid by retailers who want to provide bar code driven access to the UPC REQUEST System in retail stores Sponsor Fees paid by Sponsors of the UPC REQUEST System and Advertiser Fees paid by advertisers on the UPC REQUEST Central Website.

Manufacturers desiring to register their consumer products and product related Web pages within the UPC REQUEST Database would pay a one time Manufacture Registration Fee based on volume of sales. An annual maintenance fee may be desired or necessary. Minimally such fees should cover the cost of the EDI and UPC URL Database Management software and updates automatically downloaded to each manufacturer upon registration. Such Web based EDI software enables manufacturers to easily manage the UPC numbers and Web page URLs associated with their changing product lines and automatically transmit such information to the UPC REQUEST Manufacturer Product Registration Subsystem in order that the UPC REQUEST Database Management Subsystem is periodically updated.

Retailers providing bar code driven access to the UPC REQUEST System in their retail stores would pay an annual Retailer License Fee based on the number of UPC REQUEST kiosks deployed therein.

Each sponsor of the UPC REQUEST System would pay an annual Sponsor Fee for the right to display its name trademark servicemark and or message in hypertext within a selected portion of the sponsor frame displayed by licensed UPC REQUEST kiosks in retail stores as well as Internet enable computer systems accessing the UPC REQUEST Central Website. For marketing reasons it would be desirable to limit the number of sponsors of the UPC REQUEST System at any instant in time.

Advertisers who advertise on the UPC REQUEST Central Website would pay an Advertiser Fee based on the time and location that the Web advertisement is displayed.

The UPC REQUEST System can be used to provide consumers quick access to useful product related information in diverse types of retail shopping environments including for example retail superstores discount department stores home improvement stores computer superstores drugstores and pharmacies music stores video rental stores bookstores supermarkets grocery stores and the like. Each of these retail markets provides a unique environment in which the UPC REQUEST System can be used by manufacturers of consumer products to effectively deliver product related information to consumers in retail stores at home in the office or on the road before and after consumer purchases.

As the UPC REQUEST System provides manufacturers with an effective way and means of making direct contact with present and future customers it enables both manufacturers and retailers alike to influence demand in ways that have hitherto have been unavailable. Such features of the UPC REQUEST System present enormous growth opportunities in retail supply and demand chain management across diverse markets within our ever expanding global economy.

The present invention has been described in great detail with reference to the above illustrative embodiments. It is understood however that numerous modifications will readily occur to those with ordinary skill in the art having had the benefit of reading the present disclosure.

For example in the illustrative embodiments described hereinabove separate databases are maintained by each data synchronized IPD Server for i registered products within the system and ii non registered products within the system. Notably the reasons for using a dual database design of this sort would be based largely on economics namely only those companies who have paid the required maintenance or registration fees get their products and linked URLs registered with the system whereas non paying companies and organizations do not get their products and linked URLs registered with the system regardless of how such product URL information is ascertained e.g. by solicitation versus data mining .

Thus it is contemplated that in some embodiments of the present invention each IPD Server will be designed to maintain only a single database for maintaining product URL information currently available on the Internet. In such embodiments of the present invention the concept of non registered products will be altogether avoided since the system implementation and administration may be designed to not require companies to pay maintenance or registration fees in order that their products and linked URLs are registered with the IPI system. Instead some alternative income producing scheme will be used in such embodiments of the present invention e.g. user fees subscription fees Internet browser licensing fees etc. for system maintenance and administration.

When practicing the system and method of the present invention it is preferred that the UPC label with its human readable UPC number assigned to the particular product be attached embossed or otherwise embodied on an accessible surface thereof. In addition to applying the UPC label to the external packaging of the product it is preferred that the UPC label also be printed on any and all product instructions and manuals provided with the product. In this way the UPC number can be easily read by a human being and then used to access a desired type of product information using the system and method of the present invention.

In order that the system hereof can be used to find information pertaining to large products such as automobiles motorcycles skidoos farm machinery boats etc. the present invention also contemplates assigning UPC numbers to such products and attaching embossing or otherwise embodying the same on an accessible surface thereof. Also the UPC label can be printed on all instruction booklets and or operating manuals normally provided with the product. In this way information related to any particular product that is posted anywhere on the Internet and linked to URLs registered with the IPD Servers of the system hereof can be readily found using the uniquely assigned UPC number assigned thereto by the manufacturer at the time of sale. Notably multimedia information about such products can be most helpful in regard to the operation repair and servicing of such products.

The system and method of the present invention has been shown to combine the use of UPC numbers trademarks and company names when making a product information request of the system. It is understood however that the present invention can be practiced using anyone of these items of information alone or in combination with each other in order to place a product information request with the system hereof.

These and all other such modifications and variations are deemed to be within the scope and spirit of the present invention as defined by the accompanying Claims to Invention.

