---

title: Multifunction all in one capture station for creating identification documents
abstract: A capture station for creating identification documents comprises a housing including a camera and lighting device, a base, and at least one leg extending from the base. The housing is mounted to the leg to enable height adjustment of the camera. One configuration of the capture station has two substantially rigid and parallel legs with the housing mounted between the legs. Configurations of the capture station can include a processor, such a CPU or embedded controller, enabling ID document data capture functions to be executed within the capture station, and to be controlled via a remote computer via a network connection. In one embodiment, the processor is housed in the base and communicates with the camera via wiring routed through the leg. Peripherals used in capture functions, such as a fingerprint reader, signature pad, display, etc., may be mounted to the leg via clamps, or a plug in receptacle with power and communication wiring provided in the leg.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07646425&OS=07646425&RS=07646425
owner: L-I Secure Credentialing, Inc.
number: 07646425
owner_city: Billerica
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050422
---
The invention relates to a capture station and related systems and methods for capturing information used for creating identification documents. This invention also relates to a configurable capture station structure that integrates together a computer with one or more components such as cameras signature pads fingerprint scanners etc. used to capture information to be printed to identification documents.

Identification documents hereafter ID documents play a critical role in today s society. One example of an ID document is an identification card ID card . ID documents are used on a daily basis to prove identity to verify age to access a secure area to evidence driving privileges to cash a check and so on. For the purposes of this disclosure ID documents are broadly defined herein and include e.g. credit cards bank cards phone cards passports driver s licenses network access cards employee badges debit cards security cards visas immigration documentation national ID cards citizenship cards social security cards security badges certificates identification cards or documents voter registration cards police ID cards border crossing cards legal instruments security clearance badges and cards gun permits gift certificates or cards membership cards or badges etc. etc. Also the terms document card badge and documentation are used interchangeably throughout this patent application. .

Many types of identification cards and documents such as driving licenses national or government identification cards bank cards credit cards controlled access cards and smart cards carry thereon certain items of information which relate to the identity of the bearer. Examples of such information include name address birth date signature and photographic image the cards or documents may in addition carry other variant data i.e. data specific to a particular card or document for example an employee number and invariant data i.e. data common to a large number of cards for example the name of an employer . All of the cards described above will hereinafter be generically referred to as ID documents .

Identification documents such as ID cards having printed background security patterns designs or logos and identification data personal to the card bearer have been known and are described for example in U.S. Pat. No. 3 758 970 issued Sep. 18 1973 to M. Annenberg in Great Britain Pat. No. 1 472 581 issued to G. A. O. Gesellschaft Fur Automation Und Organisation mbH published Mar. 10 1976 in International Patent Application PCT GB82 00150 published Nov. 25 1982 as Publication No. WO 82 04149 in U.S. Pat. No. 4 653 775 issued Mar. 31 1987 to T. Raphael et al. in U.S. Pat. No. 4 738 949 issued Apr. 19 1988 to G. S. Sethi et al. and in U.S. Pat. No. 5 261 987 issued Nov. 16 1993 to J. W. Luening et al. All of the aforementioned documents are hereby incorporated by reference.

As those skilled in the art know ID documents such as drivers licenses can contain information such as a photographic image of the bearer variable personal information such as an address signature and or birthdate and biometric information associated with the person whose image appears in the photographic image e.g. a fingerprint a magnetic stripe which for example can be on the a side of the ID document that is opposite the side with the photographic image . This information needs to be acquired from the individual such as by taking the individual s picture asking the individual to provide a signature scanning the individual s fingerprint and the like.

Systems for production of identification documents often include separate functional subsystems or components for completing the transaction. Examples of these functions and associated components can include 

 a capturing personalized information e.g. cameras for photographic images scanners readers and or cameras for biometric data electronic signature pads for signatures etc 

 c processing the transaction e.g. point of sale POS devices credit card readers receipt printers etc 

 d and producing a permanent or temporary identification document e.g. printers to produce temporary paper identification documents so called over the counter or on the spot identification document printers and or laminators and so called central issue and other large scale identification printing systems 

 e storing the captured information for future retrieval and or providing to external sources e.g. memory systems image storage systems etc. and

 f performing all processing device control communications and other operations both automated and manual necessary to perform functions a through e d e.g. via a computer such as a standalone computer system.

Systems performing the above functions can be configured in many different ways but commonly the various components are separate entities not provided as part of the same integrated package or housing arranged separately in an applicant processing area and manually coupled together via connection and or communication cables. This type of capture configuration is more difficult to transport and configure in an office setting and is more costly because it involves multiple physically separate machines or devices. In addition the separate devices often take up a significant amount of physical space in what often is a space constrained environment. This arrangement also presents challenges in sharing the capture station among more than one station operator adding cost and inconvenience.

In one approach to enable sharing of the camera assembly the workstation that controls the camera assembly may be connected to other workstations in a computer network. This network configuration enables the other workstations to issue image capture and transfer commands to the workstation directly connected to the capture stand. However this configuration presents more costs and challenges because all capture control commands and associated data flow from a source workstation to a destination workstation connected to the camera assembly and the destination workstation may not always be available. A typical problem is where the destination workstation is not logged on due to the absence of office personnel responsible for that station. In this case the workstation is not able to process requests for image capture and transfer from other workstations.

In addition this configuration requires at least three machines to operate in a networked environment two workstations and a separate camera assembly.

Another limitation of known systems for capturing images is that such systems can be awkward to adjust to accommodate photographing subjects of varying heights. Some known systems couple the camera directly to a computer monitor limiting the range of motion and adjustment of the camera. Some known systems use conventional camera stands such as tripods which permit more adjustment of where the camera is to be pointed. Conventional tripods generally include a head to which a camera is mountable and a series of three telescoping legs that support the head and can fold together when not in use.

Use of conventional tripods can be inconvenient and awkward in some types of environments however such as locations for taking images used in identification documents. One problem is that such locations are often space limited and tripods can be bulky and space consuming. Another problem is that it can be difficult and time consuming for an operator to adjust all three legs of the conventional tripod quickly and easily to the proper length needed to mount the camera at a desired elevation which elevation may change with each person being photographed. Stability and balance of the tripod can also be an issue especially since the legs each must be at approximately the same length. Another issue is theft prevention because it is not simple or even desirable to rigidly mount a tripod and camera in a fixed location the tripod and camera may have to be disassembled and reassembled with each days use including connections to computers printers etc. which is time consuming prone to error and prone to accidental damage of the equipment.

One type of known device that addresses some of these issues is a so called camera tower capture station. illustrates such a camera tower type of capture station which is available from the assignee of the present invention. note that at least some elements of the capture station of as described herein may have application in the new embodiments of the new multifunction capture station that are described further herein . The capture station of includes an image capture device such as a video camera and lens a light sensor and a light source .

During operation the capture station is controlled by a computer. In a commonly assigned patent application entitled All in One Capture Station for Creating Identification Documents Ser. No. 10 676 362 filed Sep. 30 2003 hereinafter All In One Application which is hereby incorporated by reference a capture station is described that includes a computer that can be built in to the capture station or provided separately and operably coupled to the capture station to provide light directed toward a subject e.g. an applicant for an identification document and to capture a digital image of the subject. Together the light sensor and a light source operate as a lighting device. An exit aperture plane can be defined to include the surface of the light source through which the light is directed. The image capture device has an observation axis that is orthogonal to the exit aperture plane of the light source . In one embodiment the light sensor is provided by a strobe sensor and the light source is an electronic strobe. The light sensor provides a real time adjustment to the light source illumination of the subject by sampling light reflected off the subject and directed back to the light sensor . The strobe can optionally include a diffuser cover.

The capture station includes a top portion slidably engaged with a bottom portion enabling the top portion to be slid into and out of the bottom portion enabling the height of the observation axis to be changed e.g. to accommodate subjects of varying heights . A locking mechanism not shown is provided to ensure that the desired orientation of the top and bottom portions respectively can be maintained. Such a locking mechanism is presumed to be known to those of skill in the art and is not described further here.

As explained in the All In One Application the capture station of can be provided with a lighting device as shown in the capture station . As described in a commonly assigned patent application entitled Enhanced Shadow Reduction System and Related Techniques for Digital Image Capture Ser. No. 10 663 439 filed Sep. 15 2003 hereinafter Shadow Reduction Application which is hereby incorporated by reference the lighting device can be used to help reduce shadows in subjects whose images are being captured using the capture station . The lighting device includes a housing which includes diffusely reflective inner surfaces and coupled to diffusely reflective end portions and respectively. The lighting device further includes a diffuser disposed on the housing . A reflector is not visible in but the reflector and additional details about the lighting device are described more fully in the Shadow Reduction Application.

As described in the Shadow Reduction Application at least some embodiments of the lighting device are adapted to mount directly onto the capture station without requiring any changes to the workstation control software and hardware and without modification to the image capture device the light sensor and the light source . The image capture device has an observation axis which is generally aligned with light reflected from the inner surfaces and directed onto the subject. It will be appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art that image capture device may include but is not limited to a video camera and associated frame or field capture device a digital camera or a CCD or CMOS image sensor. The image capture device is coupled to a built in computer described below by means of a video signal interface or a digital interface.

During use the computer to which capture station of is connected can also be operably coupled to other devices e.g. peripherals to acquire additional information as part of the process of creation and issuance of the identification document. Such devices although not illustrated in are known in the art and include devices such as fingerprint readers signature capture devices scanners etc.

The lighting device and capture stand housing of can be formed using virtually any material and or combination of materials so long as the resultant device is capable of functioning in the manner described. Additional considerations such as weight electrical shielding environmental conditions etc. also can impact selection of an appropriate material. We have made a capture stand housing using for example substantially rigid plastic materials such as PC and ABS. Housing of the illustrated lighting device of was formed using a plastic material and the diffusively reflective surfaces within it were created by coating the surfaces with a light colored paint.

Those skilled in the art will appreciate however that the capture station housing and or the diffuser can be formed using virtually any type of material capable of being formed into the desired shape and in the case of the diffuser providing the desired optical properties including but not limited to metal cardboard glass fabric paper wood paperboard ceramic rubber along with many man made materials such as microporous materials single phase materials two phase materials coated paper synthetic paper e.g. TYVEC manufactured by Dupont Corp of Wilmington Del. ABS polycarbonate polyolefin polyester polyethylenetelphthalate PET PET G PET F and polyvinyl chloride PVC and combinations thereof. In one experiment we found that a satisfactory housing could even be formed using a section of six 6 inch diameter white plastic plumbing pipe. Many different methods of forming the capture station diffuser and housing are usable including milling injection molding stamping welding coupling several individual elements together using adhesive screws staples etc.

Although the capture station of meets at least some of the needs of users it would be desirable to further reduce the footprint of the capture station and if possible combine the capture station with a computer and include with or couple to the capture station one or more other devices for acquiring information about a subject. It also would be desirable to provide a capture station that is simple to set up and use and which is readily configurable based on the end user s needs. It would be advantageous if a capture station could be provided that can help to minimize the problems associated with hanging wires and connections. It also would be desirable to have a capture station with a streamlined contemporary and aesthetically pleasing appearance which can be simpler to install upgrade and maintain than some current installations.

In one embodiment the invention provides a configurable all in one capture station and related methods system and software for creating identification documents. One aspect of the invention is the configurable all in one capture station which combines the functions of a camera assembly lighting system and workstation into a single configurable device. This device can be operated in a shared mode where it is controlled via one or more other workstations or a stand alone mode where it performs all of the functions needed to prepare information for printing to an identification document. The configurable all in one capture station in one embodiment includes a housing that combines a camera stand a camera mounted within the camera stand lighting system mounted within the camera stand enclosures for cables and wires and a computer integrated into the camera stand. The computer includes a processor network interface device and memory. The memory stores a camera control program and a network interface program for transferring camera control commands and image data between the capture station and a remote workstation so that the capture station can operate under the control of the remote workstation to capture data for incorporation into an identification document.

In another embodiment the invention provides an all in one capture station that includes a camera stand camera mounted within the camera stand an integrated lighting system and an optional computer integrated into the camera stand. The camera stand has one or more elongated support members to which additional optional capture elements e.g. a signature pad can be fixedly coupled. In at least one embodiment the elongated support members are constructed and arranged so that connections e.g. cables between the camera computer and or the additional capture element s can be routed through the elongated members. This embodiment of the all in one capture station can provide a number of functional operational aesthetic and or economic advantages including 

Another aspect of the invention is a capture station for creating identification documents comprising a housing including a camera and lighting device a base and at least one leg extending from the base the housing being adjustably mounted to the at least one leg to enable height adjustment of the camera. One configuration of the capture station has two substantially rigid and parallel legs with the housing mounted between the legs. The housing is mounted to be adjustable to a desired height above the base. Configurations of the capture station can include a processor such as a networked processor enabling capture functions to be executed within the capture station and to be controlled via a remote computer via a network connection. In one embodiment the processor is housed in the base and communicates with the camera via wiring routed through a leg. Peripherals used in capture functions such as a fingerprint reader signature pad display etc. may be mounted to the leg via clamps or a plug in receptacle with power and communication wiring provided in the leg.

The foregoing and other objects aspects features and advantages of this invention will become even more apparent from the following description and drawings and from the claims.

The foregoing and other features and advantages of the present invention will be even more readily apparent from the following Detailed Description which proceeds with reference to the accompanying drawings.

Of course the drawings are not necessarily drawn to scale with emphasis rather being placed upon illustrating the principles of the invention. In the drawings like reference numbers indicate like elements or steps. Further throughout this application certain indicia information identification documents data etc. may be shown as having a particular cross sectional shape e.g. rectangular but that is provided by way of example and illustration only and is not limiting nor is the shape intended to represent the actual resultant cross sectional shape that occurs during manufacturing of identification documents.

In the foregoing discussion the use of the word ID document is broadly defined and intended to include all types of ID documents including but not limited to documents magnetic disks credit cards bank cards phone cards stored value cards prepaid cards smart cards e.g. cards that include one more semiconductor chips such as memory devices microprocessors and microcontrollers contact cards contactless cards proximity cards e.g. radio frequency RFID cards passports driver s licenses network access cards employee badges debit cards security cards visas immigration documentation national ID cards citizenship cards social security cards security badges certificates identification cards or documents voter registration and or identification cards police ID cards border crossing cards security clearance badges and cards legal instruments gun permits badges gift certificates or cards membership cards or badges and tags. Also the terms document card badge and documentation are used interchangeably throughout this patent application. . In at least some aspects of the invention ID document can include any item of value e.g. currency bank notes and checks where authenticity of the item is important and or where counterfeiting or fraud is an issue.

 Personalization Personalized data and variable data are used interchangeably herein and refer at least to data images and information that are personal to or specific to a specific cardholder or group of cardholders. Personalized data can include data that is unique to a specific cardholder such as biometric information image information serial numbers Social Security Numbers privileges a cardholder may have etc. but is not limited to unique data. Personalized data can include some data such as birthdate height weight eye color address etc. that are personal to a specific cardholder but not necessarily unique to that cardholder for example other cardholders might share the same personal data such as birthdate . In at least some embodiments of the invention personal variable data can include some fixed data as well. For example in at least some embodiments personalized data refers to any data that is not pre printed onto an ID document in advance so such personalized data can include both data that is cardholder specific and data that is common to many cardholders. Variable data can for example be printed on an information bearing layer of the ID card using thermal printing ribbons and thermal printheads.

The computer cover is intended to cover and protect an optional computer not visible in these Figures which in one embodiment is integrated into the capture station . The computer is operable to control operation of the multifunctional capture station as explained further herein. illustrates a front view of a capture station that is similar to the capture station of and includes a break away view revealing a computer inside the capture station. The computer is powered via a wall outlet connection not shown which wall connection also is coupled via electrical wiring running through the legs to a power strip not visible mounted within the housing formed by of the capture station . This power strip also provides power for the imaging device and lighting device . In one embodiment both the imaging device and the computer can include power supplies to convert line voltage to the voltage current for the respective device. In one embodiment the lighting device includes a strobe that is connected directly to line voltage. More information about the electrical connections is provided further herein.

Referring to now the computer cover can include optional indicia for identifying a manufacturer or issuer such as an optional nameplate on the computer cover . The rear of the computer cover includes a computer cover opening . The computer cover in this example also includes a plurality of ventilation holes and can be coupled to a substantially planar mounting plate having optional mounting holes . More information about the computer cover is provided in connection with .

Referring again to the computer is a general purpose computer that includes preferably in a single package sized to fit within the computer cover a processor memory devices RAM and persistent storage such as fixed and removable disk drives flash memory etc. and peripheral interface devices such as a network device interface e.g. Ethernet card an imaging device e.g. camera and lighting device interface e.g. USB port Firewire interface etc signature capture device interface e.g. USB port and a fingerprint capture device interface e.g. USB port . Such a computer can be obtained from many different manufacturers including from Via Technologies Inc. Fremont Calif. . The processor may comprise a microcontroller or a microprocessor. In one embodiment the computing platform of the capture station comprises a microprocessor executing an operating system such as Windows XP from Microsoft Unix or Unix variant and in another it comprises an embedded controller such as a Windows or Unix or Unix variant embedded controller.

In addition the capture station can be transformed into a fully functioning computer workstation by plugging in a video monitor through its video device interface speakers through its audio device interface and or keyboard e.g. folding keyboard and cursor control devices e.g. mouse through input device interfaces .

In one embodiment a computer is incorporated into the capture station by installing a mainboard with CPU memory USB ports network device interface etc. from Via Technologies inside the base of the camera stand housing. At least some of the ports such as the network device interface and some of the USB ports can be connected to an outer wall of the base and are exposed on the outside of the stand to enable connection to other devices and or peripherals such as signature capture pads scanner fingerprint capture etc. In one embodiment see and associated description the other devices and or peripherals can be coupled to a leg of the capture station .

The combination of the imaging device e.g. digital camera and a software component for controlling the imaging device e.g. camera software component in the computer provides complete automatic focusing contrast correction and cropping that ensure consistent and uniform portraits. In one embodiment we have used a software component called Find a Face which is available from Digimarc ID Systems of Burlington Mass. to provide automatic face location cropping and color adjustment of captured images. The automated process that is substantially instantaneous and allows multiple operators from networked workstations to capture applicant portraits from sitting or standing positions without adjustment or intervention of any kind. This ease of operation produces significant efficiencies in customer throughput. The multifunction capabilities of the workstation allow complete intake portrait signature image capture and driver s license production from multiple different networked workstations or alternatively from the all in one capture station itself.

The capture station s computer executes programs from its memory including an operating system e.g. Windows XP from Microsoft Corporation network communication programs e.g. BSD socket software TCP IP and UDP software a camera control module a fingerprint capture module a signature capture module and other programs and data.

The network interface and network communication software enables the computer in the capture station to communicate with two or more other computer workstations. For example in one embodiment the network interface is an Ethernet network interface but other alternative networking hardware and related communication protocols can be used. For example an operator can control the all in one capture station from a tablet PC PDA or other portable computing device via a wireless connection to the capture station e.g. according wi fi standards such as 802.11b g etc. 

Among its network communication software the all in one capture station includes capture device interface software. This capture device interface software enables any workstation connected to the all in one capture station via a network to control the functions of the capture stations such as taking a picture capturing signatures and fingerprints and printing an ID card. This interface is an extension of a BSD socket software which is responsible for establishing a network connection between the computer in the capture station and other workstations. The socket software sets up a network connection through a socket using TCP and or UDP protocols. Executing on both the remote workstation and the all in one capture station the socket software receives requests to transfer instructions and data. In response it transforms instructions data into packets for sending through the socket. The extension to this interface adds an application programming interface and corresponding code modules to provide function calls that enable capture station control functions. These functions can be grouped according to the devices in the capture station such as the camera the signature capture device the identification document printer the fingerprint capture device and the machine readable code reader e.g. bar code reader magnetic stripe reader smart card reader optical memory device reader digital watermark reader etc. .

For example the camera control functions includes functions such as Start the camera Initialize the camera Capture an image Close the camera etc. Similarly the signature capture functions include Start the signature pad Initialize the signature pad Capture a signature Close the signature pad etc. The control functions for the fingerprint capture device are similar.

The computer in the all in one capture station operates in a service mode which enables the networking software and capture device software modules to execute without requiring a user to log on to the system. In one specific implementation the service mode is the service mode of the Windows XP operating system executing in the all in one capture station.

As illustrate the capture station breaks up into three major sub parts 1 the base cover which includes an optional base and mounting hardware and which may include a computer not visible 2 the legs which include optional leg caps and 3 a capture station top housing which includes the front panel back panel flash unit cover front middle portion front bottom portion camera flash unit and optional image capture aid . Each of these subparts is described more fully herein.

In an advantageous embodiment however the leg has at least one opening therein through capable of permitting at least a portion of a wire or cable between the capture station top housing and a controller such as the computer described previously the connection can also be made between the capture station top housing and one or more external devices. This routing of cables through the legs helps simplify setup and use of the capture station prevents accidental damage or disconnection of the cables and can help eliminate tangled wires and instability in the setup of imaging device lighting device and computer .

For example in the embodiment of the opening is similar to a channel or conduit in the leg which runs along at least a portion of the leg permitting power communications and or other connections cable wires to be routed from the flash unit and or the camera to other devices e.g. a computer . In an advantageous embodiment the leg had a cross section that is substantially circular or oval but has a portion that is open so that the cable or wire can be removed and inserted. is a perspective view of a leg of the capture station of showing a cross sectional perspective and showing the leg opening into which a cable or wire can be inserted. Of course the example of is but one example and those skilled in the art will appreciate that many different cross sections are possible. The leg can however take on any cross sectional shape especially any shape that is suitable for enclosing cable or wire e.g. square rectangular triangular elliptical etc. as long as the cross sectional shape enables the pair of legs to support the capture station top housing .

Another feature of the legs is that the channel can also permit the capture station top housing to be height adjustable. Openings not visible in can be formed in the leg to permit multiple possible points of attachment to the capture station top housing . For example in one embodiment we have constructed the capture station top housing and legs to permit a height adjustment from 28 inches to 38 inches to accommodate placement of the capture station for image capture purposes on varying heights of tables and counters.

It also should be understood that although two legs are illustrated in the embodiment of it is possible to construct the multifunction capture station using just a single leg see e.g. or using more than two legs. Generally the arrangement and number of legs is selected to be sufficient to support the capture station top housing in a stable configuration. If cables are being routed through one or more legs then the arrangement and number of legs is selected to be sufficient to accommodate the size and number of cables wires etc.

Referring again to the back panel of the capture station top housing is constructed and arranged to mate with the front panel and flash unit cover and to provide a cover for and ventilation to the components contained within the capture station top housing . is a left side elevational view of the back panel of the capture station of . is a left front perspective view of the back panel of the capture station of showing inner surfaces thereof and mounting holes . is a rear elevational view of the back panel of the capture station of showing ventilation openings .

The back panel is also sized and constructed to couple to and preferably mate closely with the front panel . For example the back panel includes a back panel lip sized to mate with and snap into a corresponding back panel lip opening in the front panel see . The back panel of this example embodiment also is formed to have an aesthetically pleasing smooth curved and distinct appearance. The back panel can be formed out of virtually any material suitable of holding the desired shape and of safely enclosing the components therein. The back panel is made from any sturdy material capable of being formed into the back panel shape. Virtually any materials that are commonly used to house or enclose electronic equipment can be used to construct the back panel e.g. materials including but not limited to plastic semi rigid polycarbonate PC Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene ABS ABS PC flame retardant PC ABS and ABS PC products polyvinyl chloride PVC polystyrene high impact polystyrene HIPS polybutylene Terephthalate PET PC PET polybutylene terephthalate PBT PC PBT polyetherimide PEI acetal copolymer POM and metal. 

In a preferred embodiment the back panel is manufactured in a low cost and rapid manner by molding it from a lightweight low cost material such as plastic. However the back panel along with other parts of the capture station in accordance with the principles of the invention could also be achieved by other manufacturing techniques capable of producing the respective parts effectively in a quick simple low cost or otherwise improved manner. For example the back panel or any other part of the capture station could be formed by milling punching filing or cutting the respective parts of the chassis out of a solid material such as a solid plastic material. It also should be understood that the chassis could be made using materials of biological or metallic origin that possess the desired mechanical qualities. Details of the above described materials and the manufacturing methods are well known to those skilled in the plastics and materials arts and are not disclosed herein in detail.

In addition although not illustrated in or in those skilled in the art will appreciate that in at least some embodiment of the invention the back panel could be modified to permit one or more electrical connections to be routed therethrough e.g. to connectors on the back top or bottom thereof of the back panel instead of running connections through the legs via the front panel as described further herein . In addition it will be well understood that many different designs for the back panels can be provided to serve as a covering provide ventilation and or provide a different ornamental appearance e.g. straight or angled instead of curved textured etc . Examples of other embodiments of a back panel that we have prepared include for example the back panels shown in B D B B B B B B B and B herein but these examples are not of course limiting The back panels in any of the illustrated embodiments can of course be adapted to a capture station having one or more legs . We envision that many designs are possible in accordance with the invention.

The optional image capture aid is a designated area on the capture station where a subject can look as the subject s image is being captured i.e. a look here button . The image capture aid by providing a consistent place of subjects to look can help to ensure consistency of image quality. In this embodiment the image capture aid is a circular colored portion formed in the bottom of the front panel of the housing of the capture station . Of course the illustrated type of image capture aid is not limiting. The image capture aid can for example be an illuminated area a mirror permitting an applicant to check his or appearance a graphic design etc. and can have virtually any appearance. Of course the capture station need not be provided with an image capture aid and other illustrated embodiments herein do not necessarily include an image capture aid .

Many different designs for the front panel can be provided in accordance with the invention to serve as a covering provide ventilation and or provide a different ornamental appearance e.g. straight or angled instead of curved textured etc . Examples of other embodiments of a front panel that we have prepared include for example the front panels shown in A C A A A A A A A and A herein but these examples are not of course limiting The front panel can be manufactured using similar manufacturing methods and materials similar to the materials suitable for making the back panel although the front and back panels need not be manufactured from the same material or in the same way.

The top housing mounting chassis the imaging device mounting bracket and the lighting device mounting bracket can be manufactured using similar manufacturing methods and materials similar to the materials suitable for making the back panel although the top housing mounting chassis the imaging device mounting bracket and the lighting device mounting bracket need not be manufactured from the same material or in the same way. In a preferred embodiment the top housing mounting chassis the imaging device mounting bracket and the lighting device mounting bracket are made from aluminum.

In one embodiment we have used for the imaging device a charge control device CCD solid state digital camera having 4 megapixel resolution of course the resolution can vary depending on the desired image quality . Digital cameras capable of this type of image resolution are available from many different sources such as Kodak Canon Nikon Olympus etc.

The flash unit B is an industrial or studio quality flash internal unit that preferably is designed to have a long life e.g. a life expectancy of over 250 000 exposures compared to 3000 10 000 or fewer for a some conventional internal consumer quality flash units . Studio quality flash units can be obtained from many different sources such as Olympus America Inc. of Melville N.Y. Vivitar USA of Oxnard Calif. Minolta Corporation of Ramsey N.J. etc. As shown in the flash unit cover includes a flash lens that works in cooperation with the flash unit .

The flash lens is a flash cover designed to ensure proper illumination to help reduce subject squinting and bright spots. In one embodiment the flash lens is made from a material having a transparency or translucency sufficient to permit the lighting device to properly illuminate the subject. Suitable materials for the flash lens include glass and plastic along with any other material having the requisite transparency or translucency. In one embodiment the flash lens is a Fresnel lens and can be used with the flash unit to improve light illumination of a subject. Advantageously such a Fresnel lens can have a rear face that is sufficiently roughened to permit the Fresnel lens to also provide diffusion of the flash when illuminating a subject. Roughened Fresnel lenses can be obtained from many different sources including Kupo Company Ltd of Taipei Taiwan. Other devices for directing light such as diffusers also can be used as a light directing device in at least some embodiments of the invention.

The computer cover is a structure sized to house a computer or other computing device not shown and also to enclose at least some of the connection cables and wires routed through the legs to be operably connected to the computer and or other devices. The computer cover includes at least one ventilation hole the number and style of ventilation holes will of course depend on the power dissipation of the computer and a computer cover opening . The computer cover opening can in one embodiment be covered by a removable or fixed cover not shown which cover may include one or more connectors for communicating with the computer and or other capture station elements .

The embodiment of the capture station of can help to perform some or all of these functions. For example we can provide a fingerprint scanner to capture biometric information such as fingerprints a signature capture device to capture a subject s signature and a magnetic strip reader to read a magnetic strip e.g. if a subject is paying for the application document by credit or debit card . A keypad can be used to enter information about a subject such as demographic data. A printer can also be provided the printer can be a type suitable for printing an identification card itself whether temporary or permanent a receipt and or other records. A compact display can also be provided this display can be used for many purposes such as conducting an eye test of an subject displaying to a subject a replica of the subject s captured image so that the subject can determine if the image is acceptable displaying recorded information to a subject giving a test e.g. a written driving test to a subject etc. The display also can be used by an operator of the capture station . Even a mirror not shown could be coupled to the leg to enable a subject to check his or her appearance.

For peripheral devices requiring power and or connections to a computer or other device the requisite connections can if desired be routed through the legs in the manner of routing the other connections. Such connections could also of course be outside the leg. We also anticipate in many instances that wireless and or battery powered peripherals can be used to help reduce physical connections.

The positioning and arrangement of peripherals on the legs can be varied depending on factors such as the weight of the peripheral its size and where it will be best utilized by a subject or operator. For example it may be preferable to place a signature pad and biometric scanner at heights and orientations that enable ease of use by subjects of a variety of heights.

Many other types of peripherals can be coupled to the legs as those skilled in the art will appreciate and the listing of peripherals here and those shown in are intended to be illustrative and not exhaustive. Further many different manufacturers of such peripherals exist and are usable with the invention provided the peripheral can be appropriately coupled to the leg whether by itself or via a clamp plate strap screw bolt hook rivet nail latch hinge lock etc. . We presume that those skilled in the art are familiar with the manufacturers of such peripherals and they are not listed here. In addition as those skilled in the art will recognize the method of coupling to the leg will depend on the device itself and the configuration of the leg. We also anticipate that certain relatively flat or slip peripherals e.g. displays signature pads etc. could instead be made to snap or hinge off of the base cover rather than the legs .

The all in one capture station communicates with other computing devices via a network . Other networked devices include operator workstations e.g. which each share the all in one capture from the operator perspective. Additional networked devices include a local server which stores data for local enrollment transactions a central image server which stores images and related applicant demographic and biometric data in files and a legacy system which generally refers to the identification document issuer s data processing system that manages applicant processing and applicant information. For instance in the example document creation process outlined below the legacy system stores applicant demographic information and is either polled by the workstation to get requested applicant data or pushes the appropriate applicant data to the local server and or workstation. This applicant data is then used to generate or renew identification documents in enrollment transactions performed in the workstations.

In a typical configuration one or more workstations are connected to the all in one capture station via a network connection. Users of the workstations log on to the their systems which include capture control software and BSD socket network communication software compatible with the all in one capture station. These users can enter or select any of a variety of commands via a capture station user interface. In response the socket interface packages these commands into packets and sends them to the counterpart socket interface on the all in one capture station computer. An example of the enrollment process will help illustrate the operation of the workstation and its interface with the all in one capture station.

The enrollment process begins when the operator logs onto the workstation . This may include biometric verification of the operator through a fingerprint capture station e.g. either connected to the workstation or the all in one capture station .

At this stage an enrollment application program including a user interface and variety of modules for controlling capture and communication with other networked devices are executing within memory of the workstation.

The user interface provides an input text box for entering a transaction identifier. This transaction identifier identifies the applicant to the system. The operator enters this transaction identifier as shown in step .

In response the enrollment program fetches demographic data of the applicant associated with the identifier assuming this is a previously enrolled applicant . In particular it queries the legacy system through a legacy system interface module which looks up the demographic data associated with the identifier and returns it to the workstation. As noted this demographic data may be pre loaded onto the workstation or local server via a data polling or data push model in which transaction identifiers for planned enrollment transactions are used to pre load the demographic data of applicants. This process of course is skipped for new applicants for whom no demographic data exists in the system.

Next the workstation fetches a file including the applicant s portrait and other applicant information e.g. signature fingerprint etc. from a central image server through a image server interface. The user interface then populates a display window with the applicant s picture and demographic information if available .

The workstation operator is now ready to capture the applicant s portrait. The operator has the applicant sit in front of the camera of the all in one capture station. The enrollment software in the workstation prepares the camera in the all in one capture station via the network interface between the workstation and capture station. When the enrollment program calls cameral control functions in the camera programming interface it identifies the destination all in one capture station. This interface in turn sets up a socket connection with its counterpart on the all in one capture station. Once this communication link is established the workstation controls the camera in the all in one capture device via the network interface. The camera feeds video back to camera control software on the capture station which in turn forwards it back to the enrollment program on the workstation via the socket. The workstation s user interface then displays the live video from the camera in a window next to a collection of windows text boxes displaying applicant s old portrait and other demographic information.

Next the operator has the ability to capture a particular image via an input control on the workstation . In this example the operator presses the spacebar to capture the applicant s portrait. The camera module then captures a single frame from the video feed and passes it to the enrollment program which displays it in the window which previously showed the live video feed. Alternatively still image capture of the applicant photo and the video feed of the applicant are performed separately and the data and commands for video and still image capture are communicated separately. The video feed enables the operator to view the applicant and compare the applicant with any photos on file for that applicant. It also enables the operator to ensure that the applicant is in the correct position before capturing a still image for use in the identification document.

This process of image capture can be repeated if necessary. As shown in the enrollment program and specifically its camera control module in the workstation controls the process of setting up a connection with the capture device returning video and finally capturing a single portrait through the network interface and the camera control module executing in the all in one capture station.

The enrollment process then repeats a similar procedure to capture the applicant s signature and fingerprint . In particular a signature module on the workstation receives a request from the enrollment program to capture a signature . In response it sets up the socket interface and passes the request to the signature module on the all in one capture station which captures the signature and returns it via the socket to the enrollment program on the workstation.

The fingerprint module on the workstation receives a request from the enrollment program to capture a fingerprint . In response it sets up the socket interface and passes the request to the fingerprint capture module on the all in one capture station which captures the fingerprint and returns it via the socket to the enrollment program on the workstation.

Now that the enrollment program has captured all of the data for the identification card it sends a request to a rendering program to render and print the card . The rendering program packages and transforms the data including the photo signature and possibly the fingerprint into a printable image format. This may include invoking still other programs to generate various machine readable features such as 2D bar code and digital watermark e.g. for embedding in the card s photo and background and return printable versions of these features. Ultimately the rendering program issues a request to the printer driver of an over the counter card printer to print the card.

The operator then gives the card to the applicant for inspection and verification of the accuracy of the data. If it s accurate and complete the operator initiates a series of steps to complete the enrollment process. These include for example scanning the card with an image reader to capture an image record of the card and to extract machine readable data from the card such as the 2D bar code and digital watermark.

At this point the enrollment program writes a new image file with the card portrait and related information e.g. bar code signature fingerprint etc. as shown in step . It then uploads the file to the central image server via a image server interface . Now that the enrollment transaction is complete it also update s the issuer s legacy system with the demographic and other card transaction information . The workstation now gets ready for the next applicant e.g. by destroying data structures created in the enrollment process and initializing new ones etc. .

While we have used a specific example to illustrate the operation of the all in one capture station the actual enrollment process can vary significantly. Cards need not be issued over the counter but instead can be issued from a central location where cards are printed and mailed. The capture station uses a socket interface but other forms of network interfaces may be used.

The capture station has been described in network operation mode but it can also operate in a stand alone mode. As noted the operator can simply plug in a video display and keyboard and then operate the capture station as a self contained card enrollment and issuing system. Alternatively the capture station can be controlled by a portable computing device such as a Pocket PC PDA or PC tablet via a wireless connection.

There are a variety of alternative ways to implement the enrollment program and its interface. One way is to implement the user interface of the enrollment program as a collection of web pages and the core software and modules of the enrollment process as a web server application program such as an Apache web server. In one particular embodiment for the all in one capture station this web server executes on the all in one capture station. The web page interface e.g. HTML coding executes in a browser session all running on a client device such as a portable computer PDA or PC tablet connected via wireless e.g. 802.11 or wired network connection to the all in one capture station.

In capture station embodiments described above the capture devices are accessed via a network connection Ethernet for example rather than being directly attached to the computer through an interface such as a serial USB parallel SCSI PCMCIA or FireWire interface to name a few. One advantage of the network accessible devices is that a workstation can attach to any capture device in an office providing more flexibility and reliability in the office environment.

One possible design of these capture systems is to have all of the capture actions controlled directly by a separate workstation computer connected to the networked capture station. In this design model all captured images are initially downloaded to the separate enrollment workstation computer for printing or later transfer to a central image server or central image store.

The network camera tower described above includes the ability to network many traditional peripherals as noted above through the camera tower via a network link to multiple workstations. This basic system uses the same design model of transferring all images to the workstation before being uploaded to a central image server or central image store.

Another approach is to execute an application on the capture station that provides external workstations including notebook computers palm computers PDA tablet etc. a pure web based interface to the capture device. In this approach the only data transferred from the camera tower to the attached enrollment workstation in normal operation is the normally low resolution preview images of the captured images. The high resolution images are stored temporarily within the storage of the camera tower itself. Web forms provided by the capture system permit any attached device to upload any necessary text image and demographic information to the camera tower for association with the newly captured record. For security reasons none of the newly captured high resolution images are transferred to the attached enrollment workstation or web based computer.

In this model the captured images are combined with demographics uploaded from the web based workstation and the group of files or combined archive files are transferred directly from the networked camera tower to one or more central image storage locations. The transfers would be configurable to be via any of a number of commonly used network transport agents including but not limited to 

This model of capture allows an insecure capture station to perform all of the tasks necessary to capture identification information while never having access to the actual identification information. Lower cost thin client and palm based capture solutions implementing secure transfers become possible. Additionally the captured information can be transferred securely encrypted to multiple destinations without enrollment workstation intervention for higher reliability and redundancy.

In this model the capture system has three principal components 1. enrollment workstation 2. capture station and 3. secure data repository or server secure data system . The enrollment workstation and capture station communicate via a first communication channel. The capture station and secure data system communicate via a second communication channel which is preferably a secure channel.

The first channel need not be secure. It provides a communication channel for the enrollment workstation to send a limited set of commands to the capture station in response to enrollment operator input. The data from the enrollment workstation to the capture station is limited to basic commands such as take a picture send a preview of the picture and send data to the secure data system . The data sent from the capture station to the enrollment workstation is limited such that secure applicant data such as the high resolution images captured of an applicant s face fingerprint iris retinal scan etc. is not sent to nor available to the enrollment workstation. Instead only limited data needed to facilitate accurate capture is sent from the capture station to the enrollment workstation such as a low resolution facial image of the applicant e.g. the preview image .

To reduce opportunities for interference with the secure channel the capture station is configured such that enrollment workstations are only allowed to connect to it through restricted ports e.g. ports that only allow access from authenticated enrollment workstations . A firewall may be implemented on the capture station to prevent unrestricted access and unauthorized data transfer between the enrollment and capture stations. Further bio logins and password restricted access may be used to limit access to the capture station.

The secure data captured from an applicant facial and other biometric data is temporarily stored on the capture station in a secure format. In particular it is stored in an encrypted and digitally signed format according to cryptographic protocols such as PKI 3DES or AES. This applicant data is removed after it is sent to the secure data system. Preferably the data is removed from temporary storage on the capture station after it is sent to the secure data system and a confirmation is received from the secure data system indicating that the data has been received and authenticated as being from a valid source and as being unmodified. Digital certificates and signatures may be used to authenticate the source and data integrity respectively.

The communication channel between the secure data system and the capture station is secure. Secure data objects such as facial images biometric information and other applicant data are encrypted and digitally signed. They are sent over a network connection via secure email protocol encrypted and digitally signed secure FTP e.g. including encrypted and digitally signed file and or using secure protocols like SSH secure sockets etc.

Both the first and second communication channels may be implemented using web services interface a Citrix portal XML RPC etc. As noted above the capture station can execute a web server that communicates with a thin client on the enrollment workstation. In this case the web server controls the interface establishing the limited control commands that the enrollment client can issue to the web server and the limited data e.g. low resolution preview image returned from the capture station to the enrollment client. Layers of security can be added to each communication channel as desired by using secure protocols like SSH secure sockets etc.

The secure data system can be implemented in a variety of configurations. In one configuration it includes an image repository on a server. The server could be local to the enrollment workstation e.g. on a LAN or it can be remote e.g. connected via WAN Internet connection . It may be comprised of several devices for redundancy or for storing different aspects of the application data e.g. different fingerprint facial image and signature databases . The capture station can be programmed to send the applicant data to multiple destinations e.g. via secure email or FTP . Preferably a transaction log of the secure data transmissions is kept by the capture station and secure data system. Suspicious transactions e.g. ones involving failed login attempts or suspicious patterns of data transmission can be flagged for operator investigation e.g. by identifying the FTP file transfers or emails that are suspect through an email of transmission events to a security administrator.

The secure data system processes the incoming secure objects. In one implementation it is implemented as a Daemon Unix process executing on the image server. The image server receives incoming secure data objects and stores them in a directory. The objects are queued for handling by the Daemon. The Daemon authenticates the objects by checking their data integrity and source via the encryption protocol which includes a digital signature of the data object. Once the validity of the data object and its source is confirmed the server sends a confirmation receipt back to the enrollment workstation which in response removes the data object from its temporary storage.

We have also developed numerous other configurations and designs of the capture station that can be adapted to work with the functions described herein. as well as illustrate just a few of our designs. are front and back perspective views respectively of a capture station in accordance with a fifth embodiment of the invention. are front and back perspective views respectively of a capture station in accordance with a sixth embodiment of the invention. are front side and top views respectively of a seventh embodiment of the invention. are front side and top views respectively of an eighth embodiment of the invention. are front side and top views respectively of a ninth embodiment of the invention. are front side and top views respectively of a tenth embodiment of the invention. are front side and top views respectively of a eleventh embodiment of the invention. are front side and top views respectively of a twelfth embodiment of the invention.

Having described and illustrated the principles of the technology with reference to specific implementations it will be recognized that the technology can be implemented in many other different forms and in many different environments.

The technology disclosed herein can be used in combination with other technologies. Also instead of ID documents the inventive techniques can be employed with product tags product packaging labels business cards bags charts smart cards maps labels etc. etc. The term ID document is broadly defined herein to include these tags maps labels packaging cards etc.

It should be appreciated that while illustrates a particular species of ID document a driver s license the present invention is not so limited. Indeed our inventive methods and techniques apply generally to all identification documents defined above. Moreover our techniques are applicable to non ID documents e.g. such as printing or forming covert images on physical objects holograms etc. etc. Further instead of ID documents the inventive techniques can be employed with product tags product packaging business cards bags charts maps labels etc. etc. particularly those items including providing a non visible indicia such as an image information on an over laminate structure. The term ID document is broadly defined herein to include these tags labels packaging cards etc. In addition while some of the examples above are disclosed with specific core components it is noted that laminates can be sensitized for use with other core components. For example it is contemplated that aspects of the invention may have applicability for articles and devices such as compact disks consumer products knobs keyboards electronic components decorative or ornamental articles promotional items currency bank notes checks etc. or any other suitable items or articles that may record information images and or other data which may be associated with a function and or an object or other entity to be identified.

It should be understood that while our some of our detailed embodiments described herein use UV inks and or dyes by way of example the present invention is not so limited. Our inventive techniques and methods will improve the visibility and crispness of infrared and other fluorescing images as well. The inventive techniques and methods can improve the visibility and crispness of thermachromic inks and resins i.e. inks and resins whose appearance changes and or becomes visible with temperature changes . Moreover our inventive techniques are useful for preprocessing images destined for ID documents using various printing processes including but not limited to dye infusion mass transfer laser xerography ink jet wax transfer variable dot transfer and other printing methods by which a fluorescing image can be formed.

It should be appreciated that the methods described above as well as the methods for implementing and embedding digital watermarks can be carried out on a general purpose computer. These methods can of course be implemented using software hardware or a combination of hardware and software. Systems and methods in accordance with the invention can be implemented using any type of general purpose computer system such as a personal computer PC laptop computer server workstation personal digital assistant PDA mobile communications device interconnected group of general purpose computers and the like running any one of a variety of operating systems. We note that some image handling software such as Adobe s PrintShop as well as image adaptive software such as LEADTOOLS which provide a library of image processing functions and which is available from LEAD Technologies Inc. of Charlotte N.C. can be used to facilitate these methods including steps such as providing enhanced contrast converting from a color image to a monochromatic image thickening of an edge dithering registration etc. An edge detection algorithm may also be incorporated with or used in concert with such software. Computer executable software can be stored on a computer readable media such as a diskette removable media DVD CD hard drive electronic memory circuit etc. .

It should be understood that in the Figures of this application in some instances a plurality of system elements or method steps may be shown as illustrative of a particular system element and a single system element or method step may be shown as illustrative of a plurality of a particular systems elements or method steps. It should be understood that showing a plurality of a particular element or step is not intended to imply that a system or method implemented in accordance with the invention must comprise more than one of that element or step nor is it intended by illustrating a single element or step that the invention is limited to embodiments having only a single one of that respective elements or steps. In addition the total number of elements or steps shown for a particular system element or method is not intended to be limiting those skilled in the art will recognize that the number of a particular system element or method steps can in some instances be selected to accommodate the particular user needs.

To provide a comprehensive disclosure without unduly lengthening the specification applicants hereby incorporate by reference each of the U.S. patent documents referenced herein.

The technology and solutions disclosed herein have made use of elements and techniques known from the cited documents. Other elements and techniques from the cited documents can similarly be combined to yield further implementations within the scope of the present invention. Thus for example single bit watermarking can be substituted for multi bit watermarking technology described as using imperceptible watermarks or encoding can alternatively be practiced using visible watermarks glyphs etc. or other encoding local scaling of watermark energy can be provided to enhance watermark signal to noise ratio without increasing human perceptibility various filtering operations can be employed to serve the functions explained in the prior art watermarks can include subliminal graticules to aid in image re registration encoding may proceed at the granularity of a single pixel or DCT coefficient or may similarly treat adjoining groups of pixels or DCT coefficients the encoding can be optimized to withstand expected forms of content corruption etc.

Thus the exemplary embodiments are only selected samples of the solutions available by combining the teachings referenced above. The other solutions necessarily are not exhaustively described herein but are fairly within the understanding of an artisan given the foregoing disclosure and familiarity with the cited art. The particular combinations of elements and features in the above detailed embodiments are exemplary only the interchanging and substitution of these teachings with other teachings in this and the incorporated by reference patent documents are also expressly contemplated.

In describing the embodiments of the invention illustrated in the figures specific terminology is used for the sake of clarity. However the invention is not limited to the specific terms so selected and each specific term at least includes all technical and functional equivalents that operate in a similar manner to accomplish a similar purpose.

