---

title: Sampling system for moving fluid
abstract: A system for sampling a moving fluid utilizes a housing in the shape of an airfoil having a leading edge adapted to be disposed in the moving fluid such that the moving fluid will initially encounter the leading edge. A fluid flow pathway extends through the airfoil. One or more sampling ports are formed in the airfoil on the airfoil's high pressure side. Each sampling port is in fluid communication with the fluid flow pathway. The system can also have one or more control ports formed on the low pressure side of the airfoil. Each control port is in fluid communication with the fluid flow pathway. The housing can be mounted to experience two rotational degrees of freedom, and can have an aerodynamic tail assembly coupled thereto.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07111521&OS=07111521&RS=07111521
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07111521
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050519
---
The invention described herein was made in the performance of official duties by an employee of the Department of the Navy and may be manufactured used licensed by or for the Government for any governmental purpose without payment of any royalties thereon.

The invention relates generally to the sampling of moving fluids such as moving airflows and more particularly to a sampling system that extracts samples of a moving fluid passing thereover.

Moving fluids such as airflows frequently must be sampled for a variety of flow monitoring applications. A typical sampling system utilizes a housing having i one or more inlets or ports formed therein and ii a fan in the housing for drawing fluid moving over the housing into the ports. For relatively steady state external flows this type of sampling system is adequate as the system can be designed for appropriate fan power consumption and fan speeds to actualize the expected fluid flow speeds. However if the fluid flow speed increases beyond the design parameters the Bernoulli effect at the housing s ports causes backpressure to develop in the housing. The higher backpressure in the housing prevents the moving fluid from efficiently entering the sampling ports unless the fan speed can be increased sufficiently to overcome the backpressure. As fluid flow speeds increase the fan can eventually overheat and fail.

Accordingly it is an object of the present invention to provide an inlet system for sampling a moving fluid.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a system that can efficiently sample a moving fluid at a variety of fluid flow speeds.

Other objects and advantages of the present invention will become more obvious hereinafter in the specification and drawings.

A system for sampling a moving fluid utilizes a housing in the shape of an airfoil having a leading edge adapted to be disposed in the moving fluid such that the moving fluid will initially encounter the leading edge of the airfoil. As a result a high pressure side and a low pressure side of the airfoil are established. The housing further has a fluid flow pathway defined therein that starts near the leading edge and extends through the airfoil. At a minimum one or more sampling ports are formed in the airfoil on the high pressure side. Each sampling port is in fluid communication with the fluid flow pathway.

The system can also have one or more control ports formed on the low pressure side of the airfoil aft of the leading edge thereof. Each control port is in fluid communication with the fluid flow pathway. Still further the housing can be mounted such that it is permitted to experience two rotational degrees of freedom. An aerodynamic tail assembly can also be coupled to the housing such that when it is disposed in the moving fluid the tail assembly interacts with the moving fluid and causes the housing to rotate about it s mounting. As a result the leading edge of the airfoil is always positioned to initially encounter the moving fluid for all moving fluid speeds and directions.

Referring now to the drawings and more particularly to a moving fluid flow sampling system in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention is shown and is referenced generally by numeral . In general sampling system can be used in any moving fluid environment to include liquids and gases. However by way of example the present invention will be described for use in a moving air environment.

Sampling system utilizes an airfoil shaped housing that is placed in a moving airflow represented by flow lines where the arrow heads indicate flow direction. While system could utilize a variety of airfoil shapes the shape of housing should be such that when the leading edge A of airfoil shaped housing is positioned such that it is the first part of housing to encounter moving airflow a pressure differential is established with a pressure Pon one side e.g. the top of housing being greater than a pressure Pon the other side e.g. the bottom . At a position aft of leading edge A where the pressure differential P Pis developed at least one port e.g. one is shown is formed in housing that communicates or opens to a pathway formed in and through housing . The exact location of port is a design parameter predicated on the geometries of housing and port . In general pathway is a non tortuous pathway that begins with port extends to a collection zone located aft of leading edge A.

In operation as moving airflow encounters leading edge A and flows over housing such that the pressure differential P Pdevelops a portion of airflow will enter port in accordance with Bernoulli s Law and flow through pathway towards collection zone . One or more sensors and or measurement equipment not shown can be provided in collection zone .

Sampling system can be designed for a relatively small range of airflow speeds by judicious selection of the airfoil shape of housing and or the size number of ports . However in applications where the speed of moving airflow could vary beyond such design specifications sampling system can be provided with elements that allow it to adapt to speed variations. For example one or more control ports e.g. only one is shown can be provided on the low pressure side i.e. on the Pside of airfoil shaped housing aft of leading edge A and typically aft of sampling port . Port is open to pathway such that airflow in pathway is always kept moving towards collection zone regardless of the speed of airflow at leading edge A.

For even greater control and adaptability one or both of ports and could be adjustable in size e.g. movable doors represented by dashed lines A and A respectively could be provided so that more or less air is admitted to pathway . The size adjustment of port and or port can be controlled passively e.g. spring loaded doors A and A designed to open close by an amount based on speeds of airflow or actively e.g. a feedback system utilizing one or more sensors mounted along pathway where the outputs of the sensors are supplied to controllers that control the amount of opening closing of doors A and A .

Another embodiment of the present invention is illustrated in where sampling system includes the afore described elements of system and further includes a mounting coupled to airfoil shaped housing . More specifically mounting is fixed at A to some rigid structure not shown and is rotatably coupled to housing at B such that housing is free to experience two rotational degrees of freedom. That is mounting allows housing to rotate in azimuth thereabout as indicated by arrow while simultaneously being able to pivot up or down through polar angles as indicated by arrow . In this way housing can adapt to changing directions of moving airflow such that i leading edge A can always be positioned as the initial point of impact and ii P P.

In general the size adjustment of port and or port is used to keep sampled portions of airflow moving towards collection zone . To further assure the movement of sampled air through pathway towards collection zone a fan could be provided at collection zone . Note that since ports and are used to prevent any backpressure from developing in pathway fan could typically be a relatively low power device.

The present invention can further be adapted such that it will passively and automatically position itself optimally in a moving airflow that is also changeable in terms of its direction. For example sampling system illustrated in includes the afore described elements of system and further includes an aerodynamic tail assembly added to housing . The design of aerodynamic tail assembly should be such that the forces of moving airflow acting thereon control the two rotational degrees of freedom provided by mounting in order to optimally position leading edge A relative to moving airflow for the establishment of the pressure differential P P. The particular design of tail assembly would be well known in the art of aerodynamics and is not a limitation of the present invention.

The advantages of the present invention are numerous. For example the backpressure problem associated with existing sampling systems is virtually eliminated. The present sampling system is readily configured to operate in fluid flows experiencing changing flow speeds and flow directions. Such operation can be passive in nature thereby making the present invention robust as well as cost effective.

Although the invention has been described relative to a specific embodiment thereof there are numerous variations and modifications that will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art in light of the above teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced other than as specifically described.

