---

title: Human monoclonal antibodies against CD20
abstract: Isolated human monoclonal antibodies which bind to and inhibit human CD20, and related antibody-based compositions and molecules, are disclosed. Also disclosed are pharmaceutical compositions comprising the human antibodies, and therapeutic and diagnostic methods for using the human antibodies.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07850962&OS=07850962&RS=07850962
owner: Genmab A/S
number: 07850962
owner_city: Copenhagen-K
owner_country: DK
publication_date: 20050420
---
This application is the U.S. National Stage of International Application No. PCT DK2005 000270 filed Apr. 20 2005 published in English and claims priority under 35U.S.C. 119 or 365 to Denmark Application No. PA 2004 00627 filed Apr. 20 2004.

The CD20 molecule also called human B lymphocyte restricted differentiation antigen or Bp35 is a hydrophobic transmembrane protein with a molecular weight of approximately 35 kD located on pre B and mature B lymphocytes Valentine et al. 1989 264 19 11282 11287 and Einfield et al. 1988 7 3 711 717 . CD20 is found on the surface of greater than 90 of B cells from peripheral blood or lymphoid organs and is expressed during early pre B cell development and remains until plasma cell differentiation. CD20 is present on both normal B cells as well as malignant B cells. In particular CD20 is expressed on greater than 90 of B cell non Hodgkin s lymphomas NHL Anderson et al. 1984 63 6 1424 1433 but is not found on hematopoietic stem cells pro B cells normal plasma cells or other normal tissues Tedder et al. 1985 135 2 973 979 .

The 85 amino acid carboxyl terminal region of the CD20 protein is located within the cytoplasm. The length of this region contrasts with that of other B cell specific surface structures such as IgM IgD and IgG heavy chains or histocompatibility antigens class II or chains which have relatively short intracytoplasmic regions of 3 3 28 15 and 16 amino acids respectively Komaromy et al. 1983 11 6775 6785 . Of the last 61 carboxyl terminal amino acids 21 are acidic residues whereas only 2 are basic indicating that this region has a strong net negative charge. The GenBank Accession No. is NP690605.

It is thought that CD20 might be involved in regulating an early step s in the activation and differentiation process of B cells Tedder et al. 1986 16 881 887 and could function as a calcium ion channel Tedder et al. 1990 14D 195 .

Despite uncertainty about the actual function of CD20 in promoting proliferation and or differentiation of B cells it provides an important target for antibody mediated therapy to control or kill B cells involved in cancers and autoimmune disorders. In particular the expression of CD20 on tumor cells e.g. NHL makes it an important target for antibody mediated therapy to specifically target therapeutic agents against CD20 positive neoplastic cells. However while the results obtained to date clearly establish CD20 as a useful target for immunotherapy they also show that currently available murine and chimeric antibodies do not constitute ideal therapeutic agents.

Accordingly the need exists for improved therapeutic antibodies against CD20 which are effective in preventing and or treating a range of diseases involving cells expressing CD20.

The present invention provides a human monoclonal antibody which specifically binds to human CD20 and which comprises a heavy chain variable region and a light chain variable region wherein the heavy chain variable region contains the VCDR3 of SEQ ID NO 10.

In one embodiment the human monoclonal antibody comprises the VCDR1 of SEQ ID NO 8 the VCDR2 of SEQ ID NO 9 and the VCDR3 of SEQ ID NO 10.

In one embodiment the invention provides a human monoclonal antibody which specifically binds to human CD20 and which comprises the Vregion of SEQ ID NO 2 or a Vregion which is at least 90 homologous preferably at least 95 homologous and more preferably at least 98 homologous or at least 99 homologous to the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 2.

In one embodiment the human monoclonal antibody as disclosed in any of the above embodiments comprises

In one embodiment the human monoclonal antibody is an IgG1 or IgM antibody e.g. an IgG1 or IgM antibody.

In one embodiment the human monoclonal antibody is encoded by human heavy chain nucleic acids and human kappa light chain nucleic acids comprising variable heavy chain nucleotide sequence SEQ ID NO 1 and variable light chain nucleotide sequence SEQ ID NO 3 or SEQ ID NO 6 or conservative sequence modifications thereof.

In one embodiment the human monoclonal antibody is an antibody fragment a single chain antibody or a binding domain immunoglobulin fusion protein comprising i a binding domain polypeptide in the form of a heavy chain variable region as defined in SEQ ID NO 2 or a light chain variable region as defined in SEQ ID NOs 4 5 or 7 that is fused to an immunoglobulin hinge region polypeptide ii an immunoglobulin heavy chain CH2 constant region fused to the hinge region and iii an immunoglobulin heavy chain CH3 constant region fused to the CH2 constant region.

In one embodiment the invention relates to a human monoclonal antibody which specifically binds to human CD20 and which comprises a heavy chain variable region derived from human germline sequence V3 20 and a light chain variable region derived from human germline sequence V III L6 or V I L15.

In one embodiment the human monoclonal antibody as defined in any of the embodiments above does not bind to CD20 which has been mutated at positions 163 or 166. More particularly the human antibody does not bind to human CD20 mutants N163D or N166D.

In one embodiment the human monoclonal antibody as defined in any of the embodiments above binds to a discontinuous epitope on CD20 wherein the epitope has part of the first small extracellular loop and part of the second extracellular loop.

In one embodiment the invention relates to a hybridoma which produces a human monoclonal antibody against CD20 encoded by human heavy chain and human light chain nucleic acids comprising nucleotide sequences in their variable heavy chain region as set forth in SEQ ID NO 1 and nucleotide sequences in their variable light chain region as set forth in SEQ ID NO 3 or SEQ ID NO 6 respectively or conservative sequence modifications thereof.

In one embodiment the invention relates to a hybridoma which produces a human monoclonal against CD20 having human heavy chain and light chain variable regions which comprise the human heavy chain variable amino acid sequence as set forth in SEQ ID NO 2 and the human light chain variable amino sequence as set forth in SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 5 or SEQ ID NO 7 respectively or conservative sequence modifications thereof.

In one embodiment the invention relates to a transfectoma which produces a human monoclonal antibody against CD20 encoded by human heavy chain variable nucleic acids as set forth in SEQ ID NO 1 and human light chain nucleic acids as set forth SEQ ID NO 3 or SEQ ID NO 6 or conservative sequence modifications thereof.

In one embodiment the invention relates to a transfectoma which produces a human monoclonal antibody against CD20 having human heavy chain and light chain variable regions which comprise the human heavy chain variable amino acid sequence as set forth in SEQ ID NO 2 and the human light chain variable amino sequence as set forth in SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 5 or SEQ ID NO 7 respectively or conservative sequence modifications thereof.

In one embodiment the invention relates to a eukaryotic or prokaryotic host cell which produces a human monoclonal antibody as disclosed in any of the above embodiments and conservative sequence modifications thereof.

In one embodiment the invention relates to a pharmaceutical composition comprising the human monoclonal antibody of the invention and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.

In one embodiment the pharmaceutical composition may comprise one or more further therapeutic agents.

In one embodiment the antibody of the invention can further comprising a chelator linker for attaching a radioisotope.

In one embodiment the invention relates to an immunoconjugate comprising the human monoclonal antibody of the invention linked to a cytotoxic agent a radioisotope or a drug.

In one embodiment the immunoconjugate comprises a monomeric IgM antibody according to the invention linked to a cytotoxic agent a radioisotope or a drug.

In one embodiment the invention relates to a bispecific molecule comprising an antibody of the invention and a binding specificity for a human effector cell e.g. a binding specificity for a human Fc receptor or a binding specificity for a T cell receptor such as CD3.

In one embodiment the invention relates to a method of treating or preventing a disease or disorder involving cells expressing CD20 comprising administering to a subject a human monoclonal antibody a pharmaceutical composition immunoconjugate or bispecific molecule or an expression vector of the invention in an amount effective to treat or prevent the disease or disorder. Such methods which also include administering one or more further therapeutic agents to the subject are disclosed in further details in the following sections.

In one embodiment the invention relates to an in vitro method for detecting the presence of CD20 antigen or a cell expressing CD20 in a sample comprising 

contacting the sample with the antibody of the invention under conditions that allow for formation of a complex between the antibody and CD20 and

In one embodiment the invention relates to a kit for detecting the presence of CD20 antigen or a cell expressing CD20 in a sample comprising the antibody of the invention.

In one embodiment the invention relates to an in vivo method for detecting CD20 antigen or a cell expressing CD20 in an subject comprising 

administering the antibody of the invention under conditions that allow for formation of a complex between the antibody and CD20 and

In one embodiment the invention relates to an expression vector comprising a heavy chain nucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO 1 the variable region of a light chain nucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO 3 or SEQ ID NO 6 or both the variable region of the heavy chain nucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO 1 and the variable region of the light chain nucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO 3 or SEQ ID NO 6 or conservative modifications thereof.

In one embodiment the expression vector further comprises a nucleotide sequence encoding the constant region of a light chain heavy chain or both light and heavy chains of a human antibody which binds to human CD20.

In one embodiment the invention relates to an expression vector comprising a nucleotide sequence encoding a heavy chain variable region comprising an amino acid sequence as set forth in SEQ ID NO 2 and a nucleotide sequence encoding a light chain variable region comprising an amino acid sequence as set forth in SEQ ID NO 4 SEQ ID NO 5 or SEQ ID NO 7 or conservative modifications thereof.

In one embodiment the invention relates to a pharmaceutical composition comprising the expression vector as disclosed in any of the above embodiments and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.

In one embodiment the invention relates to an anti idiotypic antibody binding to an antibody of the invention e.g. 2C6 IgG1 and use of such anti idiotypic antibodies for detecting the level of human monoclonal antibody against CD20 in a sample.

Anti idiotypic antibodies can be produced by immunizing Balb C mice with an antibody of the invention e.g. 2C6 IgG1 and generating hybridomas from spleens of these mice by fusion with NS1 myeloma cells using standard techniques. The anti idiotype antibodies can be tested for specific binding to the relevant antibody by coating ELISA plates with purified antibody diluted in PBS to a final concentration of 1 2 g ml 37 C. 2 hours .

The specific anti idiotypic antibodies can be used as an immunodiagnostic tool to detect and quantify levels of human monoclonal antibodies against CD20 in laboratory or patient samples. This may be useful for examining pharmakokinetics of the anti CD20 antibody or for determining and adjusting the dosage of the anti CD20 antibody and for monitoring the disease and the effect of treatment in a patient. As an example of such an assay ELISA plates are coated with 4 g ml anti idiotypic antibody. Plates are blocked with PBS containing 0.05 Tween 20 and 2 chicken serum room temperature 1 hour . Subsequently the plates are incubated with a serial dilution of the relevant antibody e.g. 2C6 IgG1 10 000 9.77 ng ml room temperature 2 hours . Bound 2C6 IgG1 is detected with mouse anti human IgG HRP conjugated antibody.

Other features and advantages of the instant invention will be apparent from the following detailed description and claims.

In order that the present invention may be more readily understood certain terms are first defined. Additional definitions are set forth throughout the detailed description.

The terms CD20 and CD20 antigen are used interchangeably herein and include any variants isoforms and species homologs of human CD20 which are naturally expressed by cells or are expressed on cells transfected with the CD20 gene. Binding of an antibody of the invention to the CD20 antigen mediate the killing of cells expressing CD20 e.g. a tumor cell by inactivating CD20. The killing of the cells expressing CD20 may occur by one or more of the following mechanisms 

Synonyms of CD20 as recognized in the art include B lymphocyte antigen CD20 B lymphocyte surface antigen B1 Leu 16 Bp35 BM5 and LF5.

As used herein the term inhibits growth e.g. referring to cells is intended to include any measurable decrease in the cell growth when contacted with an anti CD20 antibody as compared to the growth of the same cells not in contact with an anti CD20 antibody e.g. the inhibition of growth of a cell culture by at least about 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 99 or 100 . Such a decrease in cell growth can occur by a variety of mechanisms e.g. effector cell phagocytosis ADCC CDC and or apoptosis.

The term antibody as referred to herein includes whole antibodies and any antigen binding fragment i.e. antigen binding portion or single chain thereof. An antibody refers to a glycoprotein comprising at least two heavy H chains and two light L chains inter connected by disulfide bonds or an antigen binding portion thereof. Each heavy chain is comprised of a heavy chain variable region abbreviated herein as V and a heavy chain constant region abbreviated herein as C . Each light chain is comprised of a light chain variable region abbreviated herein as V and a light chain constant region abbreviated herein as C . The Vand Vregions can be further subdivided into regions of hypervariability termed complementarity determining regions CDRs interspersed with regions that are more conserved termed framework regions FRs . Each Vand Vis composed of three CDRs and four FRs arranged from amino terminus to carboxy terminus in the following order FR1 CDR1 FR2 CDR2 FR3 CDR3 FR4. The variable regions of the heavy and light chains contain a binding domain that interacts with an antigen. The constant regions of the antibodies may mediate the binding of the immunoglobulin to host tissues or factors including various cells of the immune system e.g. effector cells and the first component C1q of the classical complement system.

The term antigen binding portion of an antibody or simply antibody portion as used herein refers to one or more fragments of an antibody that retain the ability to specifically bind to an antigen e.g. CD20 . It has been shown that the antigen binding function of an antibody can be performed by fragments of a full length antibody. Examples of binding fragments encompassed within the term antigen binding portion of an antibody include i a Fab fragment a monovalent fragment consisting of the V V Cand C domains ii a F ab fragment a bivalent fragment comprising two Fab fragments linked by a disulfide bridge at the hinge region iii a Fd fragment consisting of the Vand C domains iv a Fv fragment consisting of the Vand Vdomains of a single arm of an antibody v a dAb fragment Ward et al. 1989 341 544 546 which consists of a Vdomain vi an isolated complementarity determining region CDR and vii a combination of two or more isolated CDRs which may optionally be joined by a synthetic linker. Furthermore although the two domains of the Fv fragment Vand V are coded for by separate genes they can be joined using recombinant methods by a synthetic linker that enables them to be made as a single protein chain in which the Vand Vregions pair to form monovalent molecules known as single chain Fv scFv see e.g. Bird et al. 1988 242 423 426 and Huston et al. 1988 85 5879 5883 . Such single chain antibodies are also intended to be encompassed within the term antigen binding portion of an antibody. A further example is binding domain immunoglobulin fusion proteins comprising i a binding domain polypeptide that is fused to an immunoglobulin hinge region polypeptide ii an immunoglobulin heavy chain CH2 constant region fused to the hinge region and iii an immunoglobulin heavy chain CH3 constant region fused to the CH2 constant region. The binding domain polypeptide can be a heavy chain variable region or a light chain variable region. Such binding domain immunoglobulin fusion proteins are further disclosed in US 2003 0118592 and US 2003 0133939. These antibody fragments are obtained using conventional techniques known to those with skill in the art and the fragments are screened for utility in the same manner as are intact antibodies.

The term epitope means a protein determinant capable of specific binding to an antibody. Epitopes usually consist of chemically active surface groupings of molecules such as amino acids or sugar side chains and usually have specific three dimensional structural characteristics as well as specific charge characteristics. Conformational and nonconformational epitopes are distinguished in that the binding to the former but not the latter is lost in the presence of denaturing solvents.

The term discontinuous epitope as used herein means a conformational epitope on a protein antigen which is formed from at least two separate regions in the primary sequence of the protein.

The term bispecific molecule is intended to include any agent e.g. a protein peptide or protein or peptide complex which has two different binding specificities. For example the molecule may bind to or interact with a a cell surface antigen and b an Fc receptor on the surface of an effector cell. The term multispecific molecule or heterospecific molecule is intended to include any agent e.g. a protein peptide or protein or peptide complex which has more than two different binding specificities. For example the molecule may bind to or interact with a a cell surface antigen b an Fc receptor on the surface of an effector cell and c at least one other component. Accordingly the invention includes but is not limited to bispecific trispecific tetraspecific and other multispecific molecules which are directed to CD20 and to other cell surface antigens or targets such as Fc receptors on effector cells.

The term bispecific antibodies also includes diabodies. Diabodies are bivalent bispecific antibodies in which the Vand Vdomains are expressed on a single polypeptide chain but using a linker that is too short to allow for pairing between the two domains on the same chain thereby forcing the domains to pair with complementary domains of another chain and creating two antigen binding sites see e.g. Holliger P. et al. 1993 90 6444 6448 Poljak R. J. et al. 1994 2 1121 1123 .

The term human antibody derivatives refers to any modified form of the antibody e.g. a conjugate of the antibody and another agent or antibody.

As used herein a human antibody is derived from a particular germine sequence if the antibody is obtained from a system using human immunoglobulin sequences e.g. by immunizing a transgenic mouse carrying human immunoglobulin genes or by screening a human immunoglobulin gene library and wherein the selected human antibody is at least 90 more preferably at least 95 even more preferably at least 96 97 98 or 99 identical in amino acid sequence to the amino acid sequence encoded by the germine immunoglobulin gene. Typically a human antibody derived from a particular human germline sequence will display no more than 10 amino acid differences more preferably no more than 5 or even more preferably no more than 4 3 2 or 1 amino acid difference from the amino acid sequence encoded by the germine immunoglobulin gene.

The term human antibody as used herein is intended to include antibodies having variable and constant regions derived from human germline immunoglobulin sequences. The human antibodies of the invention may include amino acid residues not encoded by human germine immunoglobulin sequences e.g. mutations introduced by random or site specific mutagenesis in vitro or by somatic mutation in vivo . However the term human antibody as used herein is not intended to include antibodies in which CDR sequences derived from the germline of another mammalian species such as a mouse have been grafted onto human framework sequences.

The terms monoclonal antibody or monoclonal antibody composition as used herein refer to a preparation of antibody molecules of single molecular composition. A monoclonal antibody composition displays a single binding specificity and affinity for a particular epitope. Accordingly the term human monoclonal antibody refers to antibodies displaying a single binding specificity which have variable and constant regions derived from human germline immunoglobulin sequences.

The term recombinant human antibody as used herein includes all human antibodies that are prepared expressed created or isolated by recombinant means such as a antibodies isolated from an animal e.g. a mouse that is transgenic or transchromosomal for human immunoglobulin genes or a hybridoma prepared therefrom described further in Section I below b antibodies isolated from a host cell transformed to express the antibody e.g. from a transfectoma c antibodies isolated from a recombinant combinatorial human antibody library and d antibodies prepared expressed created or isolated by any other means that involve splicing of human immunoglobulin gene sequences to other DNA sequences. Such recombinant human antibodies have variable and constant regions derived from human germine immunoglobulin sequences. In certain embodiments however such recombinant human antibodies can be subjected to in vitro mutagenesis or when an animal transgenic for human Ig sequences is used in vivo somatic mutagenesis and thus the amino acid sequences of the Vand Vregions of the recombinant antibodies are sequences that while derived from and related to human germline Vand Vsequences may not naturally exist within the human antibody germline repertoire in vivo.

The term transfectoma as used herein includes recombinant eukaryotic host cells expressing the antibody such as CHO cells NS 0 cells HEK293 cells plant cells or fungi including yeast cells.

As used herein a heterologous antibody is defined in relation to the transgenic non human organism producing such an antibody. This term refers to an antibody having an amino acid sequence or an encoding nucleic acid sequence corresponding to that found in an organism not consisting of the transgenic non human animal and generally from a species other than that of the transgenic non human animal.

An isolated antibody as used herein is intended to refer to an antibody which is substantially free of other antibodies having different antigenic specificities e.g. an isolated antibody that specifically binds to CD20 is substantially free of antibodies that specifically bind antigens other than CD20 . An isolated antibody that specifically binds to an epitope isoform or variant of human CD20 may however have cross reactivity to other related antigens e.g. from other species e.g. CD20 species homologs . Moreover an isolated antibody may be substantially free of other cellular material and or chemicals. In one embodiment of the invention a combination of isolated monoclonal antibodies having different specificities are combined in a well defined composition.

As used herein specific binding refers to antibody binding to a predetermined antigen. Typically the antibody binds with an affinity corresponding to a Kof about 10M or less such as about 10M or less such as about 10M or less about 10M or less or about 10M or even less when measured as apparent affinities based on ICvalues in FACS and binds to the predetermined antigen with an affinity corresponding to a Kthat is at least ten fold lower such as at least 100 fold lower than its affinity for binding to a non specific antigen e.g. BSA casein other than the predetermined antigen or a closely related antigen. The phrases an antibody recognizing an antigen and an antibody specific for an antigen are used interchangeably herein with the term an antibody which binds specifically to an antigen .

The term K M as used herein is intended to refer to the dissociation equilibrium constant of a particular antibody antigen interaction.

As used herein isotype refers to the antibody class e.g. IgM or IgG1 that is encoded by heavy chain constant region genes.

As used herein isotype switching refers to the phenomenon by which the class or isotype of an antibody changes from one immunoglobulin class to one of the other immunoglobulin classes.

As used herein nonswitched isotype refers to the isotypic class of heavy chain that is produced when no isotype switching has taken place the Cgene encoding the nonswitched isotype is typically the first Cgene immediately downstream from the functionally rearranged VDJ gene. Isotype switching has been classified as classical or non classical isotype switching. Classical isotype switching occurs by recombination events which involve at least one switch sequence region in the transgene. Non classical isotype switching may occur by for example homologous recombination between human and human associated deletion . Alternative non classical switching mechanisms such as intertransgene and or interchromosomal recombination among others may occur and effectuate isotype switching.

As used herein the term switch sequence refers to those DNA sequences responsible for switch recombination. A switch donor sequence typically a p switch region will be 5 i.e. upstream of the construct region to be deleted during the switch recombination. The switch acceptor region will be between the construct region to be deleted and the replacement constant region e.g. etc. . As there is no specific site where recombination always occurs the final gene sequence will typically not be predictable from the construct.

As used herein glycosylation pattern is defined as the pattern of carbohydrate units that are covalently attached to a protein more specifically to an immunoglobulin antibody protein. A glycosylation pattern of a heterologous antibody can be characterized as being substantially similar to glycosylation patterns which occur naturally on antibodies produced by the species of the non human transgenic animal when one of ordinary skill in the art would recognize the glycosylation pattern of the heterologous antibody as being more similar to said pattern of glycosylation in the species of the non human transgenic animal than to the species from which the CH genes of the transgene were derived.

The term naturally occurring as used herein as applied to an object refers to the fact that an object can be found in nature. For example a polypeptide or polynucleotide sequence that is present in an organism including viruses that can be isolated from a source in nature and which has not been intentionally modified by man in the laboratory is naturally occurring.

The term rearranged as used herein refers to a configuration of a heavy chain or light chain immunoglobulin locus wherein a V segment is positioned immediately adjacent to a D J or J segment in a conformation encoding essentially a complete Vor Vdomain respectively. A rearranged immunoglobulin antibody gene locus can be identified by comparison to germline DNA a rearranged locus will have at least one recombined heptamer nonamer homology element.

The term unrearranged or germline configuration as used herein in reference to a V segment refers to the configuration wherein the V segment is not recombined so as to be immediately adjacent to a D or J segment.

The term nucleic acid molecule as used herein is intended to include DNA molecules and RNA molecules. A nucleic acid molecule may be single stranded or double stranded but preferably is double stranded DNA.

The term isolated nucleic acid molecule as used herein in reference to nucleic acids encoding whole antibodies or antibody portions e.g. V V CDR3 that bind to CD20 is intended to refer to a nucleic acid molecule in which the nucleotide sequences encoding the intact antibody or antibody portion are free of other nucleotide sequences encoding whole antibodies or antibody portions that bind antigens other than CD20 which other sequences may naturally flank the nucleic acid in human genomic DNA.

As disclosed and claimed herein the sequences set forth in SEQ ID NOs 1 19 include conservative sequence modifications i.e. nucleotide and amino acid sequence modifications which do not significantly affect or alter the binding characteristics of the antibody encoded by the nucleotide sequence or containing the amino acid sequence. Such conservative sequence modifications include nucleotide and amino acid substitutions additions and deletions. Modifications can be introduced into the sequences by standard techniques known in the art such as site directed mutagenesis and PCR mediated mutagenesis. Conservative amino acid substitutions include ones in which the amino acid residue is replaced with an amino acid residue having a similar side chain. Families of amino acid residues having similar side chains have been defined in the art. These families include amino acids with basic side chains e.g. lysine arginine histidine acidic side chains e.g. aspartic acid glutamic acid uncharged polar side chains e.g. glycine asparagine glutamine serine threonine tyrosine cysteine tryptophan nonpolar side chains e.g. alanine valine leucine isoleucine proline phenylalanine methionine beta branched side chains e.g. threonine valine isoleucine and aromatic side chains e.g. tyrosine phenylalanine tryptophan histidine . Thus a predicted nonessential amino acid residue in a human anti CD20 antibody is preferably replaced with another amino acid residue from the same side chain family.

The present invention also encompasses derivatives of the amino acid sequences as set forth in SEQ ID NOs 2 4 5 and 7 and conservative sequence modifications thereof wherein one or more of the amino acid residues have been derivatised e.g. by acylation or glycosylation without significantly affecting or altering the binding characteristics of the antibody containing the amino acid sequences.

Furthermore the present invention comprises antibodies in which one or more alterations have been made in the Fc region in order to change functional or pharmacokinetic properties of the antibodies. Such alterations may result in a decrease or increase of C1q binding and CDC complement dependent cytotoxicity or of Fc R binding and antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity ADCC . Substitutions can for example be made in one or more of the amino acid positions 234 235 236 237 297 318 320 and 322 of the heavy chain constant region thereby causing an alteration in an effector function while retaining binding to antigen as compared with the unmodified antibody cf. U.S. Pat. No. 5 624 821 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 648 260. Further reference may be had to WO 00 42072 disclosing antibodies with altered Fc regions that increase ADCC and WO 94 29351 disclosing antibodies having mutations in the N terminal region of the CH2 domain that alter the ability of the antibodies to bind to FcR and thereby decreases the ability of the antibodies to bind to C1q which in turn decreases the ability of the antibodies to fix complement. Furthermore Shields et al. 2001 276 6591 6604 teaches combination variants e.g. T256A S298A S298A E333A and 5298A E333A K334A that improve Fc RIII binding.

The in vivo half life of the antibodies can also be improved by modifying the salvage receptor epitope of the Ig constant domain or an Ig like constant domain such that the molecule does not comprise an intact CH2 domain or an intact Ig Fc region cf. U.S. Pat. No. 6 121 022 and U.S. Pat. No. 6 194 551. The in vivo half life can furthermore be increased by making mutations in the Fc region e.g. by substituting threonine for leucine at position 252 threonine for serine at position 254 or threonine for phenylalanine at position 256 cf. U.S. Pat. No. 6 277 375.

Furthermore the glycosylation pattern of the antibodies can be modified in order to change the effector function of the antibodies. For example the antibodies can be expressed in a transfectoma which does not add the fucose unit normally attached to the carbohydrate attached to Asn at position 297 of Fc in order to enhance the affinity of Fc for Fc RIII which in turn will result in an increased ADCC of the antibodies in the presence of NK cells cf. Shield et al. 2002 277 26733. Furthermore modification of galactosylation can be made in order to modify CDC. Further reference may be had to WO 99 54342 and Umana et al. 1999 17 176 disclosing a CHO cell line engineered to express GntIII resulting in the expression of monoclonal antibodies with altered glycoforms and improved ADCC activity.

Furthermore the antibody fragments e.g. Fab fragments of the invention can be pegylated to increase the half life. This can be carried out by pegylation reactions known in the art as described for example in 1992 3 4 10 EP 154 316 and EP 401 384.

Furthermore the antibodies can be administered in combination with beta glucan to enhance ADCC activity cf. Ross G. D. et al. 1999 42 61 74 Vetvicka V. et al. JCI 1996 98 50 61 Yan J. et al. JI 1999 163 3045 3052 Cheung N K. V. et al. 2002 51 557 564 and Hong F. et al. 2003 63 9023 9031.

Alternatively in another embodiment mutations can be introduced randomly along all or part of an anti CD20 antibody coding sequence such as by saturation mutagenesis and the resulting modified anti CD20 antibodies can be screened for binding activity.

Accordingly antibodies encoded by the heavy and light chain variable region nucleotide sequences disclosed herein i.e. SEQ ID NOs 1 3 and 6 and or containing the heavy and light chain variable region amino acid sequences disclosed herein i.e. SEQ ID NOs 2 4 5 and 7 include substantially similar antibodies encoded by or containing similar sequences which have been conservatively modified. Further discussion as to how such substantially similar antibodies can be generated based on the partial i.e. heavy and light chain variable regions sequences disclosed herein is provided below.

For nucleotide and amino acid sequences the term homology indicates the degree of identity between two nucleic acid or amino acid sequences when optimally aligned and compared with appropriate insertions or deletions. Alternatively substantial homology exists when the DNA segments will hybridize under selective hybridization conditions to the complement of the strand.

The percent identity between two sequences is a function of the number of identical positions shared by the sequences i.e. homology of identical positions total of positions 100 taking into account the number of gaps and the length of each gap which need to be introduced for optimal alignment of the two sequences. The comparison of sequences and determination of percent identity between two sequences can be accomplished using a mathematical algorithm as described in the non limiting examples below.

The percent identity between two nucleotide sequences can be determined using the GAP program in the GCG software package using a NWSgapdna.CMP matrix and a gap weight of 40 50 60 70 or 80 and a length weight of 1 2 3 4 5 or 6. The percent identity between two nucleotide or amino acid sequences can also be determined using the algorithm of E. Meyers and W. Miller 4 11 17 1988 which has been incorporated into the ALIGN program version 2.0 using a PAM120 weight residue table a gap length penalty of 12 and a gap penalty of 4. In addition the percent identity between two amino acid sequences can be determined using the Needleman and Wunsch 48 444 453 1970 algorithm which has been incorporated into the GAP program in the GCG software package using either a Blossum 62 matrix or a PAM250 matrix and a gap weight of 16 14 12 10 8 6 or 4 and a length weight of 1 2 3 4 5 or 6.

The nucleic acids may be present in whole cells in a cell lysate or in a partially purified or substantially pure form. A nucleic acid is isolated or rendered substantially pure when purified away from other cellular components or other contaminants e.g. other cellular nucleic acids or proteins by standard techniques including alkaline SDS treatment CsCl banding column chromatography agarose gel electrophoresis and others well known in the art. See F. Ausubel et al. ed. Current Protocols in Molecular Biology Greene Publishing and Wiley Interscience New York 1987 .

The nucleic acid compositions of the present invention while often in a native sequence except for modified restriction sites and the like from either cDNA genomic or mixtures thereof may be mutated in accordance with standard techniques to provide gene sequences. For coding sequences these mutations may affect amino acid sequence as desired. In particular DNA sequences substantially homologous to or derived from native V D J constant switches and other such sequences described herein are contemplated where derived indicates that a sequence is identical or modified from another sequence .

A nucleic acid is operably linked when it is placed into a functional relationship with another nucleic acid sequence. For instance a promoter or enhancer is operably linked to a coding sequence if it affects the transcription of the sequence. With respect to transcription of regulatory sequences operably linked means that the DNA sequences being linked are contiguous and where necessary to join two protein coding regions contiguous and in reading frame. For switch sequences operably linked indicates that the sequences are capable of effecting switch recombination.

The term vector as used herein is intended to refer to a nucleic acid molecule capable of transporting another nucleic acid to which it has been linked. One type of vector is a plasmid which refers to a circular double stranded DNA loop into which additional DNA segments may be ligated. Another type of vector is a viral vector wherein additional DNA segments may be ligated into the viral genome. Certain vectors are capable of autonomous replication in a host cell into which they are introduced e.g. bacterial vectors having a bacterial origin of replication and episomal mammalian vectors . Other vectors e.g. non episomal mammalian vectors can be integrated into the genome of a host cell upon introduction into the host cell and thereby are replicated along with the host genome. Moreover certain vectors are capable of directing the expression of genes to which they are operatively linked. Such vectors are referred to herein as recombinant expression vectors or simply expression vectors . In general expression vectors of utility in recombinant DNA techniques are often in the form of plasmids. In the present specification plasmid and vector may be used interchangeably as the plasmid is the most commonly used form of vector. However the invention is intended to include such other forms of expression vectors such as viral vectors e.g. replication defective retroviruses adenoviruses and adeno associated viruses which serve equivalent functions.

The term recombinant host cell or simply host cell as used herein is intended to refer to a cell into which a recombinant expression vector has been introduced. It should be understood that such terms are intended to refer not only to the particular subject cell but to the progeny of such a cell. Because certain modifications may occur in succeeding generations due to either mutation or environmental influences such progeny may not in fact be identical to the parent cell but are still included within the scope of the term host cell as used herein. Recombinant host cells include for example transfectomas such as CHO cells NS 0 cells and lymphocytic cells.

As used herein the term subject includes any human or non human animal. The term non human animal includes all vertebrates e.g. mammals and non mammals such as non human primates sheep dog cow chickens amphibians reptiles etc.

The terms transgenic non human animal refers to a non human animal having a genome comprising one or more human heavy and or light chain transgenes or transchromosomes either integrated or non integrated into the animal s natural genomic DNA and which is capable of expressing fully human antibodies. For example a transgenic mouse can have a human light chain transgene and either a human heavy chain transgene or human heavy chain transchromosome such that the mouse produces human anti CD20 antibodies when immunized with CD20 antigen and or cells expressing CD20. The human heavy chain transgene can be integrated into the chromosomal DNA of the mouse as is the case for transgenic e.g. HuMAb mice such as HCo7 or HCo12 mice or the human heavy chain transgene can be maintained extrachromosomally as is the case for transchromosomal KM mice as described in WO 02 43478. Such transgenic and transchromosomal mice are capable of producing multiple isotypes of human monoclonal antibodies to CD20 e.g. IgM IgG IgA and or IgE by undergoing V D J recombination and isotype switching.

Human monoclonal antibodies of the invention can be produced by a variety of techniques including conventional monoclonal antibody methodology e.g. the standard somatic cell hybridization technique of Kohler and Milstein 256 495 1975 . Although somatic cell hybridization procedures are preferred in principle other techniques for producing monoclonal antibody can be employed e.g. viral or oncogenic transformation of B lymphocytes or phage display techniques using libraries of human antibody genes.

In a preferred embodiment human monoclonal antibodies directed against CD20 can be generated using transgenic or transchromosomal mice carrying parts of the human immune system rather than the mouse system. These transgenic and transchromosomic mice include mice referred to herein as HuMAb mice and KM mice respectively and are collectively referred to herein as transgenic mice. 

The HuMAb mouse contains a human immunoglobulin gene miniloci that encodes unrearranged human heavy and and light chain immunoglobulin sequences together with targeted mutations that inactivate the endogenous and chain loci Lonberg N. et al. 1994 368 6474 856 859 . Accordingly the mice exhibit reduced expression of mouse IgM or K and in response to immunization the introduced human heavy and light chain transgenes undergo class switching and somatic mutation to generate high affinity human IgG monoclonal antibodies Lonberg N. et al. 1994 supra reviewed in Lonberg N. 1994 113 49 101 Lonberg N. and Huszar D. 1995 13 65 93 and Harding F. and Lonberg N. 1995 764 536 546 . The preparation of HuMAb mice is described in detail in Taylor L. et al. 1992 20 6287 6295 Chen J. et al. 1993 5 647 656 Tuaillon et al. 1994 152 2912 2920 Lonberg et al. 1994 368 6474 856 859 Lonberg N. 1994 113 49 101 Taylor L. et al. 1994 6 579 591 Lonberg N. and Huszar D. 1995 13 65 93 Harding F. and Lonberg N. 1995 764 536 546 Fishwild D. et al. 1996 14 845 851. See further U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 545 806 5 569 825 5 625 126 5 633 425 5 789 650 5 877 397 5 661 016 5 814 318 5 874 299 and 5 770 429 all to Lonberg and Kay as well as U.S. Pat. No. 5 545 807 to Surani et al. WO 98 24884 WO 94 25585 WO 93 1227 WO 92 22645 WO 92 03918 and WO 01 09187.

The KM mouse contains a human heavy chain transchromosome and a human kappa light chain transgene. The endogenous mouse heavy and light chain genes also have been disrupted in the KM mice such that immunization of the mice leads to production of human immunoglobulins rather than mouse immunoglobulins. Construction of KM mice and their use to raise human immunoglobulins is described in detail in WO 02 43478.

To generate fully human monoclonal antibodies to CD20 transgenic or trans chromosomal mice containing human immunoglobulin genes e.g. HCo12 HCo7 or KM mice can be immunized with an enriched preparation of CD20 antigen and or cells expressing CD20 as described for example by Lonberg et al. 1994 supra Fishwild et al. 1996 supra and WO 98 24884. Alternatively mice can be immunized with DNA encoding human CD20. Preferably the mice will be 6 16 weeks of age upon the first infusion. For example an enriched preparation 5 50 g of the CD20 antigen can be used to immunize the HuMAb mice intraperitoneally. In the event that immunizations using a purified or enriched preparation of the CD20 antigen do not result in antibodies mice can also be immunized with cells expressing CD20 e.g. a cell line to promote immune responses.

Cumulative experience with various antigens has shown that the HuMAb transgenic mice respond best when initially immunized intraperitoneally i.p. or subcutaneously s.c. with CD20 expressing cells in complete Freund s adjuvant followed by every other week i.p. immunizations up to a total of 10 with CD20 expressing cells in PBS. The immune response can be monitored over the course of the immunization protocol with plasma samples being obtained by retroorbital bleeds. The plasma can be screened by FACS analysis and mice with sufficient titers of anti CD20 human immunoglobulin can be used for fusions. Mice can be boosted intravenously with CD20 expressing cells for example 4 and 3 days before sacrifice and removal of the spleen.

To generate hybridomas producing human monoclonal antibodies to human CD20 splenocytes and lymph node cells from immunized mice can be isolated and fused to an appropriate immortalized cell line such as a mouse myeloma cell line. The resulting hybridomas can then be screened for the production of antigen specific antibodies. For example single cell suspensions of splenic lymphocytes from immunized mice can be fused to SP2 0 nonsecreting mouse myeloma cells ATCC CRL 1581 with 50 PEG w v . Cells can be plated at approximately 1 10per well in flat bottom microtiter plate followed by a two week incubation in selective medium containing besides usual reagents 10 fetal Clone Serum 5 10 origen hybridoma cloning factor IGEN and 1 HAT Sigma . After approximately two weeks cells can be cultured in medium in which the HAT is replaced with HT. Individual wells can then be screened by ELISA for human kappa light chain containing antibodies and by FACS analysis using CD20 expressing cells for CD20 specificity. Once extensive hybridoma growth occurs medium can be observed usually after 10 14 days. The antibody secreting hybridomas can be replated screened again and if still positive for human IgG anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies can be subcloned at least twice by limiting dilution. The stable subclones can then be cultured in vitro to generate antibody in tissue culture medium for characterization.

Human antibodies of the invention also can be produced in a host cell transfectoma using for example a combination of recombinant DNA techniques and gene transfection methods as is well known in the art see e.g. Morrison S. 1985 229 1202.

For example to express the antibodies or antibody fragments thereof DNAs encoding partial or full length light and heavy chains can be obtained by standard molecular biology techniques e.g. PCR amplification site directed mutagenesis and can be inserted into expression vectors such that the genes are operatively linked to transcriptional and translational control sequences. In this context the term operatively linked is intended to mean that an antibody gene is ligated into a vector such that transcriptional and translational control sequences within the vector serve their intended function of regulating the transcription and translation of the antibody gene. The expression vector and expression control sequences are chosen to be compatible with the expression host cell used. The antibody light chain gene and the antibody heavy chain gene can be inserted into separate vectors or more typically both genes are inserted into the same expression vector. The antibody genes are inserted into the expression vector by standard methods e.g. ligation of complementary restriction sites on the antibody gene fragment and vector or blunt end ligation if no restriction sites are present . The light and heavy chain variable regions of the antibodies described herein can be used to create full length antibody genes of any antibody isotype by inserting them into expression vectors already encoding heavy chain constant and light chain constant regions of the desired isotype such that the Vsegment is operatively linked to the Csegment s within the vector and the Vsegment is operatively linked to the Csegment within the vector. Additionally or alternatively the recombinant expression vector can encode a signal peptide that facilitates secretion of the antibody chain from a host cell. The antibody chain gene can be cloned into the vector such that the signal peptide is linked in frame to the amino terminus of the antibody chain gene. The signal peptide can be an immunoglobulin signal peptide or a heterologous signal peptide i.e. a signal peptide from a non immunoglobulin protein .

In addition to the antibody chain genes the recombinant expression vectors of the invention carry regulatory sequences that control the expression of the antibody chain genes in a host cell. The term regulatory sequence is intended to include promoters enhancers and other expression control elements e.g. polyadenylation signals that control the transcription or translation of the antibody chain genes. Such regulatory sequences are described for example in Goeddel Gene Expression Technology. Methods in Enzymology 185 Academic Press San Diego Calif. 1990 . It will be appreciated by those skilled in the art that the design of the expression vector including the selection of regulatory sequences may depend on such factors as the choice of the host cell to be transformed the level of expression of protein desired etc. Preferred regulatory sequences for mammalian host cell expression include viral elements that direct high levels of protein expression in mammalian cells such as promoters and or enhancers derived from cytomegalovirus CMV Simian Virus 40 SV40 adenovirus e.g. the adenovirus major late promoter AdMLP and polyoma. Alternatively nonviral regulatory sequences may be used such as the ubiquitin promoter or globin promoter.

In addition to the antibody chain genes and regulatory sequences the recombinant expression vectors of the invention may carry additional sequences such as sequences that regulate replication of the vector in host cells e.g. origins of replication and selectable marker genes. The selectable marker gene facilitates selection of host cells into which the vector has been introduced see e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 4 399 216 U.S. Pat. No. 4 634 665 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 179 017 all by Axel et al. . For example typically the selectable marker gene confers resistance to drugs such as G418 hygromycin or methotrexate on a host cell into which the vector has been introduced. Preferred selectable marker genes include the dihydrofolate reductase DHFR gene for use in dhfr host cells with methotrexate selection amplification and the neo gene for G418 selection .

For expression of the light and heavy chains the expression vector s encoding the heavy and light chains is transfected into a host cell by standard techniques. The various forms of the term transfection are intended to encompass a wide variety of techniques commonly used for the introduction of exogenous DNA into a prokaryotic or eukaryotic host cell e.g. electroporation calcium phosphate precipitation DEAE dextran transfection lipofectin transfection and the like.

In one embodiment the antibodies are expressed in eukaryotic cells such as mammalian host cells. Preferred mammalian host cells for expressing the recombinant antibodies of the invention include CHO cells including dhfr CHO cells described in Urlaub and Chasin 1980 77 4216 4220 used with a DHFR selectable marker e.g. as described in R. J. Kaufman and P. A. Sharp 1982 159 601 621 NS 0 myeloma cells COS cells HEK293 cells and SP2.0 cells. In particular for use with NS 0 myeloma cells another preferred expression system is the GS glutamine synthetase gene expression system disclosed in WO 87 04462 WO 89 01036 and EP 338 841. When recombinant expression vectors encoding antibody genes are introduced into mammalian host cells the antibodies are produced by culturing the host cells for a period of time sufficient to allow for expression of the antibody in the host cells or more preferably secretion of the antibody into the culture medium in which the host cells are grown. Antibodies can be recovered from the culture medium using standard protein purification methods.

Alternatively the cloned antibody genes can be expressed in other expression systems including prokaryotic cells such as microorganisms e.g. for the production of scFv antibodies algi as well as insect cells. Furthermore the antibodies can be produced in transgenic non human animals such as in milk from sheep and rabbits or eggs from hens or in transgenic plants. See e.g. Verma R. et al. 1998 Antibody engineering Comparison of bacterial yeast insect and mammalian expression systems 216 165 181 Pollock et al. 1999 Transgenic milk as a method for the production of recombinant antibodies 231 147 157 and Fischer R. et al. 1999 Molecular farming of recombinant anti bodies in plants 380 825 839.

Antibodies interact with target antigens predominantly through amino acid residues that are located in the six heavy and light chain complementarity determining regions CDRs . For this reason the amino acid sequences within CDRs are more diverse between individual antibodies than sequences outside of CDRs. Because CDR sequences are responsible for most antibody antigen interactions it is possible to express recombinant antibodies that mimic the properties of specific naturally occurring antibodies by constructing expression vectors that include CDR sequences from the specific naturally occurring antibody grafted onto framework sequences from a different antibody with different properties see e.g. Riechmann L. et al. 1998 332 323 327 Jones P. et al. 1986 321 522 525 and Queen C. et al. 1989 86 10029 10033 . Such framework sequences can be obtained from public DNA databases that include germine antibody gene sequences. These germine sequences will differ from mature antibody gene sequences because they will not include completely assembled variable genes which are formed by V D J joining during B cell maturation. Germline gene sequences will also differ from the sequences of a high affinity secondary repertoire antibody which contains mutations throughout the variable gene but typically clustered in the CDRs. For example somatic mutations are relatively infrequent in the amino terminal portion of framework region 1 and in the carboxy terminal portion of framework region 4. For this reason it is not necessary to obtain the entire DNA sequence of a particular antibody in order to recreate an intact recombinant antibody having binding properties similar to those of the original antibody see WO 99 45962 . Partial heavy and light chain sequence spanning the CDR regions is typically sufficient for this purpose. The partial sequence is used to determine which germline variable and joining gene segments contributed to the recombined antibody variable genes. The germline sequence is then used to fill in missing portions of the variable regions. Heavy and light chain leader sequences are cleaved during protein maturation and do not contribute to the properties of the final antibody. To add missing sequences cloned cDNA sequences can be combined with synthetic oligonucleotides by ligation or PCR amplification. Alternatively the entire variable region can be synthesized as a set of short overlapping oligonucleotides and combined by PCR amplification to create an entirely synthetic variable region clone. This process has certain advantages such as elimination or inclusion or particular restriction sites or optimization of particular codons.

The nucleotide sequences of heavy and light chain transcripts from hybridomas are used to design an overlapping set of synthetic oligonucleotides to create synthetic V sequences with identical amino acid coding capacities as the natural sequences. The synthetic heavy and kappa chain sequences can differ from the natural sequences in three ways strings of repeated nucleotide bases are interrupted to facilitate oligonucleotide synthesis and PCR amplification optimal translation initiation sites are incorporated according to Kozak s rules Kozak 1991 J. Biol. Chem. 266 19867 19870 and HindIII sites are engineered upstream of the translation initiation sites.

For both the heavy and light chain variable regions the optimized coding and corresponding non coding strand sequences are broken down into 30 50 nucleotides approximately at the midpoint of the corresponding non coding oligonucleotide. Thus for each chain the oligonucleotides can be assembled into overlapping double stranded sets that span segments of 150 400 nucleotides. The pools are then used as templates to produce PCR amplification products of 150 400 nucleotides. Typically a single variable region oligonucleotide set will be broken down into two pools which are separately amplified to generate two overlapping PCR products. These overlapping products are then combined by PCR amplification to form the complete variable region. It may also be desirable to include an overlapping fragment of the heavy or light chain constant region including the BbsI site of the kappa light chain or the AgeI site of the gamma heavy chain in the PCR amplification to generate fragments that can easily be cloned into the expression vector constructs.

The reconstructed heavy and light chain variable regions are then combined with cloned promoter leader translation initiation constant region 3 untranslated polyadenylation and transcription termination sequences to form expression vector constructs. The heavy and light chain expression constructs can be combined into a single vector co transfected serially transfected or separately transfected into host cells which are then fused to form a host cell expressing both chains.

In another aspect of the invention the structural features of the human anti CD20 antibodies of the invention are used to create structurally related human anti CD20 antibodies that retain at least one functional property of the antibodies of the invention such as binding to CD20. More specifically one or more CDR regions of 2C6 can be combined recombinantly with known human framework regions and CDRs to create additional recombinantly engineered human anti CD20 antibodies of the invention.

Accordingly in another embodiment the invention provides a method for preparing an anti CD20 antibody comprising 

preparing an antibody comprising 1 human heavy chain framework regions and human heavy chain CDRs wherein at least one of the human heavy chain CDRs comprises an amino acid sequence selected from the amino acid sequences of CDRs shown in SEQ ID NOs 8 10 and 2 human light chain framework regions and human light chain CDRs wherein at least one of the human light chain CDRs comprises an amino acid sequence selected from the amino acid sequences of CDRs shown in SEQ ID NOs 11 3 14 16 or 17 19 wherein the antibody retains the ability to bind to CD20.

Since it is well known in the art that antibody heavy and light chain CDR3 domains play a particularly important role in the binding specificity affinity of an antibody for an antigen the recombinant antibodies of the invention prepared as set forth above preferably comprise the VCDR3 of SEQ ID NO 10.

In yet another embodiment of the invention human monoclonal antibodies to CD20 can be derivatized or linked to another functional molecule e.g. another peptide or protein e.g. a Fab fragment to generate a bispecific or multispecific molecule which binds to multiple binding sites or target epitopes. For example an antibody of the invention can be functionally linked e.g. by chemical coupling genetic fusion noncovalent association or otherwise to one or more other binding molecules such as another antibody peptide or binding mimetic.

Accordingly the present invention includes bispecific and multispecific molecules comprising at least one first binding specificity for CD20 and a second binding specificity for a second target epitope. In a particular embodiment of the invention the second target epitope is an Fc receptor e.g. human Fc RI CD64 or a human Fc receptor CD89 or a T cell receptor e.g. CD3. Therefore the invention includes bispecific and multispecific molecules capable of binding both to Fc R Fc R or Fc R expressing effector cells e.g. monocytes macrophages or polymorphonuclear cells PMNs and to target cells expressing CD20. These bispecific and multispecific molecules target CD20 expressing cells to effector cell and like the human monoclonal antibodies of the invention trigger Fc receptor mediated effector cell activities such as phagocytosis of CD20 expressing cells antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity ADCC cytokine release or generation of superoxide anion.

Bispecific and multispecific molecules of the invention can further include a third binding specificity in addition to an anti Fc binding specificity and an anti CD20 binding specificity. In one embodiment the third binding specificity is an anti enhancement factor EF portion e.g. a molecule which binds to a surface protein involved in cytotoxic activity and thereby increases the immune response against the target cell. The anti enhancement factor portion can be an antibody functional antibody fragment or a ligand that binds to a given molecule e.g. an antigen or a receptor and thereby results in an enhancement of the effect of the binding determinants for the Fc receptor or target cell antigen. The anti enhancement factor portion can bind an Fc receptor or a target cell antigen. Alternatively the anti enhancement factor portion can bind to an entity that is different from the entity to which the first and second binding specificities bind. For example the anti enhancement factor portion can bind a cytotoxic T cell e.g. via CD2 CD3 CD8 CD28 CD4 CD40 ICAM 1 or other immune cell that results in an increased immune response against the target cell .

In one embodiment the bispecific and multispecific molecules of the invention comprise as a binding specificity at least one further antibody including e.g. an Fab Fab F ab Fv or a single chain Fv. The antibody may also be a light chain or heavy chain dimer or any minimal fragment thereof such as a Fv or a single chain construct as described in Ladner et al. in U.S. Pat. No. 4 946 778. The antibody may also be a binding domain immunoglobulin fusion protein as disclosed in US 2003 0118592 and US 2003 0133939.

In one embodiment the binding specificity for an Fc receptor is provided by a human monoclonal antibody the binding of which is not blocked by human immunoglobulin G IgG . As used herein the term IgG receptor refers to any of the eight chain genes located on chromosome 1. These genes encode a total of twelve transmembrane or soluble receptor isoforms which are grouped into three Fc receptor classes Fc RI CD64 Fc RII CD32 and Fc RIII CD16 . In one preferred embodiment the Fc receptor is a human high affinity Fc RI.

The production and characterization of these preferred monoclonal antibodies are described by Fanger et al. in WO 88 00052 and in U.S. Pat. No. 4 954 617. These antibodies bind to an epitope of Fc RI Fc RII or Fc RIII at a site which is distinct from the Fc binding site of the receptor and thus their binding is not blocked substantially by physiological levels of IgG. Specific anti Fc RI antibodies useful in this invention are mAb 22 mAb 32 mAb 44 mAb 62 and mAb 197. In other embodiments the anti Fc receptor antibody is a humanized form of mAb 22 H22 . The production and characterization of the H22 antibody is described in Graziano R. F. et al. 1995 155 10 4996 5002 and WO 94 10332. The H22 antibody producing cell line was deposited at the American Type Culture Collection on Nov. 4 1992 under the designation HA022CL1 and has the accession No. CRL 11177.

In still other preferred embodiments the binding specificity for an Fc receptor is provided by an antibody that binds to a human IgA receptor e.g. an Fc receptor Fc I CD89 the binding of which is preferably not blocked by human immunoglobulin A IgA . The term IgA receptor is intended to include the gene product of one gene Fc RI located on chromosome 19. This gene is known to encode several alternatively spliced transmembrane isoforms of 55 to 110 kDa. Fc RI CD89 is constitutively expressed on monocytes macrophages eosinophilic and neutrophilic granulocytes but not on non effector cell populations. Fc RI has medium affinity for both IgA1 and IgA2 which is increased upon exposure to cytokines such as G CSF or GM CSF Morton H. C. et al. 1996 16 423 440 . Four FcaRI specific monoclonal antibodies identified as A3 A59 A62 and A77 which bind FcaRI outside the IgA ligand binding domain have been described Monteiro R. C. et al. 1992 148 1764 .

Fc RI Fc RI Fc RII and Fc RIII especially Fc RII and Fc RIII are preferred trigger receptors for use in the invention because they 1 are expressed primarily on immune effector cells e.g. monocytes PMNs macrophages and dendritic cells 2 are expressed at high levels e.g. 5 000 100 000 per cell 3 are mediators of cytotoxic activities e.g. ADCC phagocytosis and 4 mediate enhanced antigen presentation of antigens including self antigens targeted to them.

An effector cell specific antibody as used herein refers to an antibody or functional antibody fragment that binds the Fc receptor of effector cells. Preferred anti bodies for use in the subject invention bind the Fc receptor of effector cells at a site which is not bound by endogenous immunoglobulin.

As used herein the term effector cell refers to an immune cell which is involved in the effector phase of an immune response as opposed to the cognitive and activation phases of an immune response. Exemplary immune cells include a cell of a myeloid or lymphoid origin e.g. lymphocytes e.g. B cells and T cells including cytolytic T cells CTLs killer cells natural killer cells macrophages monocytes eosinophils neutronphils polymorphonuclear cells granulocytes mast cells and basophils. Some effector cells express specific Fc receptors and carry out specific immune functions. In preferred embodiments an effector cell is capable of inducing antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity ADCC e.g. a neutrophil capable of inducing ADCC. For example monocytes macrophages which express FcR are involved in specific killing of target cells and presenting antigens to other components of the immune system or binding to cells that present antigens. In other embodiments an effector cell can phagocytose a target antigen target cell or microorganism. The expression of a particular FcR on an effector cell can be regulated by humoral factors such as cytokines. For example expression of Fc RI has been found to be up regulated by interferon gamma IFN and or G CSF. This enhanced expression increases the cytotoxic activity of Fc RI bearing cells against targets. An effector cell can phagocytose or lyse a target antigen or a target cell.

 Target cell shall mean any undesirable cell in a subject e.g. a human or animal that can be targeted by a composition e.g. a human monoclonal antibody a bispecific or a multispecific molecule of the invention. In preferred embodiments the target cell is a cell expressing or overexpressing CD20. Cells expressing CD20 typically include B cells and B cell tumors.

While human monoclonal antibodies are preferred other antibodies which can be employed in the bispecific or multispecific molecules of the invention are murine chimeric and humanized monoclonal antibodies. Such murine chimeric and humanized monoclonal antibodies can be prepared by methods known in the art.

Bispecific and multispecific molecules of the present invention can be made using chemical techniques see e.g. D. M. Kranz et al. 1981 78 5807 polydoma techniques see U.S. Pat. No. 4 474 893 or recombinant DNA techniques.

In particular bispecific and multispecific molecules of the present invention can be prepared by conjugating the constituent binding specificities e.g. the anti FcR and anti CD20 binding specificities using methods known in the art. For example each binding specificity of the bispecific and multispecific molecule can be generated separately and then conjugated to one another. When the binding specificities are proteins or peptides a variety of coupling or cross linking agents can be used for covalent conjugation. Examples of cross linking agents include protein A carbodiimide N succinimidyl 5 acetyl thioacetate SATA 5 5 dithiobis 2 nitrobenzoic acid DTNB o phenylenedimaleimide oPDM N succinimidyl 3 2 pyridyldithio propionate SPDP and sulfosuccinimidyl 4 N maleimidomethyl cyclohexane 1 carboxylate sulfo SMCC see e.g. Karpovsky et al. 1984 160 1686 Liu M. A. et al. 1985 82 8648. Other methods include those described by Paulus Behring Ins. Mitt. 1985 78 118 132 Brennan et al. 1985 229 81 83 and Glennie et al. 1987 139 2367 2375. Preferred conjugating agents are SATA and sulfo SMCC both available from Pierce Chemical Co. Rockford Ill. .

When the binding specificities are antibodies they can be conjugated via sulfhydryl bonding of the C terminus hinge regions of the two heavy chains. In a particularly preferred embodiment the hinge region is modified to contain an odd number of sulfhydryl residues preferably one prior to conjugation.

Alternatively both binding specificities can be encoded in the same vector and expressed and assembled in the same host cell. This method is particularly useful where the bispecific and multispecific molecule is a mAb mAb mAb Fab Fab F ab or ligand Fab fusion protein. A bispecific and multispecific molecule of the invention e.g. a bispecific molecule can be a single chain molecule such as a single chain bispecific antibody a single chain bispecific molecule comprising one single chain antibody and a binding determinant or a single chain bispecific molecule comprising two binding determinants. Bispecific and multispecific molecules can also be single chain molecules or may comprise at least two single chain molecules. Methods for preparing bi and multispecific molecules are described for example in U.S. Pat. No. 5 260 203 U.S. Pat. No. 5 455 030 U.S. Pat. No. 4 881 175 U.S. Pat. No. 5 132 405 U.S. Pat. No. 5 091 513 U.S. Pat. No. 5 476 786 U.S. Pat. No. 5 013 653 U.S. Pat. No. 5 258 498 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 482 858.

Binding of the bispecific and multispecific molecules to their specific targets can be confirmed by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay ELISA a radioimmunoassay RIA FACS analysis a bioassay e.g. growth inhibition or a Western Blot Assay. Each of these assays generally detects the presence of protein antibody complexes of particular interest by employing a labeled reagent e.g. an antibody specific for the complex of interest. For example the FcR antibody complexes can be detected using e.g. an enzyme linked antibody or antibody fragment which recognizes and specifically binds to the antibody FcR complexes. Alternatively the complexes can be detected using any of a variety of other immunoassays. For example the antibody can be radioactively labeled and used in a radioimmunoassay RIA see for example Weintraub B. Principles of Radioimmunoassays Seventh Training Course on Radioligand Assay Techniques The Endocrine Society March 1986 . The radioactive isotope can be detected by such means as the use of a counter or a scintillation counter or by autoradiography.

In another aspect the present invention features a human anti CD20 monoclonal antibody conjugated to a therapeutic moiety such as a cytotoxin a chemotherapeutic drug an immunosuppressant or a radioisotope. Such conjugates are referred to herein as immunoconjugates . A cytotoxin or cytotoxic agent includes any agent that is detrimental to e.g. kills cells. Examples include taxol cytochalasin B gramicidin D ethidium bromide emetine mitomycin etoposide tenoposide vincristine vinblastine colchicin doxorubicin daunorubicin dihydroxy anthracin dione mitoxantrone mithramycin actinomycin D 1 dehydrotestosterone glucocorticoids procaine tetracaine lidocaine propranolol and puromycin and analogs or homologs thereof.

Suitable chemotherapeutic agents for forming immunoconjugates of the invention include but are not limited to antimetabolites e.g. methotrexate 6 mercaptopurine 6 thioguanine cytarabine fludarabin 5 fluorouracil decarbazine hydroxyurea azathiprin gemcitabin and cladribin alkylating agents e.g. mechlorethamine thioepa chlorambucil melphalan carmustine BSNU and lomustine CCNU cyclophosphamide busulfan dibromomannitol streptozotocin mitomycin C and cis dichlorodiamine platinum II DDP cisplatin anthracyclines e.g. daunorubicin formerly daunomycin and doxorubicin antibiotics e.g. dactinomycin formerly actinomycin bleomycin mithramycin and anthramycin AMC and anti mitotic agents e.g. vincristine vinblastine docetaxel paclitaxel and vinorelbin .

Further examples of therapeutic moieties may be a protein or polypeptide possessing a desired biological activity. Such proteins may include for example an enzymatically active toxin or active fragment thereof such as abrin ricin A pseudomonas exotoxin or diphtheria toxin a protein such as tumor necrosis factor or interferon or biological response modifiers such as for example lymphokines interleukin 1 IL 1 interleukin 2 IL 2 interleukin 6 IL 6 granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor GM CSF granulocyte colony stimulating factor G CSF or other growth factors.

In a preferred embodiment the therapeutic moiety is doxorubicin cisplatin bleomycin carmustine chlorambucil cyclophosphamide or ricin A.

Techniques for conjugating such therapeutic moiety to antibodies are well known see e.g. Amon et al. Monoclonal Antibodies For Immunotargeting Of Drugs In Cancer Therapy Reisfeld et al. eds. pp. 243 56 Alan R. Liss Inc. 1985 Hellstrom et al. Antibodies For Drug Delivery 2nd Ed. Robinson et al. eds. pp. 623 53 Marcel Dekker Inc. 1987 Thorpe Antibody Carriers Of Cytotoxic Agents In Cancer Therapy A Review 1984 Biological And Clinical Applications Pinchera et al. eds. pp. 475 506 1985 Analysis Results And Future Prospective Of The Therapeutic Use Of Radiolabeled Antibody In Cancer Therapy Baldwin et al. eds. pp. 303 16 Academic Press 1985 and Thorpe et al. The Preparation And Cytotoxic Properties Of Antibody Toxin Conjugates 62 119 58 1982 .

In a further embodiment the human monoclonal antibodies according to the invention are attached to a linker chelator e.g. tiuxetan which allows for the antibody to be conjugated to a radioisotope.

In another aspect the present invention provides a composition e.g. a pharmaceutical composition comprising a human monoclonal antibody of the present invention. The pharmaceutical compositions may be formulated with pharmaceutically acceptable carriers or diluents as well as any other known adjuvants and excipients in accordance with conventional techniques such as those disclosed in Remington The Science and Practice of Pharmacy 19Edition Gennaro Ed. Mack Publishing Co. Easton Pa. 1995.

The pharmaceutical composition may be administered by any suitable route and mode. As will be appreciated by the skilled artisan the route and or mode of administration will vary depending upon the desired results.

The pharmaceutical compositions of the present invention include those suitable for oral nasal topical including buccal and sublingual rectal vaginal and or parenteral administration.

Formulations of the present invention which are suitable for vaginal administration include pessaries tampons creams gels pastes foams or spray formulations containing such carriers as are known in the art to be appropriate. Dosage forms for the topical or transdermal administration of compositions of this invention include powders sprays ointments pastes creams lotions gels solutions patches and inhalants.

The phrases parenteral administration and administered parenterally as used herein means modes of administration other than enteral and topical administration usually by injection and includes without limitation intravenous intramuscular intraarterial intrathecal intracapsular intraorbital intracardiac intradermal intraperitoneal transtracheal subcutaneous subcuticular intraarticular subcapsular subarachnoid intraspinal epidural and intrasternal injection and infusion.

In one embodiment the pharmaceutical composition is administered by intravenous or subcutaneous injection or infusion.

In one embodiment the human monoclonal antibodies of the invention are administered in crystalline form by subcutaneous injection cf. Yang et al. 2003 100 12 6934 6939.

Regardless of the route of administration selected the compounds of the present invention which may be used in the form of a pharmaceutically acceptable salt or in a suitable hydrated form and or the pharmaceutical compositions of the present invention are formulated into pharmaceutically acceptable dosage forms by conventional methods known to those of skill in the art.

As used herein pharmaceutically acceptable carrier includes any and all solvents dispersion media coatings antibacterial and antifungal agents isotonicity agents antioxidants and absorption delaying agents and the like that are physiologically compatible.

Pharmaceutically acceptable carriers include sterile aqueous solutions or dispersions and sterile powders for the extemporaneous preparation of sterile injectable solutions or dispersion. The use of such media and agents for pharmaceutically active substances is known in the art. Except insofar as any conventional media or agent is incompatible with the active compound use thereof in the pharmaceutical compositions of the invention is contemplated.

Preferably the carrier is suitable for parenteral administration e.g. intravenous or subcutaneous injection or infusion.

Pharmaceutical compositions typically must be sterile and stable under the conditions of manufacture and storage. The composition can be formulated as a solution microemulsion liposome or other ordered structure suitable to high drug concentration. Examples of suitable aqueous and nonaqueous carriers which may be employed in the pharmaceutical compositions of the invention include water ethanol polyols such as glycerol propylene glycol polyethylene glycol and the like and suitable mixtures thereof vegetable oils such as olive oil and injectable organic esters such as ethyl oleate. Proper fluidity can be maintained for example by the use of coating materials such as lecithin by the maintenance of the required particle size in the case of dispersions and by the use of surfactants.

The pharmaceutical compositions may also contain adjuvants such as preservatives wetting agents emulsifying agents and dispersing agents. Prevention of presence of microorganisms may be ensured both by sterilization procedures and by the inclusion of various antibacterial and antifungal agents for example paraben chlorobutanol phenol sorbic acid and the like. It may also be desirable to include isotonicity agents such as sugars polyalcohols such as mannitol sorbitol glycerol or sodium chloride in the compositions. Pharmaceutically acceptable antioxidants may also be included for example 1 water soluble antioxidants such as ascorbic acid cysteine hydrochloride sodium bisulfate sodium metabisulfite sodium sulfite and the like 2 oil soluble antioxidants such as ascorbyl palmitate butylated hydroxyanisole BHA butylated hydroxytoluene BHT lecithin propyl gallate alpha tocopherol and the like and 3 metal chelating agents such as citric acid ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid EDTA sorbitol tartaric acid phosphoric acid and the like.

Prolonged absorption of the injectable compositions can be brought about by including in the composition an agent that delays absorption for example monostearate salts and gelatin.

Sterile injectable solutions can be prepared by incorporating the active compound in the required amount in an appropriate solvent with one or a combination of ingredients e.g. as enumerated above as required followed by sterilization microfiltration. Generally dispersions are prepared by incorporating the active compound into a sterile vehicle that contains a basic dispersion medium and the required other ingredients e.g. from those enumerated above. In the case of sterile powders for the preparation of sterile injectable solutions the preferred methods of preparation are vacuum drying and freeze drying lyophilization that yield a powder of the active ingredient plus any additional desired ingredient from a previously sterile filtered solution thereof.

If appropriate the antibody may be used in a suitable hydrated form or in the form of a pharmaceutically acceptable salt. A pharmaceutically acceptable salt refers to a salt that retains the desired biological activity of the parent compound and does not impart any undesired toxicological effects see e.g. Berge S. M. et al. 1977 66 1 19 . Examples of such salts include acid addition salts and base addition salts. Acid addition salts include those derived from nontoxic inorganic acids such as hydrochloric nitric phosphoric sulfuric hydrobromic hydroiodic phosphorous and the like as well as from nontoxic organic acids such as aliphatic mono and dicarboxylic acids phenyl substituted alkanoic acids hydroxy alkanoic acids aromatic acids aliphatic and aromatic sulfonic acids and the like. Base addition salts include those derived from alkaline earth metals such as sodium potassium magnesium calcium and the like as well as from nontoxic organic amines such as N N dibenzylethylenediamine N methyl glucamine chloroprocaine choline diethanolamine ethylenediamine procaine and the like.

Depending on the route of administration the active compound i.e. antibody and bispecific multispecific molecule may be coated in a material to protect the compound from the action of acids and other natural conditions that may inactivate the compound. For example the compound may be administered to a subject in an appropriate carrier for example liposomes. Liposomes include water in oil in water CGF emulsions as well as conventional liposomes Strejan et al. 1984 J. Neuroimmunol. 7 27 .

The active compounds can be prepared with carriers that will protect the compound against rapid release such as a controlled release formulation including implants transdermal patches and microencapsulated delivery systems. Biodegradable biocompatible polymers can be used such as ethylene vinyl acetate polyanhydrides polyglycolic acid collagen polyorthoesters and polylactic acid. Methods for the preparation of such formulations are generally known to those skilled in the art. See e.g. J. R. Robinson ed. Marcel Dekker Inc. New York 1978.

The pharmaceutical compositions can be administered with medical devices known in the art. For example in a preferred embodiment a therapeutic composition of the invention can be administered with a needleless hypodermic injection device such as the devices disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 399 163 U.S. Pat. No. 5 383 851 U.S. Pat. No. 5 312 335 U.S. Pat. No. 5 064 413 U.S. Pat. No. 4 941 880 U.S. Pat. No. 4 790 824 or U.S. Pat. No. 4 596 556. Examples of well known implants and modules useful in the present invention include U.S. Pat. No. 4 487 603 which discloses an implantable micro infusion pump for dispensing medication at a controlled rate U.S. Pat. No. 4 486 194 which discloses a therapeutic device for administering medicants through the skin U.S. Pat. No. 4 447 233 which discloses a medication infusion pump for delivering medication at a precise infusion rate U.S. Pat. No. 4 447 224 which discloses a variable flow implantable infusion apparatus for continuous drug delivery U.S. Pat. No. 4 439 196 which discloses an osmotic drug delivery system having multi chamber compartments and U.S. Pat. No. 4 475 196 which discloses an osmotic drug delivery system. Many other such implants delivery systems and modules are known to those skilled in the art.

In certain embodiments the human monoclonal antibodies of the invention can be formulated to ensure proper distribution in vivo. For example the blood brain barrier BBB excludes many highly hydrophilic compounds. To ensure that the therapeutic compounds of the invention cross the BBB if desired they can be formulated for example in liposomes. For methods of manufacturing liposomes see e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 4 522 811 U.S. Pat. No. 5 374 548 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 399 331. The liposomes may comprise one or more moieties which are selectively transported into specific cells or organs thus enhance targeted drug delivery see e.g. V.V. Ranade 1989 29 685 . Exemplary targeting moieties include folate or biotin see e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 5 416 016 to Low et al. mannosides Umezawa et al. 1988 153 1038 antibodies P. G. Bloeman et al. 1995 357 140 M. Owais et al. 1995 39 180 surfactant protein A receptor Briscoe et al. 1995 1233 134 different species of which may comprise the formulations of the inventions as well as components of the invented molecules p120 Schreier et al. 1994 J. Biol. Chem. 269 9090 see also K. Keinanen M. L. Laukkanen 1994 346 123 J. J. Killion I. J. Fidler 1994 4 273. In one embodiment of the invention the therapeutic compounds of the invention are formulated in liposomes in a more preferred embodiment the liposomes include a targeting moiety. In a most preferred embodiment the therapeutic compounds in the liposomes are delivered by bolus injection to a site proximal to the desired area e.g. the site of inflammation or infection or the site of a tumor. The composition must be fluid to the extent that easy syringability exists. It must be stable under the conditions of manufacture and storage and must be preserved against the contaminating action of microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi.

In a further embodiment the human monoclonal antibodies of the invention can be formulated to prevent or reduce their transport across the placenta. This can be done by methods known in the art e.g. by PEGylation of the antibodies or by use of F ab fragments. Further references can be made to Cunningham Rundles C. Zhuo Z. Griffith B. Keenan J. 1992 Biological activities of polyethylene glycol immunoglobulin conjugates. Resistance to enzymatic degradation. 152 177 190 and to Landor M. 1995 Maternal fetal transfer of immunoglobulins 74 279 283. This is particularly relevant when the antibodies are used for treating or preventing recurrent spontaneous abortion.

Dosage regimens are adjusted to provide the optimum desired response e.g. a therapeutic response . For example a single bolus may be administered several divided doses may be administered over time or the dose may be proportionally reduced or increased as indicated by the exigencies of the therapeutic situation. It is especially advantageous to formulate parenteral compositions in dosage unit form for ease of administration and uniformity of dosage. Dosage unit form as used herein refers to physically discrete units suited as unitary dosages for the subjects to be treated each unit contains a predetermined quantity of active compound calculated to produce the desired therapeutic effect in association with the required pharmaceutical carrier. The specification for the dosage unit forms of the invention are dictated by and directly dependent on a the unique characteristics of the active compound and the particular therapeutic effect to be achieved and b the limitations inherent in the art of compounding such an active compound for the treatment of sensitivity in individuals.

Actual dosage levels of the active ingredients in the pharmaceutical compositions of the present invention may be varied so as to obtain an amount of the active ingredient which is effective to achieve the desired therapeutic response for a particular patient composition and mode of administration without being toxic to the patient. The selected dosage level will depend upon a variety of pharmacokinetic factors including the activity of the particular compositions of the present invention employed or the ester salt or amide thereof the route of administration the time of administration the rate of excretion of the particular compound being employed the duration of the treatment other drugs compounds and or materials used in combination with the particular compositions employed the age sex weight condition general health and prior medical history of the patient being treated and like factors well known in the medical arts.

A physician or veterinarian having ordinary skill in the art can readily determine and prescribe the effective amount of the pharmaceutical composition required. For example the physician or veterinarian could start doses of the compounds of the invention employed in the pharmaceutical composition at levels lower than that required in order to achieve the desired therapeutic effect and gradually increase the dosage until the desired effect is achieved. In general a suitable daily dose of a composition of the invention will be that amount of the compound which is the lowest dose effective to produce a therapeutic effect. Such an effective dose will generally depend upon the factors described above. It is preferred that administration be intravenous intramuscular intraperitoneal or subcutaneous preferably administered proximal to the site of the target. If desired the effective daily dose of a therapeutic composition may be administered as two three four five six or more sub doses administered separately at appropriate intervals throughout the day optionally in unit dosage forms. While it is possible for a compound of the present invention to be administered alone it is preferable to administer the compound as a pharmaceutical formulation composition .

In one embodiment the human monoclonal antibodies according to the invention can be administered by infusion in a weekly dosage of from 10 to 500 mg m such as of from 200 to 400 mg m. Such administration can be repeated e.g. 1 to 8 times such as 3 to 5 times. The administration may be performed by continuous infusion over a period of from 2 to 24 hours such as of from 2 to 12 hours.

In another embodiment the human monoclonal antibodies can be administered by slow continuous infusion over a long period such as more than 24 hours in order to reduce toxic side effects.

In still another embodiment the human monoclonal antibodies can be administered in a weekly dosage of from 50 mg to 4000 mg e.g. of from 250 mg to 2000 mg such as for example 300 mg 500 mg 700 mg 1000 mg 1500 mg or 2000 mg for up to 8 times such as from 4 to 6 times. The administration may be performed by continuous infusion over a period of from 2 to 24 hours such as of from 2 to 12 hours. Such regimen may be repeated one or more times as necessary for example after 6 months or 12 months.

In yet another embodiment the human monoclonal antibodies can be administered in a weekly dosage of from 50 mg to 4000 mg e.g. of from 250 mg to 2000 mg such as for example 300 mg 500 mg 700 mg 1000 mg 1500 mg or 2000 mg for up to 8 times such as from 4 to 6 times. The weekly dosage may be divided into two or three subdosages and administered over more than one day. For example a dosage of 300 mg may be administered over 2 days with 100 mg on day one 1 and 200 mg on day two 2 . A dosage of 500 mg may be administered over 3 days with 100 mg on day one 1 200 mg on day two 2 and 200 mg on day three 3 and a dosage of 700 mg may be administered over 3 days with 100 mg on day 1 one 300 mg on day 2 two and 300 mg on day 3 three . Such mode of administration may be useful in e.g. CLL. The regimen may be repeated one or more times as necessary for example after 6 months or 12 months.

The dosage can be determined or adjusted by measuring the amount of circulating monoclonal anti CD20 antibodies upon administration in a biological sample by using anti idiotypic antibodies which target the anti CD20 antibodies.

In yet another embodiment the human monoclonal antibodies can be administered by maintenance therapy such as e.g. once a week for a period of 6 months or more.

In still another embodiment the human monoclonal antibodies according to the invention can be administered by a regimen including one infusion of a human monoclonal antibody against CD20 followed by an infusion of a human monoclonal antibody against CD20 conjugated to a radioisotope. The regimen may be repeated e.g. 7 to 9 days later.

A therapeutically effective dosage for tumor therapy can be measured by objective tumor responses which can either be complete or partial. A complete response CR is defined as no clinical radiological or other evidence of disease. A partial response PR results from a reduction in aggregate tumor size of greater than 50 . Median time to progression is a measure that characterizes the durability of the objective tumor response.

A therapeutically effective dosage for tumor therapy can also be measured by its ability to stabilize the progression of disease. The ability of a compound to inhibit cancer can be evaluated in an animal model system predictive of efficacy in human tumors. Alternatively this property of a composition can be evaluated by examining the ability of the compound to inhibit cell growth or apoptosis by in vitro assays known to the skilled practitioner. A therapeutically effective amount of a therapeutic compound can decrease tumor size or otherwise ameliorate symptoms in a subject. One of ordinary skill in the art would be able to determine such amounts based on such factors as the subject s size the severity of the subject s symptoms and the particular composition or route of administration selected.

A therapeutically effective dosage for rheumatoid arthritis preferably will result in an ACR20 Preliminary Definition of Improvement in the patients more preferred in an ACR50 Preliminary Definition of Improvement and even more preferred in an ARC70 Preliminary Definition of Improvement.

ACR20 Preliminary Definition of Improvement is defined as 20 improvement in Tender Joint Count TiC and Swollen Joint Count SJC and 20 improvement in 3 of following 5 assessments Patient Pain Assessment VAS Patient Global assessment VAS Physician Global Assessment VAS Patent Self Assessed Disability HAQ Acute Phase Reactant CRP or ESR .

ACR50 and ACR70 are defined in the same way with 50 and 70 improvements respectively. For further details see Felson et al. in American College of Rheumatology Preliminary Definition of Improvement in Rheumatoid Arthritis 1995 38 727 735.

The pharmaceutical composition of the invention may contain one or a combination of human monoclonal antibodies of the invention. Thus in a further embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions include a combination of multiple e.g. two or more isolated human antibodies of the invention which act by different mechanisms e.g. one antibody which predominately acts by inducing CDC in combination with another antibody which predominately acts by inducing apoptosis.

The pharmaceutical compositions of the invention also can be administered in combination therapy i.e. combined with one or more further therapeutic agents in any suitable ratios. For example the combination therapy can include administration of a composition of the present invention together with at least one chemotherapeutic agent at least one anti inflammatory agent at least one disease modifying antirheumatic drug DMARD or at least one immunosuppressive agent. Such administration can be simultaneous separate or sequential. For simultaneous administration the agents can be administered as one compositions or as separate compositions as appropriate.

In one embodiment such therapeutic agents include one or more chemotherapeutics selected from antimetabolites e.g. methotrexate 6 mercaptopurine 6 thioguanine cytarabine fludarabin 5 fluorouracil decarbazine hydroxyurea azathiprin gemcitabin and cladribin alkylating agents e.g. mechlorethamine thioepa chlorambucil melphalan carmustine BSNU and lomustine CCNU cyclophosphamide busulfan dibromomannitol streptozotocin mitomycin C and cis dichlorodiamine platinum II DDP cisplatin anthracyclines e.g. daunorubicin formerly daunomycin and doxorubicin antibiotics e.g. dactinomycin formerly actinomycin bleomycin mithramycin and anthramycin AMC and anti mitotic agents e.g. vincristine vin blastine docetaxel paclitaxel and vinorelbin .

In a further embodiment the chemotherapeutic agent is selected form doxorubicin cisplatin bleomycin carmustine cyclophosphamide and chlorambucil.

Co administration of the human anti CD20 antibodies of the present invention with chemotherapeutic agents provides two anti cancer agents which operate via different mechanisms which yield a cytotoxic effect to human tumor cells. Such co administration can solve problems due to development of resistance to drugs or a change in the antigenicity of the tumor cells which would render them unreactive with the antibody.

In another embodiment human antibodies of the present invention may be administered in combination with chlorambucil and prednisolone cyclophosphamide and prednisolone cyclophosphamide vincristine and prednisone cyclophosphamide vincristine doxorubicin and prednisone fludarabine and anthracycline or in combination with other common multi drugs regimens for NHL such as disclosed e.g. in Non Hodgkin s Lymphomas Making sense of Diagnosis Treatment and Options Lorraine Johnston 1999 O Reilly and Associates Inc.

In yet another embodiment the human antibodies may be administered in conjunction with radiotherapy and or autologous peripheral stem cell or bone marrow transplantation.

In yet a further embodiment the human monoclonal antibodies can be administered in combination with an anti CD25 antibody for the treatment of bullous pemphigoid e.g. in patients with graft versus host disease.

In another embodiment such therapeutic agents include one or more anti inflammatory agents such as a steroidal drug or a NSAID nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drug . Preferred agents include for example aspirin and other salicylates Cox 2 inhibitors such as rofecoxib and celecoxib NSAIDs such as ibuprofen fenoprofen naproxen sulindac diclofenac piroxicam ketoprofen diflunisal nabumetone etodolac oxaprozin and indomethacin.

In another embodiment such therapeutic agents include one or more disease modifying antirheumatic drugs DMARDs such as methotrexate hydroxychloroquine sulfasalazine pyrimidine synthesis inhibitors e.g. leflunomide IL 1 receptor blocking agents e.g. anakinra and TNF blocking agents e.g. etanercept infliximab and adalimumab.

In yet another embodiment such therapeutic agents include one or more immunosuppressive agents such as cyclosporine and azathioprine.

In another particular embodiment the human monoclonal antibodies may be administered in combination with one or more antibodies selected from anti CD19 anti bodies anti CD21 antibodies anti CD22 antibodies anti CD37 antibodies and anti CD38 antibodies for the treatment of malignant diseases.

In still another particular embodiment the human antibodies are administered in combination with one or more antibodies selected from anti IL6R antibodies anti IL8 antibodies anti IL15 antibodies anti IL15R antibodies anti CD4 antibodies anti CD11a antibodies e.g. efalizumab anti alpha 4 beta 1 integrin VLA4 antibodies e.g natalizumab and CTLA4 Ig for the treatment of inflammatory diseases.

In yet a further embodiment the human antibodies may be administered in combination with an anti C3b i antibody in order to enhance complement activation.

Also within the scope of the present invention are kits comprising the antibody compositions of the invention e.g. human antibodies and immunoconjugates and instructions for use. The kit can further contain one or more additional agents such as an immunosuppressive reagent a cytotoxic agent or a radiotoxic agent or one or more additional human antibodies of the invention e.g. a human antibody having a complementary activity .

The human antibodies including immunoconjugates bispecific multispecific molecules compositions and other derivatives described herein of the present invention have numerous in vitro and in vivo diagnostic and therapeutic utilities involving the diagnosis and treatment of disorders involving cells expressing CD20. For example the antibodies can be administered to cells in culture e.g. in vitro or ex vivo or to human subjects e.g. in vivo to treat prevent and to diagnose a variety of disorders. As used herein the term subject is intended to include human and non human animals which respond to the human antibodies against CD20. Preferred subjects include human patients having disorders that can be corrected or ameliorated by inhibiting or controlling B cells normal or malignant .

For example the human antibodies can be used to elicit in vivo or in vitro one or more of the following biological activities to inhibit the growth of and or differentiation of a cell expressing CD20 to induce apoptosis of a cell expressing CD20 to kill a cell expressing CD20 to mediate phagocytosis or ADCC of a cell expressing CD20 in the presence of human effector cells and to mediate CDC of a cell expressing CD20 in the presence of complement.

The invention provides methods for treating a disorder involving cells expressing CD20 in a subject by administering to the subject the human antibodies of the invention. Such antibodies and derivatives thereof are used to inhibit CD20 induced activities associated with certain disorders e.g. proliferation and or differentiation. By contacting the antibody with CD20 e.g. by administering the antibody to a subject the ability of CD20 to induce such activities is inhibited and thus the associated disorder is treated.

Accordingly in one embodiment the present invention provides a method for treating or preventing a tumorigenic disorder involving CD20 expressing cells.

The method involves administering to a subject an antibody composition of the present invention in an amount effective to treat or prevent the disorder. The antibody composition can be administered alone or along with another therapeutic agent such as a cytotoxic or a radiotoxic agent which acts in conjunction with or synergistically with the antibody composition to treat or prevent the diseases involving CD20 expressing cells. Alternatively immunoconjugates can be used to kill cells which have CD20 expressed on their surface by targeting cytotoxins or radiotoxins to CD20.

In a particular embodiment the antibodies of the invention are used to treat or to prevent B cell lymphoma e.g. non Hodgkin s lymphoma NHL as the antibodies deplete the CD20 bearing tumor cells. CD20 is usually expressed at elevated levels on neoplastic i.e. tumorigenic B cells associated with NHL. Accordingly CD20 binding antibodies of the invention can be used to deplete CD20 bearing tumor cells which lead to NHL and thus can be used to prevent or treat this disease.

The B cell lymphomas may be relapsed B cell lymphomas e.g. B cell lymphomas relapsed after chemotherapy e.g. cisplatin therapy or after treatment with another anti CD20 antibody e.g. rituximab .

Non Hodgkin s lymphoma NHL is a type of B cell lymphoma. Lymphomas e.g. B cell lymphomas are a group of related cancers that arise when a lymphocyte a blood cell becomes malignant. The normal function of lymphocytes is to defend the body against invaders germs viruses fungi even cancer. There are many subtypes and maturation stages of lymphocytes and therefore there are many kinds of lymphomas. Like normal cells malignant lymphocytes can move to many parts of the body. Typically lymphoma cells form tumors in the lymphatic system bone marrow lymph nodes spleen and blood. However these cells can migrate to other organs. Certain types of lymphoma will tend to grow in locations in which the normal version of the cell resides. For example it s common for follicular NHL tumors to develop in the lymph nodes.

Examples of non Hodgkin s lymphoma NHL include precursor B cell lymphoblastic leukemia lymphoma and mature B cell neoplasms such as B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia CLL small lymphocytic lymphoma SLL B cell prolymphocytic leukemia lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma mantle cell lymphoma MCL follicular lymphoma FL including low grade intermediate grade and high grade FL cutaneous follicle center lymphoma marginal zone B cell lymphoma MALT type nodal and splenic type hairy cell leukemia diffuse large B cell lymphoma Burkitt s lymphoma plasmacytoma plasma cell myeloma post transplant lymphoproliferative disorder Waldenstr m s macroglobulinemia anaplastic large cell lymphoma ALCL lymphomatoid granulomatosis primary effusion lymphoma intravascular large B cell lymphoma mediastinal large B cell lymphoma heavy chain diseases including and a disease lymphomas induced by therapy with immunosuppressive agents such as cyclosporine induced lymphoma and methotrexate induced lymphoma.

In one embodiment the disease is follicular lymphoma FL . In another embodiment the disease is lymphocytic leukemia CLL small lymphocytic lymphoma SLL .

In a further embodiment the human antibodies of the present invention can be used to treat Hodgkin s lymphoma.

Human antibodies e.g. human monoclonal antibodies multispecific and bispecific molecules of the present invention also can be used to block or inhibit other effects of CD20. For example it is known that CD20 is expressed on B lymphocytes and is involved in the proliferation and or differentiation of these cells. Since B lymphocytes function as immunomodulators CD20 is an important target for antibody mediated therapy to target B lymphocytes e.g. to inactivate or kill B lymphocytes involved in immune autoimmune inflammatory or infectious disease or disorder involving human CD20 expressing cells.

Examples of diseases and disorders in which CD20 expressing B cells are involved and which can be treated and or prevented include immune autoimmune inflammatory and infectious diseases and disorders such as psoriasis psoriatic arthritis dermatitis systemic sclerosis inflammatory bowel disease IBD Crohn s disease ulcerative colitis respiratory distress syndrome meningitis encephalitis uveitis glomerulonephritis eczema asthma atherosclerosis leukocyte adhesion deficiency multiple sclerosis Raynaud s syndrome Sj gren s syndrome juvenile onset diabetes Reiter s disease Beh et s disease immune complex nephritis IgA nephropathy IgM polyneuropathies immune mediated thrombocytopenias such as acute idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura hemolytic anemia myasthenia gravis lupus nephritis systemic lupus erythematosus rheumatoid arthritis RA atopic dermatitis pemphigus Graves disease severe acute respiratory distress syndrome choreoretinitis. Hashimoto s thyroiditis Wegener s granulomatosis Omenn s syndrome chronic renal failure acute infectious mononucleosis HIV herpes virus associated diseases as well as diseases and disorders caused by or mediated by infection of B cells with virus such as Epstein Barr virus EBV .

Further examples of inflammatory immune and or autoimmune disorders in which autoantibodies and or excessive B lymphocyte activity are prominent and which can be treated and or prevented include the following 

vasculitides and other vessel disorders such as microscopic polyanguitis Churg Strauss syndrome and other ANCA associated vasculitides polyarteritis nodosa essential cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis cutaneous leukocytoclastic angiitis Kawasaki disease Takayasu arteritis giant cell arthritis Henoch Sch nlein purpura primary or isolated cerebral angiitis erythema nodosum thrombangiitis obliterans thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura including hemolytic uremic syndrome and secondary vasculitides including cutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis e.g. secondary to hepatitis B hepatitis C Waldenstr m s macroglobulinemia B cell neoplasias rheumatoid arthritis Sj gren s syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus erythema nodosum allergic vasculitis panniculitis Weber Christian disease purpura hyperglobulinaemica and Buerger s disease 

skin disorders such as contact dermatitis linear IgA dermatosis vitiligo pyoderma gangrenosum epidermolysis bullosa acquisita pemphigus vulgaris including cicatricial pemphigoid and bullous pemphigoid alopecia greata including alopecia universalis and alopecia totalis dermatitis herpetiformis erythema multiforme and chronic autoimmune urticaria including angioneurotic edema and urticarial vasculitis 

connective tissue disorders such as CNS lupus discoid lupus erythematosus CREST syndrome mixed connective tissue disease polymyositis dermatomyositis inclusion body myositis secondary amyloidosis cryoglobulinemia type I and type II fibromyalgia phospholipid antibody syndrome secondary hemophilia relapsing polychondritis sarcoidosis stiff man syndrome rheumatic fever and eosinophil fasciitis 

arthritides such as ankylosing spondylitis juvenile chronic arthritis adult Still s disease SAPHO syndrome sacroileitis reactive arthritis Still s disease and gout 

hematologic disorders such as aplastic anemia primary hemolytic anemia including cold agglutinin syndrome hemolytic anemia with warm autoantibodies hemolytic anemia secondary to CLL or systemic lupus erythematosus POEMS syndrome pernicious anemia Waldemstr m s purpura hyperglobulinaemica Evans syndrome agranulocytosis autoimmune neutropenia Franklin s disease Seligmann s disease chain disease factor VIII inhibitor formation factor IX inhibitor formation and paraneoplastic syndrome secondary to thymoma and lymphomas 

endocrinopathies such as polyendocrinopathy and Addison s disease further examples are autoimmune hypoglycemia autoimmune hypothyroidism autoimmune insulin syndrome de Quervain s thyroiditis and insulin receptor antibody mediated insulin resistance 

hepato gastrointestinal disorders such as celiac disease Whipple s disease primary biliary cirrhosis chronic active hepatitis primary sclerosing cholangiitis and autoimmune gastritis 

nephropathies such as rapid progressive glomerulonephritis post streptococcal nephritis Goodpasture s syndrome membranous glomerulonephritis cryoglobulinemic nephritis minimal change disease and steroid dependent nephritic syndrome 

neurological disorders such as autoimmune neuropathies mononeuritis multiplex Lambert Eaton s myasthenic syndrome Sydenham s chorea tabes dorsalis and Guillain Barr s syndrome further examples are myelopathy tropical spastic paraparesis myasthenia gravis acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy and chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy 

cardiac and pulmonary disorders such as fibrosing alveolitis bronchiolitis obliterans allergic aspergillosis cystic fibrosis L ffler s syndrome myocarditis and pericarditis further examples are hypersensitivity pneumonitis and paraneoplastic syndrome secondary to lung cancer 

gynecological obstetrical disorders such as recurrent abortion recurrent fetal loss intrauterine growth retardation and paraneoplastic syndrome secondary to gynaecological neoplasms 

transplantation derived disorders such as allograft and xenograft rejection and graft versus host disease.

In another embodiment the disease is selected from inflammatory bowel disease IBD ulcerative colitis Crohn s disease juvenile onset diabetes multiple sclerosis immune mediated thrombocytopenias such as acute idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura hemolytic anemia including autoimmune hemolytic anemia myasthenia gravis systemic sclerosis and pemphigus vulgaris.

In yet a further embodiment the disease is selected from inflammatory bowel disease IBD ulcerative colitis Crohn s disease and multiple sclerosis.

Target specific effector cells e.g. effector cells linked to compositions e.g. human antibodies bispecific multispecific of the invention can also be used as therapeutic agents. Effector cells for targeting can be human leukocytes such as macrophages neutrophils or monocytes. Other cells include eosinophils natural killer cells and other IgG or IgA receptor bearing cells. If desired effector cells can be obtained from the subject to be treated. The target specific effector cells can be administered as a suspension of cells in a physiologically acceptable solution. The number of cells administered can be in the order of 108 to 109 but will vary depending on the therapeutic purpose. In general the amount will be sufficient to obtain localization at the target cell e.g. a tumor cell expressing CD20 and to effect cell killing by e.g. phagocytosis.

Therapy with target specific effector cells can be performed in conjunction with other techniques for removal of targeted cells. For example anti tumor therapy using the compositions e.g. human antibodies bispecific multispecific molecules of the invention and or effector cells armed with these compositions can be used in conjunction with chemotherapy. Additionally combination immunotherapy may be used to direct two distinct cytotoxic effector populations toward tumor cell rejection. For example anti CD20 antibodies linked to anti Fc RI or anti CD3 may be used in conjunction with IgG or IgA receptor specific binding agents.

Bispecific and multispecific molecules of the invention can also be used to modulate Fc R or Fc R levels on effector cells such as by capping and elimination of receptors on the cell surface. Mixtures of anti Fc receptors can also be used for this purpose.

The compositions e.g. human antibodies multispecific and bispecific molecules and immunoconjugates of the invention which have complement binding sites such as portions from IgG1 2 or 3 or IgM which bind complement can also be used in the presence of complement. In one embodiment ex vivo treatment of a population of cells comprising target cells with a binding agent of the invention and appropriate effector cells can be supplemented by the addition of complement or serum containing complement. Phagocytosis of target cells coated with a binding agent of the invention can be improved by binding of complement proteins. In another embodiment target cells coated with the compositions e.g. human antibodies multispecific and bispecific molecules of the invention can also be lysed by complement. In yet another embodiment the compositions of the invention do not activate complement.

The compositions e.g. human antibodies multispecific and bispecific molecules and immunoconjugates of the invention can also be administered together with complement. Accordingly within the scope of the invention are compositions comprising human antibodies bispecific multispecific molecules and serum or complement. These compositions are advantageous in that the complement is located in close proximity to the human antibodies bispecific multispecific molecules. Alternatively the human antibodies bispecific multispecific molecules of the invention and the complement or serum can be administered separately. Binding of the compositions of the present invention to target cells is believed to cause translocation of the CD20 antigen antibody complex into lipid rafts of the cell membrane. Such translocation creates a high density of antigen antibody complexes which may efficiently activate and or enhance CDC.

In other embodiments the subject can be additionally treated with an agent that modulates e.g. enhances or inhibits the expression or activity of Fc or Fc receptors by for example treating the subject with a cytokine. Preferred cytokines for administration during treatment with the multispecific molecule include of granulocyte colony stimulating factor G CSF granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor GM CSF interferon IFN and tumor necrosis factor TNF .

The compositions e.g. human antibodies multispecific and bispecific molecules of the invention can also be used to target cells expressing Fc R or CD20 for example for labeling such cells. For such use the binding agent can be linked to a molecule that can be detected. Thus the invention provides methods for localizing ex vivo or in vitro cells expressing Fc receptors such as Fc R or CD20. The detectable label can be e.g. a radioisotope a fluorescent compound an enzyme or an enzyme co factor.

In a particular embodiment the invention provides methods for detecting the presence of CD20 antigen in a sample or measuring the amount of CD20 antigen comprising contacting the sample and a control sample with a human monoclonal antibody which specifically binds to CD20 under conditions that allow for formation of a complex between the antibody or portion thereof and CD20. The formation of a complex is then detected wherein a difference complex formation between the sample compared to the control sample is indicative the presence of CD20 antigen in the sample.

In another embodiment human antibodies of the invention can be used to detect levels of circulating CD20 or levels of cells which contain CD20 on their membrane surface which levels can then be linked to certain disease symptoms. Alternatively the antibodies can be used to deplete or interact with the function of CD20 expressing cells thereby implicating these cells as important mediators of the disease. This can be achieved by contacting a sample and a control sample with the anti CD20 antibody under conditions that allow for the formation of a complex between the antibody and CD20. Any complexes formed between the antibody and CD20 are detected and compared in the sample and the control.

Human antibodies of the invention can be initially tested for binding activity associated with therapeutic or diagnostic use in vitro. For example the antibodies can be tested using flow cytometric assays described in the Examples below. Moreover activity of the antibodies in triggering at least one effector mediated effector cell activity including inhibiting the growth of and or killing of cells expressing CD20 can be assayed. For example the ability of the antibodies to trigger CDC and or apoptosis can be assayed. Protocols for assaying for CDC homotypic adhesion molecular clustering or apoptosis are described in the Examples below.

In still another embodiment the invention provides a method for detecting the presence or quantifying the amount of CD20 expressing cells in vivo or in vitro. The method comprises i administering to a subject a composition e.g. a multi or bispecific molecule of the invention conjugated to a detectable marker ii exposing the subject to a means for detecting said detectable marker to identify areas containing CD20 expressing cells.

In yet another embodiment immunoconjugates of the invention can be used to target compounds e.g. therapeutic agents labels cytotoxins radiotoxins immuno suppressants etc. to cells which have CD20 expressed on their surface by linking such compounds to the antibody. Thus the invention also provides methods for localizing ex vivo or in vitro cells expressing CD20 such as Reed Sternberg cells e.g. with a detectable label such as a radioisotope a fluorescent compound an enzyme or an enzyme co factor .

The present invention is further illustrated by the following examples which should not be construed as further limiting.

Daudi and Raji B cell lines were cultured in RPMI 1640 culture medium supplemented with 10 fetal calf serum FCS Optimum C241 Wisent Inc. st. Bruno Canada 2 mM L glutamine 100 IU ml penicillin 100 g ml streptomycin and 1 mM sodium pyruvate all Gibco BRL Life Technologies Paisley Scotland .

Cultures were maintained at 37 C. in a humidified 5 COincubator split and harvested at 80 90 confluence. Medium was refreshed twice a week. At this time cells were split and seeded out to 1 1.5 10cells ml to ensure viability and optimal growth.

KM Mice Fully human monoclonal antibodies to CD20 were prepared using KM mice which express human antibody genes. In the KM mouse strain the endogenous mouse kappa light chain gene has been homozygously disrupted as described in Chen et al. 1993 12 811 820 and the endogenous mouse heavy chain gene has been homozygously disrupted as described in Example 1 of WO 01 09187. This mouse strain carries a human kappa light chain transgene KCo5 as described in Fishwild et al. 1996 14 845 851. This mouse strain also carries a human heavy chain transchromosome composed of chromosome 14 fragment hCF SC20 as described in WO 02 43478.

KM Mouse Immunizations KM mice were immunized with human CD20 transfected NS 0 cells. For the first immunization per mouse 1 10cells in 100 l PBS were mixed 1 1 with Complete Freunds Adjuvant and injected intraperitoneally i.p. . Subsequent i.p. immunizations 9 immunizations in total were done every fortnight using a similar amount of cells in phosphate buffered saline PBS without adjuvant. Four and three days prior to fusion the mice were intravenously boosted with 1 10cells suspended in PBS.

The presence of antibodies directed against human CD20 in the serum of the mice was monitored by flow cytometry using FACS analysis using human CD20 transfected NS 0 cells as well as CD20 negative parental NS 0 cells.

Generation of Hybridomas Producing Human Monoclonal Antibodies to CD20 The mouse splenocytes were isolated from the KM mice and fused with PEG to a mouse myeloma cell line based upon standard protocols. The resulting hybridomas were then screened for human antibody production by ELISA and for CD20 specificity using human CD20 transfected NS 0 and SKBR3 cells by FACS analysis.

More particularly single cell suspensions of splenic lymphocytes from immunized mice were fused to one fourth the number of SP2 0 nonsecreting mouse myeloma cells ATCC CRL 1581 with 50 PEG Sigma . Cells were plated at approximately 1 10 well in flat bottom microtiter plates followed by about two week incubation in selective medium containing 10 fetal bovine serum FBS 10 P388D1 ATCC CRL TIB 63 conditioned medium 3 5 origen IGEN in DMEM Mediatech CRL 10013 with high glucose L glutamine and sodium pyruvate plus 5 mM HEPES 0.055 mM 2 mercaptoethanol 50 mg ml gentamycin and 1 HAT Sigma H 0262 . After 1 2 weeks cells were cultured in medium in which the HAT was replaced with HT Sigma H 0137 . Individual wells were then screened by flow cytometry for human anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies. Once extensive hybridoma growth occurred usually after 10 14 days the medium was monitored. The antibody secreting hybridomas were replated screened again and if still positive for human anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies were subcloned by limiting dilution. The stable subclones were then cultured in vitro to generate small amounts of antibody in tissue culture medium for characterization. One clone from each hybridoma which retained the reactivity of parent cells by FACS was chosen. 5 10 vial cell banks were generated for each clone and stored in liquid nitrogen.

A hybridoma was chosen expressing a human monoclonal IgM anti CD20 antibody denoted 2C6 which is characterised further in the following examples.

Binding to CD20 NS 0 cells Supernatant obtained from the 2C6 IgM clone was used to determine binding to CD20 on CD20 positive NS 0 cells. In comparison herewith rituximab IDEC human IgM control antibody and human IgG1 control antibody were used. The FACS staining was performed as follows 1 10cells well in 50 l FACS buffer PBS azide bovine serum albumin BSA and 50 l supernatant or purified antibody 10 g ml were incubated for 30 min at 4 C. Thereafter the cells were washed with FACS buffer and conjugate was added to the cells anti human IgM FITC or anti human IgG FITC for detecting rituximab 4 C. 30 min . After washing the cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. The data in Table 1 show that 2C6 IgM binds to CD20 albeit that fluorescence is approximately half of fluorescence after binding of rituximab.

Blocking experiments For the blocking experiment the cells were first incubated with 2C6 IgM supernatant and in comparison herewith rituximab human IgM control antibody and human IgG1 control antibody 4 C. 30 min whereupon the cells were stained with rituximab FITC 10 g ml and analyzed on the FACS. The data in Table 1 below show that 2C6 IgM could not completely block binding of rituximab.

CDC activity To determine the CDC activity of 2C6 IgM elevated membrane permeability was assessed using FACS analysis of propidium iodide PI stained cells. Briefly Daudi cells were washed and resuspended in RPMI 1 BSA at 1 10cells ml. Various dilutions of 2C6 IgM containing supernatant and in comparison herewith rituximab IgM control antibody and IgG1 control antibody were added to the cells and allowed to bind to CD20 expressed on the Daudi cells for 10 15 min at room temperature. Thereafter serum as a source of complement was added to a final concentration of 20 v v and the mixtures were incubated for 45 min at 37 C. The cells were then kept at 4 C. until analysis. Each sample 150 l was then added to 10 l of PI solution 10 g ml in PBS in a FACS tube. The mixture was assessed immediately by flow cytometry. The data in Table 1 show that 2C6 IgM can induce CDC but to a lesser extent than rituximab.

In the following all kits were used according to manufacturers instructions unless otherwise specified.

Approximately 10hybridoma cells were collected by centrifugation 1500 rpm 4 C. and washed in 1 ml PBS. Cell suspension was transferred to 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube and pelleted by centrifugation 13 000 rpm for 10 seconds .

mRNA was prepared using Quickprep micro mRNA purification kit from Amersham Biosciences Uppsala Sweden .

Both heavy and variable chain region DNA were amplified by PCR utilising primers which recognised 5 signal sequences and 3 start of the constant region sequences for and chains 

Variations in the target sequence were allowed for by using degenerate primers where D A or T or G H A or T or C K T or G R A or G S C or G V A or C or G and Y C or T.

DNA amplification was performed utilising Pfu polymerase Promega Southampton UK to decrease the number of replicable errors inserted into the DNA sequence of interest. Briefly 1 l of the applicable 5 and 3 primer 100 ng ml was added to 0.5 l of cDNA with 2.5 l of Pfu reaction buffer and 0.5 l of dNTP mix together with 0.5 l of Pfu polymerase 5 U l in a total volume of 25 l.

The PCR reactions were run using a PTC 100 thermal control system MJ Research Inc. Waltham Mass. USA . DNA was denatured at 94 C. for 5 min followed by 30 cycles of denaturing at 94 C. for 30 seconds annealing at 55 C. for one min and elongation for two min at 72 C. A final elongation reaction of 10 min was performed to ensure formation of full length transcripts.

PCR products were mixed with 2.8 l gel loading buffer and each sample was loaded onto a 0.7 horizontal agarose gel containing ethidium bromide and separated at 120 V along with 1 kB DNA ladder Gene ruler Fermentas AB Vilnius Lithuania to allow estimation of fragment size. PCR products were visualised under UV light excised and gel extracted using QIAEX II gel extraction kit from Qiagen Westburg B.V. Leusden The Netherlands .

The purified PCR products were then cloned with Zero Blunt TOPO PCR Cloning kit from Invitrogen and transformed into the kits TOP10 chemically competent and plated out onto kanamycin selection LB agar plates. Individual colonies were picked and grown up overnight in kanamycin selection LB medium for DNA purification using QIAprep miniprep kit from Qiagen.

Purified DNA was selected for the presence of inserts by EcoRI Promega digest and sequenced. 2.5 l of mini prep sample that included the correct sized insert was used for each sequence reaction with the addition of 2 l of Big Dye Terminator v1.1 Cycle Sequencing mix 2 l of 10 reaction buffer Applied Biosystems Foster City Calif. USA and 1 l of T7 or SP6 primer 1 pmol ml and 2.5 l water. PCR reactions were performed in an Applied Biosystems GeneAmp PCR System 9700 for 3 hours using the standard BigDye protocol consisting of 25 cycles of denaturing at 96 C. for 10 seconds annealing at 50 C. for 5 seconds and elongation at 60 C. for 4 min samples were then cooled to 4 C.

DNA from each PCR reaction was then precipitated by adding 1 l of 3 M sodium acetate and 25 l of 100 ethanol to 10 l of sample in a 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube and incubating the samples on ice for 10 min. DNA was pelleted by centrifugation at 16 000 g for 30 min at 4 C. then washed in 250 l of 70 ethanol and re pelleted for 10 min. Ethanol was completely removed and the DNA pellet was re suspended in 2 l of loading buffer 1 4 of dextran formaldehyde .

DNA sequence samples were run on a Perkin Elmer ABI Prism 377 DNA Sequencer Fremont Calif. USA and analysed using DNASTAR Sequence Manager software Madison Wis. USA .

The obtained sequences were compared to the known sequences and new primers designed which would introduce restriction sites for cloning with constant region sequences 

The PCR products were isolated and sub cloned into TOPO blunt end PCR vectors and sequenced as detailed above.

The obtained sequences were compared to the source sequences and then digested with HindIII SpeI for the heavy chain or HindIII BsiWI for the light chain alongside vectors containing human IgG constant regions for IgG1 and K chains respectively. The digest products were visualised and extracted as previously detailed. The digested fragments were then ligated using T4 DNA ligase Promega overnight at 4 C. and transformed into chemically competent JM109 Promega and plated out onto ampicillin selection LB agar plates. Individual colonies were picked and grown up overnight in ampicillin selection LB media for DNA purification using QIAprep miniprep kit from Qiagen and subsequent diagnostic digest with the appropriate restriction enzymes.

Once ligated with their constant regions the full length heavy and light chains were then extracted by double restriction digest using HindIII and EcoRI alongside pEE6.1 and pEE14.1 mammalian expression vectors respectively Lonza Biologics Slough UK . The digested fragments were then ligated using T4 DNA ligase Promega overnight at 4 C. and transformed into chemically competent JM109 Promega and plated out onto ampicillin selection LB agar plates. Individual colonies were picked and grown up overnight in ampicillin selection LB media for DNA purification using QIAprep miniprep kit from Qiagen and subsequent diagnostic digest with the appropriate restriction enzymes.

This experiment revealed that 2C6 has the Vnucleotide sequence SEQ ID NO 1 and amino acid sequence SEQ ID NO 2. Furthermore the 2C6 hybridoma expresses two light variable chains Va 2C6 with nucleotide sequence SEQ ID NO 3 and amino acid sequence SEQ ID NO 4 and Vb 2C6 with amino acid sequence SEQ ID NO 5.

HEK293F cells were obtained from Invitrogen and transfected with 2C6 heavy chain IgG1 DNA and 11B8 K light chain DNA according to the manufacturer s instructions using 293fectin. The recombinant antibody is denoted 2C6 IgG1 and is used in the experiments disclosed in the following examples. The production of human monoclonal anti CD20 antibody 11B8 is disclosed below.

HCo7 Immunization HCo7 mice were immunized with human CD20 transfected NS 0 cells. For the first immunization per mouse 1 10cells in 150 l PBS were mixed 1 1 with Complete Freunds Adjuvant and injected intraperitoneally i.p. . Subsequent i.p. immunizations were done using a similar amount of cells in PBS without adjuvant. Three and two days prior to fusion the mice were intravenously boosted with 0.5 10cells suspended in PBS.

The HCo7 mice have a JKD disruption in their endogenous light chain kappa genes as described in Chen et al. 1993 12 821 830 a CMD disruption in their endogenous heavy chain genes as described in Example 1 of WO 01 14424 a KCo5 human kappa light chain transgene as described in Fishwild et al. 1996 14 845 851 and a HCo7 human heavy chain transgene as described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 770 429 .

The presence of antibodies directed against human CD20 in the serum of the mice was monitored by flow cytometry using FACS analysis using human CD20 transfected NS 0 cells as well as CD20 negative parental NS 0 cells.

The mouse splenocytes were isolated from the HCo7 mice and fused with PEG to a mouse myeloma cell line based upon standard protocols. The resulting hybridomas were then screened for human IgG production by ELISA and for CD20 specificity using human CD20 transfected NS 0 and SKBR3 cells by FACS analysis. Single cell suspensions of splenic lymphocytes from immunized mice were fused to one fourth the number of SP2 0 nonsecreting mouse myeloma cells ATCC CRL 1581 with 50 PEG Sigma . Cells were plated at approximately 1 10 well in flat bottom microtiter plate followed by about two week incubation in selective medium containing 10 fetal bovine serum 10 P388D1 ATCC CRL TIB 63 conditioned medium 3 5 origen IGEN in DMEM Mediatech CRL 10013 with high glucose L glutamine and sodium pyruvate plus 5 mM HEPES 0.055 mM 2 mercaptoethanol 50 mg ml gentamycin and 1 HAT Sigma CRL P 7185 . After 1 2 weeks cells were cultured in medium in which the HAT was replaced with HT. Individual wells were then screened by flow cytometry for human anti CD20 monoclonal IgG antibodies. Once extensive hybridoma growth occurred usually after 10 14 days medium was monitored. The antibody secreting hybridomas were replated screened again and if still positive for human IgG anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies were subcloned by limiting dilution. The stable subclones were then cultured in vitro to generate small amounts of antibody in tissue culture medium for characterization. One clone from each hybridoma which retained the reactivity of parent cells by FACS was chosen. 5 10 vial cell banks were generated for each clone and stored in liquid nitrogen.

The following hybridoma was generated from the HCo7 mouse expressing a human monoclonal IgG3 anti CD20 antibody denoted 11B8.

The 11B8 antibody was sequenced according to standard techniques in a similar manner as disclosed in Example 3 using appropriate primers. The 11B8 antibody has the Vnucleotide sequence as set forth in SEQ ID NO 6 and the Vamino acid sequence as set forth in SEQ ID NO 7. The Vregion has the following amino acid sequence 

Met Glu Leu Gly Leu Ser Trp Val Phe Leu Val Ala Ile Leu Lys Gly Val Gln Cys Glu Val Gln Leu Val Gln Ser Gly Gly Gly Leu Val His Pro Gly Gly Ser Leu Arg Leu Ser Cys Thr Gly Ser Gly Phe Thr Phe Ser Tyr His Ala Met His Trp Val Arg Gln Ala Pro Gly Lys Gly Leu Glu Trp Val Ser Ile Ile Gly Thr Gly Gly Val Thr Tyr Tyr Ala Asp Ser Val Lys Gly Arg Phe Thr Ile Ser Arg Asp Asn Val Lys Asn Ser Leu Tyr Leu Gln Met Asn Ser Leu Arg Ala Glu Asp Met Ala Val Tyr Tyr Cys Ala Arg Asp Tyr Tyr Gly Ala Gly Ser Phe Tyr Asp Gly Leu Tyr Gly Met Asp Val Trp Gly Gln Gly Thr Thr Val Thr Val Ser Ser SEQ ID NO 28 .

Binding to Daudi and Raji cell lines Daudi and Raji cells were incubated for 30 min at 4 C. with FITC conjugated human antibodies 2C6 IgG1 or the reference antibodies rituximab 2F2 or 11B8. Binding was assessed by flow cytometry. As shown in 2C6 IgG1 bound to the two different Burkitt lymphoma B cell lines indicating that 2C6 IgG1 retains the binding characteristics of the original 2C6 IgM antibody.

2F2 is a human monoclonal IgG1 anti CD20 antibody raised in a KM mouse having the variable Vamino acid sequence 

Met Glu Leu Gly Leu Ser Trp Ile Phe Leu Leu Ala Ile Leu Lys Gly Val Gln Cys Glu Val Gln Leu Val Glu Ser Gly Gly Gly Leu Val Gln Pro Gly Arg Ser Leu Arg Leu Ser Cys Ala Ala Ser Gly Phe Thr Phe Asn Asp Tyr Ala Met His Trp Val Arg Gln Ala Pro Gly Lys Gly Leu Glu Trp Val Ser Thr Ile Ser Trp Asn Ser Gly Ser Ile Gly Tyr Ala Asp Ser Val Lys Gly Arg Phe Thr Ile Ser Arg Asp Asn Ala Lys Lys Ser Leu Tyr Leu Gln Met Asn Ser Leu Arg Ala Glu Asp Thr Ala Leu Tyr Tyr Cys Ala Lys Asp Ile Gln Tyr Gly Asn Tyr Tyr Tyr Gly Met Asp Val Trp Gly Gln Gly Thr Thr Val Thr Val Ser SEQ ID NO 29 and the variable Vamino acid sequence Met Glu Ala Pro Ala Gln Leu Leu Phe Leu Leu Leu Leu Trp Leu Pro Asp Thr Thr Gly Glu Ile Val Leu Thr Gln Ser Pro Ala Thr Leu Ser Leu Ser Pro Gly Glu Arg Ala Thr Leu Ser Cys Arg Ala Ser Gln Ser Val Ser Ser Tyr Leu Ala Trp Tyr Gln Gln Lys Pro Gly Gln Ala Pro Arg Leu Leu Ile Tyr Asp Ala Ser Asn Arg Ala Thr Gly Ile Pro Ala Arg Phe Ser Gly Ser Gly Ser Gly Thr Asp Phe Thr Leu Thr Ile Ser Ser Leu Glu Pro Glu Asp Phe Ala Val Tyr Tyr Cys Gln Gln Arg Ser Asn Trp Pro Ile Thr Phe Gly Gln Gly Thr Arg Leu Glu Ile Lys SEQ ID NO 30 . The 2F2 antibody used in the experiments is produced recombinantly in CHO cells.

Binding of I labeled anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies to Daudi cells I labeled anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies 2C6 IgG1 and the reference antibodies rituximab and 2F2 were incubated with Daudi cells for 2 hours at room temperature at different concentrations. The cell bound and free I labeled anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies were then separated by centrifugation through phthalate oils and the cell pellets together with bound antibody were counted for radioactivity in a gamma counter The results are shown in . All antibodies tested bound in a similar way to Daudi cells and saturated at 0.5 g ml.

Dissociation rate To determine the dissociation rate of the monoclonal anti bodies Raji cells were incubated for 10 min at room temperature with 10 g ml FITC conjugated monoclonal antibodies to achieve maximum binding. The Raji cells were washed and incubated in the presence of a high concentration of unlabeled antibody 200 g ml . The maximal initial binding to Raji cells was set at 100 . At several time points over the next 320 min following loading 1 10cells were removed from each sample to determine the levels of FITC monoclonal antibody remaining on the cell surface. As can be seen from 2C6 IgG1 dissociated faster from the surface of Raji cells than rituximab. At approximately 55 min approximately 50 of the rituximab molecules were still bound to the cell whereas 50 of the 2C6 IgG1 molecules dissociated after approximately 35 min.

Dissociation rate of I labeled anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies from Daudi cells I labeled anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies 2C6 IgG1 and the reference antibodies rituximab and 2F2 2 g ml were added to Daudi cells incubated for 1 hour at room temperature and then pelleted and resuspended in 600 l medium containing 1 mg ml of unlabeled monoclonal antibody. Cells were kept at room temperature and at various times aliquots were taken to determine the level of cell bound monoclonal antibodies by counting for radioactivity in a gamma counter. Counts remaining at each time point were expressed as a percentage of the initial count. shows the mean of 2 4 experiments. As can be seen from 2C6 IgG1 dissociates faster than rituximab.

Serum preparation Serum for complement lysis was prepared by drawing blood from healthy volunteers into autosep gel and clot activator vacutainer tubes BD biosciences Rutherford N.J. which were held at room temperature for 30 60 min and then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 min. Serum was harvested and stored at 80 C.

Flow cytometry For flow cytometry a FACScalibur flow cytometer was used with CellQuest pro software BD Biosciences Mountain view Calif. . At least 5000 events were collected for analysis with cell debris excluded by adjustment of the forward sideward scatter FCS threshold.

CDC activity of anti CD20 in B cell line cells To determine the CDC activity of each antibody elevated membrane permeability was assessed using FACS analysis of PI stained cells.

Raji or Daudi cells were pre incubated with a concentration range of 2C6 IgG1 2F2 11B8 rituximab and control antibody anti KLH respectively for 10 min before NHS was added. After 45 min incubation at 37 C. when maximal lysis occurs the cells were resuspended in PI solution and cell lysis number of PI positive cells was measured by flow cytometry.

Daudi cells were incubated with FITC labeled anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies 2C6 IgG1 and the reference antibody rituximab 5 g ml for 60 min at 37 C. to allow binding to cells. A small volume of highly concentrated F ab or Fab fragments of rituximab was added to the cells final concentration 300 g ml to compete with the bound FITC labeled anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies. At various time points samples were taken which were split into two parts. One part of the sample was used to determine the amount of FITC monoclonal antibodies bound to the cells . The other part was treated with normal human serum NHS 20 vol vol and the cells were incubated at 37 C. for 15 min. Cell lysis was assessed by flow cytometry using a PI exclusion assay and the level of CDC is expressed as PI positive cells as percentage of the total cells . The figures show the mean SEM of 3 separate experiments.

These experiments show that rituximab and 2C6 IgG1 remained bound to the cells immediately after addition of the competitor and as expected dissociated from the cells more gradually. These experiments also show that although 2C6 IgG1 dissociates faster from the cells than rituximab the ability to induce cell lysis were similar between rituximab and 2C6 IgG1 . Compared to rituximab the number of 2C6 IgG1 molecules required to give comparable levels of lysis was less. These data suggest that the density of anti CD20 monoclonal antibody bound to cells is not the only factor that determines lysis.

Raji or Daudi cells were incubated with saturating amounts of anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies 2C6 IgG1 and the reference antibody rituximab 10 g ml for 30 min at room temperature to allow binding to cells. NHS 20 vol vol was added to the cells followed by incubation at 37 C. for 15 min. The cells were spun down and supernatant was appropriately diluted in the presence of a protease inhibitor FUT 175 to prevent further complement activation. Anaphylatoxins were measured using a cytometric bead array from Becton Dickinson according to the manufacturers instructions. shows the mean and SD of 4 separate experiments.

In Raji cells production of anaphylatoxins was similar between the tested anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies. In Daudi cells high analyphylatoxin production was observed by 2C6 IgG1 and rituximab. Differences between 2C6 IgG1 and rituximab were not significant.

Preparation Cr labeled target cells Raji cells were collected 5 10cells in RPMI containing 10 fetal calf serum and pen strep RPMI spun down 1500 rpm 5 min resuspended in 140 l Cr Chromium 51 140 l is about 100 Ci and incubated 37 C. water bath 1 hour . After washing cells 1500 rpm 5 min in PBS 3 cells were resuspended in RPMI and counted by trypan blue exclusion. Cells were brought at concentration of 1 10cells ml.

Preparation of effector cells Fresh peripheral blood mononuclear cells PBMCs were isolated from heparin anti coagulated blood by Ficoll Bio Whittaker lymphocyte separation medium cat 17 829E using the manufacturer s instructions. After resuspension of cells in RPMI cells were counted by trypan blue exclusion and adjusted to a concentration of 1 10cells ml.

ADCC set up 50 l RPMI was pipetted into 96 wells plates and 50 l of Cr labeled targets cells were added. Thereafter 50 l of antibody was added diluted in RPMI final concentrations 10 1 0.1 g ml . Cells were incubated room temperature 10 min and 50 l effector cells were added resulting in an effector to target ratio of 100 1 for determination of maximal lysis 50 l 5 Triton X 100 was added instead of effector cells . Cells were spun down 500 rpm 5 min and incubated 37 C. 5 CO 4 hours . After spinning the cells 1500 rpm 5 min 100 l of supernatant was harvested into micronic tubes and counted in a gamma counter. The percentage specific lysis was calculated as follows specific lysis sample target cells only maximal lysis target cells only 100

Antibody concentration dependent lysis of Rafi cells When Raji cells were used as target cells 2C6 IgG1 induced peripheral blood mononuclear cell PBMC mediated lysis of Raji cells maximum lysis reached with 2C6 IgG1 was approximately 63 at similar levels as 2F2 and rituximab see . Spontaneous lysis was approximately 20 . Addition of the isotype control antibody anti KLH did not induce ADCC. No specific lysis was observed without PBMCs data not shown .

Apoptosis Daudi or Raji cells 0.5 10in 1 ml tissue culture medium were placed into 24 well flat bottom plates with 1 or 10 g ml 2C6 IgG1 or control antibodies anti CD20 antibody B1 the isotype control antibody anti KLH or without antibody and incubated at 37 C. After 20 hours cells were harvested washed in Annexin V FITC binding buffer BD biosciences and labeled with Annexin V FITC BD biosciences for 15 min in the dark at 4 C. The cells were kept at 4 C. until analysis. Each sample 150 l was added to 10 l of PI solution 10 g ml in PBS in a FACS tube. The mixture was assessed immediately by flow cytometry using a FACScalibur flow cytometer with CellQuest pro software BD Biosciences Mountain view Calif. . At least 10 000 events were collected for analysis.

Data in show mean of two experiments. 2C6 shows no sign of apoptosis induction in both cell lines and was similar to the isotype control antibody. As expected the reference antibody B1 did induce apoptosis 30 40 in both B cell lines.

Homotypic adhesion correlates with induction of apoptosis. Therefore the ability of the anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies to induce homotypic adhesion of B cells was investigated.

Homotypic adhesion of Daudi cells and Raji cells Daudi or Raji cells were placed into 24 well flat bottom plates with 1 or 10 g ml anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies or control antibody anti KLH and incubated at 37 C. for 4 hours. The extent of homotypic adhesion was determined by light microscopy. As can be seen from 2C6 IgG1 poorly induced homotypic adhesion of Daudi or Raji cells with 1.0 g ml and 10 g ml data not shown . Rituximab gave some homotypic adhesion of Daudi and Raji cells. In contrast 11B8 was a strong inducer of homotypic adhesion.

Epitope mapping studies using a mutagenesis approach have indicated that alanine at position 170 A170 and proline at position 172 P172 in the second extracellular loop are critical for the recognition of human CD20 by known anti CD20 antibodies. In studies by Deans and colleagues M. J. Polyak et al. 2002 99 9 pp 3256 3262 the binding of all anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies tested was abrogated by changing A170 and P172 into the corresponding murine CD20 residues S170 and S172. To verify whether the A170xP172 motive is also important for the binding of the antibodies according to the invention the AxP sequence was mutated into SxS using site directed mutagenesis AxP mutant A170S P172S cells were transfected with the AxP mutant and wild type WT CD20 DNA and the binding characteristics of the anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies were compared.

Further mutants were prepared P172S proline at position 172 mutated to serine N166D asparagine at position 166 mutated to aspartic acid and N163D asparagine at position 163 mutated to aspartic acid using site directed mutagenesis to evaluate whether the mutated amino acid residues are important for binding of the antibodies of the invention.

To examine this a CD20 expression vector was constructed by amplifying the CD20 coding sequence using suitable primers introducing restriction sites and an ideal Kozak sequence for optimal expression. The amplified fragment was digested and ligated in the expression vector pEE13.4 Lonza Slough UK . After transformation in colonies were screened for inserts and two clones were selected for sequencing to confirm the correct sequence. The construct was named pEE13.4CD20HS.

Mutagenesis was performed to introduce the AxP mutation and to introduce 20 mouse mutations in the extracellular loop regions of human CD20. Mutagenesis was checked by restriction enzyme digestion and sequencing. The constructs were transiently transfected in CHO cells for AxP mutations or HEK293F cells and analyzed 24 or 48 hours post transfection using flow cytometry.

Oligonucleotide PCR Primers Oligonucleotide primers were synthesized and quantified by Isogen BV Maarssen The Netherlands . Primers were reconstituted in water in a concentration of 100 mol l and stored at 20 C. until required. A summary of PCR and sequencing primers is shown in Table 2.

Optical density determination of nucleic acids Optical density was determined using an Ultrospec 2100 pro Classic Amersham Biosciences Uppsala Sweden according to the manufacturer s instructions. The DNA concentration was measured by analysis of the OD260 nm where one OD260 nm unit 50 g ml. The reference solution was identical to the solution used to dissolve the nucleic acids.

Plasmid DNA isolation from culture Plasmid DNA was isolated from cultures using kits from Qiagen according to the manufacturer s instructions Westburg BV Leusden The Netherlands . For bulk plasmid preparation either a Hi Speed plasmid Maxi kit or a Hi Speed plasmid Midi kit were used Qiagen . For a small scale plasmid preparation i.e. 2 ml of culture a Qiaprep Spin Miniprep Kit Qiagen was used and the DNA eluted in 50 l TE Tris HCl 10 mM pH 8.0 EDTA 1 mM .

PCR amplification PCR reactions were performed according to the manufacturer s instructions for the Pfu Turbo Hotstart DNA polymerase Stratagene Amsterdam The Netherlands . Each 20 l reaction contained 1 PCR reaction buffer 200 M mixed dNTPs 6.7 mol of each forward and reverse primer approximately 1 ng template DNA and 1 unit of Pfu Turbo Hotstart DNA polymerase. PCR reactions were performed on a T gradient Thermocycler 96 Biometra GmbH Goettingen Germany using a 30 cycle program of 95 C. for 2 min followed by 30 cycles of 95 C. for 30 sec anneal a gradient of 45 65 C. for 30 sec and extension 72 C. for 2 min followed by a final extension step of 10 min at 72 C. and subsequent storage at 4 C. The completed reactions were analysed by agarose gel electrophoresis.

Agarose gel electrophoresis Agarose gel electrophoresis was performed according to Sambrook Molecular Cloning Laboratory Manual 3rd edition using gels of 50 ml in 1 Tris acetic acid EDTA TAE buffer. DNA was visualized by the inclusion of ethidium bromide in the gel and observation under UV light. Gel images were recorded by a CCD camera and an image analysis system GeneGnome Syngene Cambridge UK .

Restriction enzyme digestions Restriction enzymes were supplied by New England Biolabs Beverly Mass. and used according to the supplier s recommendations. In general 100 ng was digested with 5 units of enzyme s in appropriate buffer in a final volume of 10 l. Reaction volumes were scaled up as appropriate. Digestions were incubated for a minimum of 60 min at the manufacturer s recommended temperature.

For fragments requiring double digestions with restriction enzymes which have incompatible buffer or temperature requirements digestions were performed sequentially so as to offer favourable conditions for each enzyme in turn.

Alkaline phosphatase treatment Shrimp alkaline phosphatase USB Cleveland Ohio was used according to the supplier s recommendations. Alkaline phosphatase removes 5 phosphate groups from the ends of DNA fragments thereby preventing self ligation. This is of particular relevance when self re ligation of a DNA fragment could result in a replication competent vector. The enzyme is active in most restriction enzyme buffers and was added as appropriate. After the digestion the enzyme was inactivated by raising the temperature to 70 C. for 15 min.

Purification of PCR and restriction enzyme reaction products Purification was carried out using the mini elute PCR Purification kit supplied by Qiagen according to the manufacturer s instructions. Briefly DNA samples were diluted in 5 volumes of binding buffer I Qiagen and loaded onto a mini elute column within an Eppendorf centrifuge tube. The assembly was centrifuged in a bench top microcentrifuge. The column was washed twice with buffer II Qiagen Following buffer application the assembly was centrifuged and the flow through was discarded. The column was dried by centrifugation in the absence of added buffer. DNA was eluted by adding elution buffer to the column and the eluate collected by centrifugation. Isolated DNA was quantified by UV spectroscopy and quality assessed by agarose gel electrophoresis.

Isolation of DNA fragments from agarose gel Where appropriate i.e. when multiple fragments were present digested DNA samples were separated by gel electrophoresis and the desired fragment excised from the gel and recovered using the QIAEX II gel extraction kit Qiagen according to the manufacturer s instructions. Briefly DNA bands were excised from the agarose gel and melted in an appropriate buffer at 55 C. QIAEX II resin was added and incubated for 5 min. QIAEX II resin was pelleted by a short centrifugation step 1 min 14000 g room temperature and washed twice with 500 l of wash buffer PE. The final pellet was dried in a hood and DNA was eluted with the appropriate volume of TE and temperature depending on the size of the DNA .

Ligation of DNA fragments Ligations were performed with the Quick Ligation Kit New England Biolabs according to the manufacturer s instructions. For each ligation the vector DNA was mixed with approximately 3 fold molar excess of insert DNA such that the total amount of DNA was lower than 200 ng in 10 l with volume adjusted with water as appropriate. To this was added 10 l 2 Quick Ligation Buffer and 1 l Quick T4 DNA ligase and the ligation mix was incubated for 5 30 min at room temperature.

Transformation of DNA into bacteria Samples of DNA were used to transform One Shot DH5 TIR competent cells Invitrogen Breda The Netherlands using the heat shock method according to the manufacturer s instructions. Briefly 1 5 l of DNA solution typically 2 l of DNA ligation mix was added to an aliquot of transformation competent bacterial cells and the mixture incubated on ice for 30 min. The cells were then heat shocked by transferring to a waterbath at 42 C. for 30 sec followed by a further incubation on ice for 5 min. Cells were left to recover by incubation in a non selective culture medium SOC for 1 hour with agitation at 37 C. and were subsequently spread onto agar plates containing appropriate selective agent ampicillin at 50 g ml . Plates were incubated for 16 18 hours at 37 C. or until colonies of bacteria became evident.

Screening of bacterial colonies by PCR Bacterial colonies were screened for the presence of vectors containing the desired sequences using the PCR colony screening technique. 20 l of PCR reaction mix containing 0.5 volumes of HotStarTaq Master Mix Qiagen 4 mol of the forward and reverse primers and completed with water was added to a PCR tube. A colony was lightly touched with a 20 l pipet tip once touched in 2 ml LB in a culture tube for growing bacteria containing the corresponding plasmid and resuspended in the 20 l PCR mix. PCR was performed on a T gradient Thermocycler 96 Biometra using a 35 cycle program of 95 C. for 15 min followed by 35 cycles of 94 C. for 30 sec anneal 55 C. for 30 sec and extension 72 C. for 2 min followed by a final extension step of 10 min at 72 C. and subsequent storage at 4 C. The completed reactions were analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis. See Table 2 for details of primer pairs used for colony PCR.

DNA sequencing Plasmid DNA samples were send to AGOWA Berlin Germany for sequence analysis. Sequences were analyzed using the Vector NTI software package Informax Frederick Md. USA .

Mutagenesis The mutagenesis was performed using the QuikChange XL Site Directed Mutagenesis kit Cat 200517 5 Lot 1120630 Stratagene Europe according to the manufacturer s instructions.

Mutagenesis reactions were concentrated using ethanol precipitation and transformed into either oneshot DH5 T1R competent cells or electroporated into ElectroTen Blue Electroporation Competent Cells. Colonies were checked by colony PCR and restriction digestion prior to transfection.

HEK293F cell transfection HEK293F cells were obtained from Invitrogen and transfected according to the manufacturer s instructions using 293fectin. The HEK293F cells were used for all the single mutant sequences.

Anti CD20 Antibody binding HEK293F cells and CHO cells were taken up in PBS in a concentration of 2 10 ml and added to round bottom plates 1 10 well . Then 50 l anti CD20 monoclonal antibody was added in serial dilutions of 10 5 2.5 or 0 g per well 4 C. 30 min . After washing in FACS buffer PBS supplemented with 0.1 BSA and 0.002 NaN the cells were analyzed on a flow cytometer Becton Dickinson San Diego Calif. USA and 5 000 events per sample were acquired at high flow rate. Data in have been corrected for protein to fluorescence ratio.

As can be seen from both 2C6 IgG1 and the reference antibody rituximab bound efficiently to CHO cells expressing WT CD20. As expected rituximab did not bind the AxP mutant and the P172S mutant and C . 2C6 IgG1 in contrast did bind equally well to WT CD20 AxP mutant CD20 and P172S mutant CD20.

For the CD20 mutant wherein asparagine at position 163 has been replaced by aspartic acid N163D rituximab was able to bind to CD20N163D whereas 2C6 IgG1 only showed very low binding see .

For the mutant wherein asparagine at position 166 has been replaced with aspartic acid N166D again 2C6 IgG1 showed very low binding whereas rituximab was able to bind see .

These experiments indicate that 2C6 IgG1 and rituximab bind to different epitopes. Furthermore this study indicates that binding of 2C6 IgG1 to human CD20 is sensitive to mutations at positions 163 and 166 but insensitive to mutations at positions 170 and 172. 2C6 IgG1 therefore belongs to a new class of anti CD20 monoclonal antibodies recognizing a novel CD20 epitope.

Raji cells were lysed on ice for 15 min in lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors 1 g ml aprotinin 1 g ml leupeptin 1 mM NaMoO4 1 mM NaVO4 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and 1 mM EDTA and either 1 Triton X 100 Tx 100 or 1 digitonin. Lysates were incubated overnight with the antibodies 2C6 IgG1 and the reference antibodies rituximab 2F2 and 7D8 and isotype control anti KLH antibody head over head rotating then protein G Sepharose was added approximately 30 l from a 1 1 mixture of beads and lysis buffer and the mixture was incubated for 1 to 2 hours at 4 C. The beads were washed with lysis buffer and precipitated protein was eluted in non reducing SDS sample buffer separated by SDS PAGE 4 15 Criterion gel Biorad and transferred to PVDF membranes Biorad . The membranes were blocked with 1 topblock Biorad probed with anti CD20 antibody 7D1 Serotec whereupon the bound antibodies were detected with HRP conjugated rabbit anti mouse antibody Amersham . Proteins were visualized using enhanced chemiluminescence Pierce Rockford Ill. recorded on a CCD Imager Westburg .

Synthesis of peptides and pepscan screening The overlapping mostly 15 mer synthetic peptides were synthesized and screened using credit card format mini PEPSCAN cards 455 well plate with 3 l wells as described by Slootstra et al. 1996 Structural aspects of antibody antigen interaction revealed through small random peptide libraries. Mol Divers. 1 87 96. The binding of antibodies 2C6 IgG1 and rituximab to each peptide was tested in a PEPSCAN based enzyme linked immuno assay ELISA . The 455 well creditcard format polypropylene cards containing the covalently linked peptides were incubated with sample for example 10 g ml antibody or serum diluted 1 1000 in a PBS solution containing 5 horse serum vol vol and 5 ovalbumin weight vol and 1 Tween 80 or in case of 2F2 in a PBS solution with 4 horse serum vol vol and 1 Tween 80 4 C. overnight . After washing the peptides were incubated with an anti antibody peroxidase dilution 1 1000 for example rabbit anti mouse peroxidase Dako 1 hour 25 C. and subsequently after washing the peroxidase substrate 2 2 azino di 3 ethylbenzthiazoline sulfonate ABTS and 2 l ml 3 HOwere added. After 1 hour the color development was measured. The color development of the ELISA was quantified with a CCD camera and an image processing system. The setup consists of a CCD camera and a 55 mm lens Sony CCD Video Camara XC 77RR Nikon micro nikkor 55 mm f 2.8 lens a camara adaptor Sony Camara adaptor DC 77RR and the Image Processing Software package Optimas version 6.5 Media Cybernetics Silver Spring Md. 20910 U.S.A. . Optimas runs on a pentium computer system.

All looped 15 mer peptides with spacing 4 to 13 such as for example CXXXXCXXXXXXXXX XXXCXXXXCXXXXXX or CXXXXXXXXXXXXXC etc. of the peptides LMIPAGIYAPIAVTV SEQ ID NO 42 KISHFLKMESLNFIR SEQ ID NO 43 KMESLNFIRAHTPYI SEQ ID NO 44 . MESLNFIRAHTPYIN SEQ ID NO 45 YINIYNAEPANPSEK SEQ ID NO 46 YNAEPANPSEKNSPS SEQ ID NO 47 NAEPANPSEKNSPST SEQ ID NO 48 EPANPSEKNSPSTQY SEQ ID NO 49 PANPSEKNSPSTQYA SEQ ID NO 50 NPSEKNSPSTQYAYS SEQ ID NO 51 SEKNSPSTQYAYSIQ SEQ ID NO 52 were synthesized.

All 400 combinations of XXXXXXXGXXXXXXX with the following 20 sequences NFIRAHT SEQ ID NO 53 FIRAHTP SEQ ID NO 54 IRAHTPY SEQ ID NO 55 RAHTPYI SEQ ID NO 56 HFLKMES SEQ ID NO 57 FLKMESL SEQ ID NO 58 LKMESLN SEQ ID NO 59 KMESLNF SEQ ID NO 60 MESLNFI SEP ID NO 61 EPANPSE SEQ ID NO 62 PANPSEK SEQ ID NO 63 ANPSEKN SEQ ID NO 64 NPSEKNS SEQ ID NO 65 PSEKNSP SEQ ID NO 66 SEKNSPS SEQ ID NO 67 EKNSPST SEQ ID NO 68 KNSPSTQ SEQ ID NO 69 NSPSTQY SEQ ID NO 70 PAGIAYP SEQ ID NO 71 AGIYAPI SEQ ID NO 72 were synthesized.

Method for epitope representation To analyse the Pepscan data and obtain a representation of the contribution of each of the amino acids in the CD20 sequence a novel epitope analysis method was deviced taking into account all the data obtained with the 905 peptides and allowing for scoring of amino acid contributions to conformational epitopes. In each peptide all possible tripeptide motifs i.e. the smallest unique units were determined. For example if the peptide was ABCDE all tripeptide motifs include ABC BCD CDE ABXD ABXXE AXCD AXXDE AXCXE. Then each of these tripeptide motifs was awarded the ELISA value of the whole peptide. This procedure was followed for all tripeptide motifs in all 905 peptides. Next to be able to rank the tripeptide motifs from strong to poor binding a relative signal was calculated by dividing the ELISA value obtained for each individual motif by the average ELISA value from all 905 tested 15 mers and sorted for decreasing value.

For each of the antibodies tested all tripeptide motifs that scored above 2.5 approximately the top 500 motifs were selected. This means that the ELISA values of peptides containing these motifs were at least 2.5 times the average ELISA value obtained with all 905 peptides. With 2C6 IgG1 the scores were lower than 2.50 and the cutt off was therefore chosen at 1.50. Finally these data were deconvoluted into single amino acid contributions represented on the linear CD20 sequence by a scoring system. By walking along the linear CD20 sequence and by using the unique tripeptide units as a reference point one point was awarded each time a CD20 amino acid was present in this set of high scoring peptides The graph shows the total points obtained for each of the single amino acids and represented for each of the antibodies tested. For example the highest scoring residue with rituximab is the P172 about 125 of the 500 high scoring tripeptide motifs contain this P172 .

The results are shown in . shows that in contrast to rituximab 2C6 IgG1 binds to peptides N terminal from A170 P172 and also to peptides derived from the smaller of the two extracellular CD20 loops AGIYAPI SEQ ID NO 72 . Very weak binding of 2C6 IgG1 was observed C terminal of A170 P172.

Those skilled in the art will recognize or be able to ascertain using no more than routine experimentation many equivalents of the specific embodiments of the invention described herein. Such equivalents are intended to be encompassed by the following claims. Any combination of the embodiments disclosed in the dependent claims are also contemplated to be within the scope of the invention.

All patents pending patent applications and other publications cited herein are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety.

