---

title: Sliding anchorage device
abstract: An anchorage safety device for steelworkers. The safety device is configured to be slidably coupleable to a flanged structural beam to which a lanyard may be attached to secure a workman against a fall. The anchorage device includes an elongate cross-member having a plurality of apertures formed there-through to allow adjustment of the anchorage device to accommodate various beams, a lanyard attachment apparatus, affixed to the mid-point of the cross-member, for receiving a clip of a workman's lanyard; and opposed first and second clamps for coupling the device to the flange of a beam. The clamps include a ratchet pawl having first and second teeth for selectively engaging the cross-member apertures. The worker needs only one hand to release the ratchet pawl from the apertures by simultaneously applying pressure on an enlarged engagement surface of the ratchet pawl and a clamp housing surface that is opposed to the enlarged engagement surface. Since both forces must be simultaneously applied in opposite directions, inadvertent disengagement of the clamp from the cross-member is obviated.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07111707&OS=07111707&RS=07111707
owner: 
number: 07111707
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050830
---
This application is a continuation of U.S. Application Ser. No. 10 620 146 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 962 234 which claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 395 429 filed Jul. 13 2002 and is hereby incorporated by reference.

The present invention relates to a method and apparatus for securing a person during construction and more particularly to a safety device slidably secured about a flanged structural beam to which a lanyard is attached to secure a workman against a fall.

Construction of steel frame structures such as industrial plants and office buildings often involve the necessity for steel workers to work a considerable distance above the ground in order to fasten individual beams and other components together. In high rise construction these activities may take place in an environment subject to wind and weather as well as subject to the typical construction site hazards of miscommunication equipment failure or worker mishap. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration OSHA of the United States and similar agencies in various States have promulgated regulations that require various safety devices to be used by workers who are occupationally exposed to the potential of a fall from an elevated structure.

Despite that there are numerous devices being offered in the market place a demand exists for a simple inexpensive device that may be used to preserve life and limb of the steel worker by providing secure fall protection. The need for such a device is especially seen in conjunction with work where significant freedom of movement is needed to enable accomplishment of a particular task. Furthermore improvement in productivity can result from additional freedom of movement. As will be evident to those familiar with steel work at great heights and to whom this specification is particularly addressed a device that may provide additional freedom of movement and ensure fail safe fall protection would be of great benefit in improving workman safety as well as increasing productivity on a construction project.

Conventional devices provide some of the desired general capabilities that have heretofore been proposed. These prior devices fall into two categories. First some devices are fixed at a point of attachment with respect to the steel beam members. The fixed devices provide a method for securing a safety line but inherently limit the steel worker s speed and mobility due to the necessity of having to stop to clip on and off of a fixed location or a fixed line.

Second other types of devices are moveable with respect to the beam to which it is attached. However the configuration of these devices is such that they have limitations. For example a device needs to be moveable along the beam and free sliding without being caught and wedged on the beam. Additionally the device needs to be lightweight and unencumbersome to allow the device to be picked up and relocated to a new steel beam. Moreover the device must be easily coupled to a flanged beam without being clumsy to manipulate. Furthermore the device must not be inadvertently disengageable from the flanged beam.

The present invention is a sliding anchorage device that resolves the above mentioned deficiencies of the prior art.

Applicant is aware of the following U.S. Patents concerning safety devices for securing a workman against a fall.

Collavino U.S. Pat. No. 6 092 623 discloses a safety anchor system that provides protection to workers that are working on an elevated platform. The safety harness system preferably includes two anchoring devices that are spaced apart on a concrete slab. An extension member extends between the anchoring devices. A tether extends between a safety harness worn by the worker and the extension member. The tether is moveable along the entire length of the extension member which results in an increased range of motion to the worker. The anchorage devices have latching members with extensions of varying dimensions to accommodate variety of concrete slab configurations.

Whitmer U.S. Pat. No. 6 076 633 discloses a fall protection device that can be attached to a structural member. The device comprises a generally U shaped member having a long leg and a short leg a spring loaded plunger mechanism that serves to lock a removable retainer bar in a position to securely engage a pre existing structural member and an attachment point for a lanyard or other fall protection device. The spring loaded plunger also includes a positive locking mechanism.

Flora et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 711 397 discloses a safety device for steelworkers. The devise is adapted to be slidably secured about a flanged beam to attach a lifeline to workmen and to secure workmen against falls. The device comprises an elongate bar member having a plurality of apertures therethrough and first and second L shaped jaw members suitable for clamping about the flange of the beam. The second L shaped jaw member is slidably fixed to the elongate member by a slide housing attachment portion that includes a barrel portion that allows the elongate member to slidably pass therethrough in a close fitting relationship. The second L shaped jaw member also includes at least one aperture through the barrel portion. A locking pin is provided which passes through any one of the plurality of apertures in the elongate member and through the barrel portion of the slide housing attachment portion. The locking pin is repositionable from a first unengaged position to a second inserted locking position so that when in an inserted position the locking pin locks the elongate member and the slide housing attachment portion to thereby adjustably fix the distance between the first L shaped jaw member and the second L shaped jaw member.

Rhodes U.S. Pat. No. 5 092 426 discloses first and second elongated members slidably communicating to form a beam of variable length to span the top surface of the structure on which a worker is positioned. Clamping surfaces extend from the ends of the beam to engage the sides of the structure. A lever pivotally mounted on the first elongated member is connected through a link to the second elongated member to shorten the beam and urge the clamping surfaced against the structure. A worker s safety line may be attached to the device such that the lever is locked relative to the first elongated member to secure the device to the structure whenever the safety line is attached.

Whitmer U.S. Pat. No. 5 029 670 discloses a removable safety system for construction workers that is mounted on an I beam. The safety system includes a cable handhold to which a safety lanyard may be fastened. The ends of the cable are terminated by a special device that increases the grip of the device on the beam when a load is applied. The safety system may be installed on the I beam at ground level and hoisted with the I beam as it is positioned for attachment to a building or bridge.

Franks U.S. Pat. No. 4 928 790 discloses a restraining device having an anchorage the length of which may be contracted to cause pads on the ends thereof to apply pressure to the side of an elevated work surface to secure the anchorage. The device further includes a tether having one end attached to the anchorage and the opposed end attached to a harness that is worn by a worker to keep a worker from falling from the elevated work surface.

Cuny U.S. Pat. No. 4 767 091 discloses a safety device for mounting on a beam section including a body comprising two articulated portions having projections that produce a wedging effect on the beam section when under the pull of a load.

Cordero Jr. U.S. Pat. No. 4 052 028 discloses a safety clamp to which a workman s lifeline is connected. The safety clamp is removable form and slidably attached to a flanged structural beam. The clamp includes a pair of complementary U shaped jaw members slidably coupled to a bar member disposed transverse the beam. A quick release lock mechanism is provided to release the lock of each jaw member to the bar member. Each jaw member is defined by a horizontal upper and lower plate members interconnected by a vertical side member. Rollers or bearings are connected to the upper and side plates to reduce frictional engagement between the clamp and structural beam to which the clamp is connected thereby allowing the clamp to slide along the beam.

Another object of the invention is to provide a device that is slidably coupleable to a flanged structural beam.

A further object of this invention is to provide a device that is slidable along a flanged beam without becoming wedged there against.

Another object of this invention is to provide a device that may be simply engaged or disengaged from a flanged beam by a worker using one hand.

Another object of this invention is to provide a device that has ample strength for its intended purpose.

A further object of the present invention is to provide a device that is not capable of being inadvertently disengaged from a flanged beam.

Another object of the invention is to provide a device that is attachable to a wide variety of flanged beams of different widths.

The present invention is an anchorage safety device for steelworkers. The anchorage device is adapted to be slidably secured about a flanged structural beam and to which a lanyard may be attached to secure a workman against a fall. The lightweight device may be easily managed by a workman. Moreover with only one hand the workman may couple or remove the anchorage device from a flanged beam. The device utilizes a pair of novel clamps that secure and maintain the device to a flanged beam. The clamps are configured such that inadvertent disengagement of the device from the beam is obviated.

In the broadest sense the invented anchorage device relates to safety device to which a lanyard may be attached in order to secure a workman. The device includes a cross member having a midpoint and opposed terminal ends said cross member further having an aperture. A clamp is provided which is slidably attached to said cross member. The clamp includes a ratchet pawl having a tooth wherein said tooth communicates with the aperture such that an unilateral force applied to said clamp that is directed away from the midpoint of said cross member does not disengage said tooth from the aperture while a force applied to said clamp that is directed towards the midpoint may disengage said tooth from the aperture.

The present invention is an anchorage safety device for steelworkers. The anchorage device is adapted to be slidably secured about a flanged structural beam and to which a lanyard may be attached to secure a workman against a fall. The lightweight device may be easily managed by a workman. Moreover with only one hand the workman may couple or remove the anchorage device from a flanged beam. The device utilizes a pair of novel clamps that secure and maintain the device to a flanged beam. The clamps are configured such that inadvertent disengagement of the device from the beam is obviated.

Referring to the drawings and particularly to the invented anchorage device includes an elongate cross member having a plurality of apertures formed in series along its longitudinal axis a lanyard attachment implement to which a worker s lanyard can be clipped and a pair of opposed clamps for releasably coupling the anchorage device to a flange of a structural beam shown only in .

The cross member is formed of high strength durable material such as for example low carbide steel. Although various configurations may be used preferably the cross member has a generally rectangular shape with a rectangular or square cross section. The rectangular or square cross section simplifies the device since the clamps and lanyard attachment implement need only to follow the contour of the cross member in order to keep these components from rotating about the cross member .

The cross member may be formed by a steel stamping process casting or other known manufacturing technique. Stamping wherein the cross member sides are bent to form the desired cross section is preferred since this process allows for the cross member to be cost effectively and efficiently manufactured. Moreover by stamping the cross member may be made hollow yielding a lightweight device that is easily managed by a workman. Furthermore stamped steel is slightly resilient as opposed to casting thereby allowing for cross member to slightly flex in order to absorb energy that may be applied to the device by a fallen workman.

Longitudinal corners of the cross member are preferably rounded. The rounded corners are less subject to fatigue and failure than would be true 90 degree corners. As the stamped cross member has ample strength for its intended use it is not necessary to join together its free longitudinal edges by welding or the like.

The orientation of the anchorage device is not limited to a specific placement on a structural beam. For example the device may be attached to the top or to the bottom flanged beam. For purposes of this disclosure the device will be described with respect to an orientation that corresponds to being positioned atop a beam.

The anchorage device has equivalent first and second sections separated by a midpoint . Accordingly any disclosure regarding one section will apply equally to the other section.

The apertures are formed through the upper wall of the cross member and are formed in series from about the mid point of the cross member to near its terminal ends . The apertures are on inch centers which coincides with the spacing between teeth provided on ratchet pawls that form part of each clamp . The apertures and the ratchet pawl teeth cooperate to selectively secure the clamps in a position along the longitudinal length of the cross member . As such each clamp may be set at inch increments which allows for the device to be attached to a variety of standard sized structural beams.

End caps are provided at the terminal ends of the cross member . Each end cap includes a plate covering the end of the cross member a pair of flanges extending from opposed sides of the plate along the sides of the anchorage device and a tab extending a distance away from the cross member . A contiguous opening provided through the flanges and cross member receives a mechanical fastener that affixes the end cap to the cross member. Other suitable methods for attaching the end cap to the cross member may be used such as welding rivets or the like.

The flanges provide abutment surfaces that limit the clamps travel along the cross member so that the clamps cannot inadvertently disengage from the device . The flanges also space the clamps approximately inch from the terminal ends of the cross member thus providing a working surface usable by a workman in moving the clamps from the terminal ends towards the midpoint of the cross member . That is a workman may position a gloved finger between the tab and clamp and press against them to cause the clamp to move towards the midpoint .

The lanyard attachment implement is affixed to the midpoint of the cross member and is configured for allowing a workman s lanyard to be securely clipped thereto. Because the attachment implement is affixed at the cross member mid point and is centrally disposed between the clamps the device does not become off set as it is being pulled along a structural beam. Accordingly the fixed placement of the attachment implement keeps the device from becoming cockeyed whereby it would act as a self energizing brake against the beam.

Not to be construed as limiting the preferred attachment implement includes a T shaped bracket for rotatably holding a ring with respect to the cross member . The T shaped bracket includes a base portion fitted to the contour of the cross member and an arcuate elongate top portion . The rectangular cross section of the base portion restrains the attachment implement from rotating about the cross member . A contiguous opening is provided through the base portion and the cross member through which a mechanical fastener is received affixing the attachment implement at the midpoint of the cross member .

The arcuate top portion forms a channel between the top portion and the cross member through which the ring is rotatably received. The ring is close fitted within the channel so that there is minimal play but with enough clearance so that the ring may freely rotate about the longitudinal axis roughly 180 .

The ring is anchored atop the cross member in order to enhanced accessibility for a workman for clipping his lanyard thereto. Further when the ring is rotated to either side of the cross member the ring rests upon the cross member upper wall such that it remains spaced from a structural beam. This spacing simplifies lanyard attachment by providing room for a lanyard clip to be snapped onto the ring without having to adjust or move the ring . In sum since the ring is fixed against movement along the longitudinal axis of cross member and because it stands away from the cross member a workman needs only to use one hand to clip his lanyard to the device by simply striking the lanyard clip against the ring .

The base portion and the top portion extend a distance along the longitudinal axis of the cross member providing sufficient structure that is capable of withstanding substantial force loads associated with a fallen workman. Preferably the top portion is spaced a distance above the cross member so that the leading edge of each clamp may be moved inward to a position juxtaposed to the base portion in order to couple to a very narrow beam. With the preferred lanyard implement configuration necessary strength characteristics are obtained while still allowing for the opposed clamps to be positioned sufficiently close together such that the device may be coupled to a 3 inch flanged beam.

The opposed clamps are identical. As such the below description applies equally to both of the clamps . Since the clamps may be identical manufacturing is advantageously simplified and more cost effective.

Referring to the clamp includes a sleeve slidably mounted to the cross member a jaw carried by the sleeve for coupling to a flanged beam and a housing containing the ratchet pawl .

The sleeve has a rectangular or square cross section that follows to the contour of the cross member . The sleeve is close fitted to the cross member with sufficient clearance to allow the clamp to freely slide along the cross member . Moreover because the cross member and sleeve have complementary cross sections the clamp cannot rotate about the longitudinal axis of the cross member .

The jaw is carried on the underside of the sleeve . The jaw is generally configured in a C shape to allow the clamp to couple to the flange of a beam. The jaw includes an first portion formed by the sleeve a second portion that is generally parallel with the upper portion and an intermediate third portion that joins and spaces apart the first and second portions . Respective edges of the first second and third portions which surround the flange of a beam are preferably rounded in order to aid the device in being slid along the beam. The rounded edges allow for the device to glide over defects in the beam when being pulled by a workman.

Integral ribs may be formed in the jaw to provide additional strength. For example the illustrated vertical and horizontal ribs are placed in tension when resisting deformation caused to the jaw when it is subjected to a substantial jerk force of a fallen workman.

Optionally a protective plastic cover not shown may be attached to the jaw covering the interior of the jaw in order to protect it from being nicked marred or the like when it engages against a structural beam. As such the cover reduces premature fatigue and failure of the device . The protective cover may be clipped onto the jaw attached by a mechanical fastener or the like for example.

The housing is unitary with the sleeve and is positioned above the upper wall of the cross member for full viewability and ease of use by a workman. The housing includes sides and a top which define a longitudinally directed chamber through the housing .

The ratchet pawl is pivotally attached within the chamber by a pivot that is common with the housing and the ratchet pawl . The ratchet pawl has an enlarged engagement portion extending out of a first side of the housing and a toothed portion extending beyond the second side of the housing .

The engagement portion provides a surface against which a workman may press his thumb or finger as one step of a two step process used to release the clamp from a locked position in order to move the clamp to a selected new position. The toothed portion includes at least one tooth which when received within a cross member aperture releaseably locks the device onto a structural beam.

The ratchet pawl preferably has two teeth . The teeth are configured so that once engaged within an aperture they remain engaged therein regardless of forces F applied to any portion of the clamp including forces that are applied to the ratchet pawl engagement end that are directed towards the respective terminal end of the cross member .

Each tooth and each aperture has first and second abutment surfaces. For purposes of this disclosure the first abutment surfaces are defined to be those surface closer in proximity to the terminal end of the cross member while the second abutment surfaces are defined to be the surfaces closer to the midpoint of the cross member as compared to the first abutment surfaces.

Referring to when the ratchet pawl is positioned within an aperture the first abutment surfaces of the teeth are perpendicular to or obtuse to the cross member longitudinal axis as shown by angle Alpha 0. Similarly the abutment surfaces are perpendicular to or obtuse to the first surfaces of the respective aperture .

Accordingly when a force is applied attempting to urge the clamp towards the terminal end of the cross member the abutment surfaces of the teeth act against the respective first abutment surfaces thereby keeping the clamp from moving. That is the shape of the teeth causes them to remain embedded within the apertures .

The second abutment surfaces of the teeth are acutely sloped in relation to the longitudinal axis as illustrated by Beta . As such a force F applied on the clamp causes the teeth to slide out of respective apertures allowing the clamp to be moved towards the midpoint of the cross member . In this manner the clamp may be easily slid to various positions in order couple the device onto beams of different widths.

Various suitable methods may be used in order to provide a force that urges the ratchet pawl teeth into respective apertures . Once positioned within the apertures the teeth remain therein until a workman purposefully overcomes the force in order to release the teeth from the apertures as described in further detail below.

A preferred arrangement is illustrated in wherein two nested coaxial springs coiled in opposite directions are provided to urge the teeth into the apertures . The springs are disposed within the clamp chamber compressed between the housing top and an intermediate portion of the ratchet pawl . A lip extending from the intermediate portion assists in confining the springs to a functioning position.

The clamp includes a sleeve slidably mounted to the cross member a jaw carried by the sleeve for coupling to the flange of a structural beam and the ratchet pawl which is housed within the jaw .

The sleeve has a rectangular or square cross section that follows the contour of the cross member . The sleeve is close fitted to the cross member with sufficient clearance to allow the sleeve to freely slide along the cross member . Since the cross member and the sleeve have complementary cross sections the clamp cannot rotate about the longitudinal axis of the cross member .

The jaw is carried on the underside of the sleeve . The jaw is generally configured in a C shape to allow the clamp to be coupled to the flange of a beam. The jaw includes a first portion formed by the sleeve a second portion that is generally parallel with the first portion and an intermediate third portion that joins and spaces apart the first and second portions . Respective edges of the first second and third portions which routinely engage a beam are preferably rounded in order to aid the device in being slid along the beam. The rounded edges allow for the device to slid over defects in the beam when being pulled by a workman. As illustrated in integral ribs may also be formed on the jaw in order to provide additional strength.

Referring to the third portion of the jaw forms a housing which in turn defines a chamber. The ratchet pawl is partially disposed within the chamber where it is rotatably attached to the housing by a pivot . The ratchet pawl also has an engagement section that is preferably recessed within the housing and a toothed second section that extends beyond the housing .

The engagement section provides a surface against which a workman may press his thumb or finger as part of the process of releasing the clamp from a locked position for movement to a selected new position. The toothed second section includes at least one tooth which when received within a cross member aperture locks the clamp from moving away from the midpoint of the cross member .

The ratchet pawl preferably has two teeth . The teeth are identical and to those described in the preferred embodiment as well as their manner of communicating with the apertures in order to lock the clamp in a position along the cross member . The teeth are configured so that once engaged within an aperture they remain engaged therein regardless of forces F that may be applied to any portion of the clamp that are directed towards the respective terminal end of the cross member . Referring to in particular each tooth has a first abutment surface that is perpendicular to or obtuse to the longitudinal axis of the cross member as shown by Alpha . As the teeth are forced against first abutment surfaces of the apertures they are directed into the aperture and are unable to escape there from.

Also like the preferred embodiment the second abutment surface of each tooth is acutely angled in relation to the longitudinal axis as shown by Beta . As such the teeth easily escape the apertures when the clamp is being slid towards the midpoint of the cross member .

Referring to a pair of coiled springs see also is disposed within the chamber compressed between the housing and the engagement section of the ratchet pawl . A lip is provided to assist in maintaining the springs in position within the housing . The springs urge the ratchet pawl teeth to remain embedded within the apertures until the force of the springs is purposely overcome by a workman. As it will be understood by those skilled in the art other suitable arrangements may be used to urge the ratchet pawl teeth into position within the apertures .

Referring to still another alternative clamp illustrated which is suitable for use with the anchorage device described in the preferred embodiment. That is the device is identical to that described in the preferred embodiment except for clamps . As such only the clamps are described in detail. Further as the alternative clamps are identical the below description applies equally to both.

Referring to the clamp includes a sleeve slidably mounted to the cross member a jaw carried by the sleeve for coupling to the flange of a structural beam a housing and a ratchet pawl disposed within the housing .

The sleeve has a rectangular or square cross section illustrated in that follows the contour of the cross member . The sleeve is close fitted to the cross member with sufficient clearance to allow the sleeve to freely slide along the cross member . Moreover because the cross member and the sleeve have complementary cross sections the clamp cannot rotate about the longitudinal axis of the cross member .

The jaw is carried on the underside of the sleeve and is identical in configuration to the jaw described in the preferred embodiment. In brief the jaw is generally configured a C shape to allow the clamp to couple to the flange of a beam. The jaw includes a first portion formed by the sleeve a second portion that is generally parallel with the first portion and an intermediate third portion that joins and spaces apart the first and second portions . Respective edges of the first second and third portions are preferably rounded in order to aid the device in being slid along the beam. Additionally integral ribs may be provided on the jaw in order to provide additional strength.

The housing is unitary with the sleeve and is positioned above the upper wall of the cross member for full viewability and ease of use by a workman. The housing defines a chamber into which the ratchet pawl is slidably disposed. The ratchet pawl has an engagement section extending out of the housing and a toothed section as shown in . The toothed section includes at least one tooth which when received within a cross member aperture locks the clamp from being forced away from the midpoint of the cross member .

The ratchet pawl preferably has two teeth . The teeth are identical to those described in the preferred embodiment. In short the teeth are configured so that once engaged within an aperture they remain engaged therein regardless of forces F that may be applied to any portion of the clamp that are directed away from the midpoint of the cross member . Referring to in particular each tooth has a first abutment surface that is normal to or obtuse to the longitudinal axis of the cross member as shown by Alpha . Accordingly when force F acts upon the clamp the ratchet pawl teeth are caused to be directed further into the apertures thereby restraining the clamp from moving along the cross member as shown in .

Referring to also identical to the description set forth in the preferred embodiment the second abutment surface of each tooth is angled in relation to the second surface of the respective aperture so that the clamp may be slid towards the midpoint of the cross member .

Referring to at least one coiled spring is disposed within the chamber compressed between a pin disposed within the housing and an intermediate section of the ratchet pawl . The spring urges the ratchet pawl teeth to remain embedded within apertures until the force of the spring is purposely overcome by a workman. As it will be understood by those skilled in the art other suitable arrangements may be used to urge the ratchet pawl teeth into position.

Referring to to illustrate the operation of the device to release the clamp from a coupled position on a flanged beam the worker must simultaneously apply forces F F on the enlarged engagement end and on the opposing side of the housing in order to overcome the spring force and to release the ratchet pawl from the apertures . A workman can easily perform this operation with only one hand by simply pushing his thumb against the enlarged engagement end while pressing his index finger to the opposed portion of the tapered housing . It is important to note that merely applying force to the enlarged engagement end will not cause the ratchet pawl to disengage from the apertures .

Referring to in use the anchorage safety device is attached to the flange of a beam by first placing the device transverse the beam then sliding the clamps along the cross member until they firmly engage the flange. The teeth of the ratchet pawl urged by the springs seat into corresponding apertures in the cross member to lock the clamp and accordingly the anchorage device in place on the beam . Once set the clamp cannot be released except by simultaneous applying two opposing forces F F to the clamp as described further below.

In this position the clamps are equally situated from the lanyard attachment implement at the midpoint of the device . Since the lanyard attachment implement is in the middle of the cross member the device is capable of being slide along the beam without becoming cockeyed or wedged against the beam . That is the arrangement of the lanyard attachment implement and clamps keep the device from acting as a self energizing brake against the beam .

Also to aid movement of the anchorage device along the beam the edges of the clamp jaws are rounded to keep the edges from being caught up on deformities in the beam s surface.

The workman attaches his lanyard to the device by merely striking his lanyard clip against the lanyard attachment implement ring . The top positioning of the ring and its secured attachment to the cross member allows for the workman to attach his lanyard by simply striking the lanyard clip against the ring .

Referring to to release the anchorage device from the beam the worker must simultaneously apply forces F F on the enlarged engagement end of the ratchet pawl and the opposed side of the housing in order to overcome the force of the springs and release the ratchet pawl teeth from the apertures . A workman can easily perform this operation with only one hand by simply pushing his thumb against the enlarged engagement end while pressing his index finger to the opposed portion of the tapered housing . It is important to note that merely applying force F to the enlarged engagement end or any other part of the housing will not cause the ratchet pawl to disengage from the apertures due to the shape of the ratchet pawl teeth . By applying opposing forces F F the teeth back out and are released from the apertures . As such if the lanyard becomes wrapped around the clamp or if an object or another worker engage the clamp the clamp will remain secured in position. As a further safety consideration the tapered shape of the housing encourages a potentially entangled lanyard to slip over the clamp .

From the foregoing it is readily apparent that I have invented an improved anchorage device that is slidably coupleable to a flanged beam to which a lanyard may be attached to secure a workman against a fall. The anchorage device is also configured to be lightweight and easily handled by a workman. Additionally the device is easily slidable along a flanged beam without becoming wedged there against. Moreover clamps on the anchorage device require only one of the workman s hands to manipulate and properly position. Furthermore the clamp is configured such the device cannot be inadvertently disengageable from the flanged beam.

It is to be understood that the foregoing description and specific embodiments are merely illustrative of the best mode of the invention and the principles thereof and that various modifications and additions may be made to the apparatus by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit and scope of this invention.

