---

title: Method and apparatus for standoff detection of liveness
abstract: A method for remotely detecting whether a subject is alive, comprising the steps of determining a calibration spectral signature for light reflectance from living skin, normalizing the calibration spectral signature values to the calibration reflectance value at a reference wavelength, storing the normalized calibration spectral signature, determining a subject spectral signature of the light reflectance of a region of skin of the subject whose liveness is to be determined, normalizing the subject spectral signature values to the subject reflectance value at the reference wavelength, comparing the normalized subject spectral signature with the normalized calibration spectral signature for at least one wavelength, generating a subject liveness signal based on the comparison of the normalized subject spectral signature with the normalized calibration spectral signature, and emitting the subject liveness signal.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07417727&OS=07417727&RS=07417727
owner: 
number: 07417727
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20051207
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 633 861 filed Dec. 7 2004.

This invention was made with government support under Contract Number DAAD05 03 C 0028 under the Counterterrorism Intelligence Surveillance Reconnaissance System CT ISR program and thus the government has certain rights in the invention.

This invention relates to a method and apparatus for the detection of live people and the discrimination between live and dead persons i.e. liveness detection and in particular to said method and apparatus the determination of liveness of a still person at a remote location such determination being useful in search and rescue operations and in tactical battlefield operations.

Currently human liveness detection can be done by the non invasive measurement of blood flow in a body. The methods are based on the well known Doppler effect change of the wave frequency after reflection from a moving object. In practice ultrasonic optical or radar waves are used. In the case of ultrasonic or optical waves after penetration into human skin the wave is scattered by static tissue as well as by movement of cells in blood vessels platelets and others . While the former will stay unchanged compared to the source the latter will be shifted in the frequency by a value proportional to the speed of scattering blood cells. As a result the scattered wave will have a broader spectrum and this effect can be measured and converted into the blood flow speed. Much of the prior art uses Doppler blood flow measurement methods and apparatus. Some of the methods use ultrasonic waves and some use laser radiation. Still other prior art uses Doppler radar measurement or detection of a beating heart or body part motion that is associated with breathing i.e. respiration. In the Doppler radar case a radar pulse is transmitted and scatters from a breathing body or penetrates the body and scatters off a beating heart or moving body parts such as lungs and chest cavity which move in the course of breathing and the Doppler frequency shift of the reflected signal is sensed or measured. Additionally some prior art employs thermal sensing of body temperature as an indication of liveness. One method of such thermal sensing is the detection of long wave infrared emission by a warm body.

As blood flow breathing and a beating heart exist only in live subjects the above methods can be in principle used for liveness detection. However direct application of the known non radar methods and apparatus to human liveness detection in combat or rescue operations is not feasible for several reasons. Ultrasonic Doppler velocimetry works only in proximity of a subject preferably requiring contact between a transducer and a detector with the body because the signal gets reduced dramatically with increased the distance from the body. The laser Doppler measurements do not require contact but are still limited in distance. In addition the laser source has a recognizable signature and can be detected by the enemy which is not acceptable for covert operations. Also for Doppler measurements a laser with very narrowband radiation must be used as the speed of blood cells is slow and high precision measurement is necessary. Such a laser adds significantly to the cost and weight of the instrument. Pulse Doppler radar measurements are used in combat and emergency situations but they are active measurements as they employ electromagnetic emissions that scatter from the subject. As such the fraction of emitted power that is returned to the sensor is proportional to the inverse fourth power of the distance i.e. the range between the transmitter and the subject. As a consequence such liveness detection requires substantial emitted power or energy and comprises a significant signature that can be detected by an enemy or if the power is reduced then significant limitations in range result.

There are many multi spectral and hyperspectral sensors and methods for a variety of physiological measurements but these sensors and methods rely on close proximity or contact with tissue for such measurements. Such sensors and monitors are cumbersome and not well suited for remote sensing. Sensors that use long wave infrared detection of body temperature are not reliable when ambient temperature is near body temperature. At extreme temperatures heat flow models must be used to account for the departure of skin temperature from normal body temperature. As a result such sensing may be unreliable require cumbersome calibration or be useful only in limited conditions of ambient temperature and wind. Further such sensors typically have poor spatial resolution and so rely on close proximity.

The ability to remotely determine if a wounded soldier was alive or dead would be of substantial benefit to battlefield leaders who must decide whether to risk personnel in recovering a soldier who might already be dead and thus unfortunately beyond medical help no matter how fast that help is provided.

The determination of liveness would also be useful to assess whether a still person poses a threat or to detect persons who are difficult to detect visually because they are in a visually cluttered scene or partially concealed. The detection and classification of pixels in a scene that correspond to live skin or tissue are useful for the detection of the use of cosmetics i.e. make up prostheses masks or other means of concealment or alteration of appearance or disguise. With other indication of liveness such as locomotion or Doppler sensing of blood flow breathing or heartbeat the identification of skin or tissue as not live would indicate an altered appearance that may be part of a disguise.

In view of the limitations now present in the prior art the present invention provides a method and device for Standoff Liveness Detection which has a significant range of operation. In addition the method does not require a laser source and can be passive i.e. it can use ambient illumination. For this reason an instrument based on this method cannot be detected during operation.

Our approach to distinguishing between live and dead subjects is based on the difference between spectral reflectance of live and dead humans and animals. Living skin and tissue are supplied with oxygenated hemoglobin while dead skin and tissue are not. Moreover the water content and consequently the optical characteristics are also different for live and dead skin or tissue. As a result the spectral signatures are quite different between live and dead. The difference can be remotely detected by an observer using a viewing apparatus.

The apparatus for implementing the proposed method includes an optical viewer with spectral analysis capabilities. When the observer looks at a subject through the viewer and positions the viewer so that the central circle is locked on a face or another bare skin area a spectral signature of this skin area is acquired by the apparatus and compared with the spectral signature of living human skin stored in memory. If the signatures are the same then the apparatus so indicates to the observer who is then informed that the subject is alive and if the signatures are different the apparatus indicates that the subject is nonliving material. In a similar manner the viewer may be a multi spectral or hyperspectral imaging device with spectral analysis capabilities which perform the comparison of observed spectral signature with the signature of living skin stored in memory. Instead of or in addition to viewing skin with its water content and the oxygenated hemoglobin in the dermis the method may be used in the sensing of tissue to determine liveness provided that such living tissue is supplied with oxygenated hemoglobin such as is the case with the conjunctiva of the eye which is a vascular tissue. It is also the case with the hypodermis epithelial tissue and other parts of the body having significant blood perfusion or oxygenated hemoglobin content.

Therefore in one aspect the invention is a method for remotely detecting whether a subject is alive comprising the steps of determining a calibration spectral signature for light reflectance from living skin normalizing the calibration spectral signature values to the calibration reflectance value at a reference wavelength storing the normalized calibration spectral signature determining a subject spectral signature of the light reflectance of a region of skin of the subject whose liveness is to be determined normalizing the subject spectral signature values to the subject reflectance value at the reference wavelength comparing the normalized subject spectral signature with the normalized calibration spectral signature for at least one wavelength generating a subject liveness signal based on the comparison of the normalized subject spectral signature with the normalized calibration spectral signature and emitting the subject liveness signal.

In another aspect the invention is an apparatus for remotely detecting whether a subject is alive comprising a viewer and an analyzer. The viewer comprises an objective and a beamsplitter which together form a first intermediate image and a second intermediate image a reticle placed in the plane of the first intermediate image an eyepiece for viewing the first intermediate image through the reticle an optical fiber bundle comprising a plurality of sub bundles a first end of the optical fiber bundle being disposed in the plane of the second intermediate image such that the plurality of sub bundles splits a central region of the second intermediate image into a plurality of light signals and a sensor comprising at least one photodiode assembly wherein at least one optical fiber sub bundle is optically coupled to the photodiode assembly. The analyzer comprises a digital signal processor and a memory such that the digital signal processor generates a liveness signal if a normalized subject spectral signature is substantially equivalent to a normalized calibration spectral signature template stored in the memory and otherwise generates a not live signal.

In yet another aspect the invention is an apparatus for remotely detecting whether a subject is alive comprising a hyperspectral imaging system comprising at least one camera for collecting a plurality of subject images formed by photons reflected from the subject each image representing photons having wavelengths within a sub portion of the electromagnetic spectrum an image processor comprising memory for storing a reference spectral signature image and logic circuits for comparison of the subject images to the reference spectral signature image to determine whether the subject is alive and an output device to indicate whether the subject is alive.

In still another aspect the invention is a method for remotely detecting whether a subject is alive comprising the steps of determining a calibration spectral signature for light reflectance from living skin storing the calibration spectral signature determining a subject spectral signature of the light reflectance of the subject whose liveness is to be determined wherein the subject spectral signature is collected as an image comprising a plurality of pixels comparing the subject spectral signature with the calibration spectral signature generating a subject liveness signal for each pixel of the image based on the comparison of the subject spectral signature for each pixel with the calibration spectral signature and displaying the subject liveness signal.

A method for standoff detection of human liveness is illustrated schematically in . It is based on the difference between spectral skin or tissue reflectance of live and dead humans. The difference can be detected remotely by an observer using either a non imaging viewer or an imaging apparatus. To implement the method an optical viewer with spectral analysis capabilities is used by an observer to locate a subject who is illuminated with a light source . The optical viewer compares the spectral signature of the subject with the spectral signature of living human skin or tissue prerecorded into its memory. If these two signatures are similar the optical viewer generates a signal for the observer to let him know that the subject is alive. If the signatures are different then the signal that indicates liveness is not generated which means the subject is dead. In another embodiment the viewer generates a signal that indicates that a live subject is not viewed. Generating a signal to indicate a lack of living material within the optical viewing field is preferred since this indicates that an analysis has been completed and distinguishes from a situation where the machine might malfunction for example due to power failure.

The methods of the present invention can also be used to automatically detect whether a subject is wearing a disguise or other potential suspicious conditions. When used in conjunction with another biometric indication of liveness such as locomotion e.g. the subject is observed to move under his own power body temperature or Doppler sensing of blood flow breathing or heartbeat the detection and classification of liveness or the lack thereof for skin or tissue which is expected to be live are an indication of altered appearance. Such alteration of appearance can be indicative of cosmetics prostheses masks or other means of disguise or abnormal condition. Therefore if for a particular subject there is obtained an initial indication of liveness using a motion heat or appearance based biometric indicator such as those discussed herein this information can then be compared to the results of spectral based liveness indicators to determine whether the subject s exposed skin e.g. on the subject s face is in fact living tissue. If a subject is determined to be alive by motion heat or appearance based biometric indicators but the subject s exposed skin is determined by spectral methods not to be living tissue then it may be concluded that the subject is wearing a disguise or prosthetic device and may thereby warrant further surveillance.

The light source can be natural sun or artificial flood light for example . In any case it should be broadband enough to permit recording a multi spectral image in the range sufficient for liveness detection. This can be explained by the graphs shown in . The solid curve depicts the spectral reflectance spectral signature of living human skin while the dashed curve corresponds to the spectral signature of dead human skin. The difference is associated with sub cutaneous blood flow of oxygenated hemoglobin transported from lungs to all parts of the body. Obviously a dead person does not have blood flow and there is no oxygenated hemoglobin in the skin tissue consequently the spectral signature becomes almost flat in the visible range of the spectrum. The proposed method includes the relative measurement of the skin spectral reflectance at several wavelengths. Using relative values is important as objects subjects in a scene can be illuminated differently and can have variable brightness. The ratio of intensities in the selected spectral bands should stay nevertheless constant.

For example the wavelength 530 nm can be selected as the reference point because spectral reflectance of living skin has a minimum value in this point. If we normalize the reflectance values of each curve to its reflectance at the reference wavelength R 530 nm we will get the graphs shown in . It depicts the ratios of reflectivities in all spectral bands to the reflectivity at the reference wavelength 530 nm. It can be easily seen that the ratio or normalized reflectance R is almost constant in the visible spectral range for dead skin R 1 0.1 while for living skin it changes in a significantly broader range 1

The block diagram of the apparatus for implementing the proposed method is shown in . It comprises three modules a viewer a sensor and an analyzer . The viewer is a modified binocular a rifle scope a telescope or any other optical device capable of imaging remote objects with magnification. It is operated by an observer who positions the viewer so that the central circle is locked on a face or another bare skin area of a subject under investigation. The light flux corresponding to the encircled spot goes to the sensor where its spectral intensities at several wavelengths optimized to liveness detection according to data are measured. The reflectance data is transferred to the analyzer which normalizes the reflectance and compares it with the values corresponding to living human skin and stored inside the analyzer. If a coincidence is detected the analyzer sends a signal visible to an observer to indicate that the subject is alive. If a discrepancy is detected no signal is sent by which the observer is informed that the subject is nonliving material. The viewer may also send a visible signal if no coincidence is detected that indicates the subject is dead and informs the observer.

A detailed diagram of all three modules a viewer a sensor and an analyzer is shown in . The viewer includes an objective and beamsplitter creating together two intermediate images and of a scene a reticle placed in the plane of the first intermediate image a multi track fiber bundle with an input tip in the plane of the second intermediate image one or more light emitting diodes and one or more fibers . The reticle has superimposed on it a circle which is optically conjugated or aligned with the end of the fiber bundle so that whatever the operator places to be viewed within the circle will be what is collected by the fiber bundle transmitted to the photodiodes and analyzed by the system for a liveness determination.

The sensor comprises several photodiode assemblies and the same amount of preamplifiers for improving the sensitivity of the photodiodes and signal to noise ratio of the device.

Each photodiode assembly includes a lens an optical bandpass filter and a photodiode as shown for photodiode assembly in . The bandpass filters all are for different wavelengths which are selected in the spectral ranges corresponding to those preferred for distinguishing between living and dead human skin blue 450 480 nm and red 600 700 nm as it has been discussed above. A working embodiment of the sensor is shown in .

As it can be seen from the observer field of view includes a central circle the pattern is on the reticle and a liveness indicator the end of the fiber coupling the LED to the reticle . A second fiber coupling a second LED to reticle may be used as a not live indicator in addition to the liveness indicator.

1. An observer calibrates the Standoff Liveness Detector by acquiring the spectral signature of a live subject.

1.1 The Standoff Liveness Detector has to be positioned so that the central circle is on the skin of a live person . After that the observer initiates calibration by pressing a button. If there is no live subject available the observer can use his her hand as a calibration object.

1.2 The image of the calibration object subject is projected by the objective on the plane of the intermediate image . The beamsplitter splits the light beam into two perpendicular sub beams and the second intermediate image is formed. To increase the sensitivity of the Detector the beamsplitter optionally can transmit only spectral band s not used for detection for example blue green yellow spectral ranges 500 540 nm . In this case all photons corresponding to those spectral bands preferred for detection will be reflected to form the second intermediate image .

1.3 The multi track fiber bundle used in the apparatus has a single input tip with random distribution of fibers non coherent bundle and multiple output tracks. It accepts the light flux concentrated inside the central circle on the reticle splits the light between multiple output tips and guides it to all photodiode assemblies . The number of output tracks is equal to the number of the photodiodes deployed in the Sensor while the spatial distribution of the fibers in the input edge is random the fibers are not mapped to specific output faces i.e. a non coherent fiber bundle is used . The latter provides mixing of the light signal from the central circle and uniform splitting in equal averaged fractions for coupling through the fiber bundle to each photodiode rather than mapping of different parts of the object subject to the individual photodiodes.

1.4 Light in each photodiode assembly is focused by lens through optical bandpass filter to the sensitive area of photodiode . Therefore only light in the selected spectral band determined by the optical bandpass filter parameters is measured by each photodiode.

1.5 After amplification by the preamplifiers the electrical signal proportional to the light flux in the given spectral band gets acquired and processed by DSP .

1.6 The results of the measurement normalized spectral signature of the living skin are sent to the memory and stored there for future use as a template.

2.1 The observer watches a scene with his her eye s through the viewer module of the Standoff Liveness Detector and finds a remotely located subject whose liveness has to be determined. He positions the viewer so that a bare skin area of the subject occupies the central circle in the field of view and acquires the spectral signature of the subject by pressing a button.

2.3. The acquired data is compared with the template by the DSP. If the data sets are close to each other the DSP generates an electrical signal driving the LED which in turn generates light. The light is transported through the fiber to the reticle . The facet of the fiber serves as the indicator of liveness in the field of view . The observer can see in the same field of view that the liveness detector is on and the person is alive. If the spectral signature of the subject is different than the template stored in the memory the liveness indicating LED remains dark as well as the liveness detector.

In another embodiment a second LED and fiber are used to indicate not live if the criteria for the DSP to generate a liveness signal are not met. In this case the DSP generates an electrical signal driving a second LED which in turn generates light which may be of a color different from the liveness indicating LED and the light is transported by a second fiber to reticle so that the facet of the second fiber serves as an indicator of not live in the field of view.

In yet another embodiment the liveness detector may take the form of a hyperspectral imaging HSI sensor. Hyperspectral imaging is a pixel by pixel measurement which is made as the continuous division in wavelength of a broad band typically optical signal. That is the reflectance intensity at each of a series of closely neighboring wavelengths or narrow contiguous bands of wavelengths or piecewise contiguous bands of wavelengths is measured for each pixel in an image. Thus for each pixel in the image the technique produces a continuous plot of reflectance within the measured region of the spectrum . Hyperspectral imaging is a well established approach that has been used in many different technical areas including medicine remote sensing counter mine applications and earth monitoring. By looking at the relative amounts of the reflectance signal at each wavelength or small bands of wavelengths separately it is possible to extract much more information than can be obtained from a signal that is the sum of the reflectance across many wavelengths or integrated across a broad band of wavelengths. Peaks and troughs in the hyperspectral signature can often be correlated with known absorption or emission bands and thus be used to identify constituents of the volume through which the data was taken e.g. the presence of oxy hemoglobin or de oxyhemoglobin or water. This is shown in . In the hyperspectral reflectance signature was obtained from two living human subjects in the range of 400 nm to 1700 nm at regular contiguous bands. The skin reflectance spectra in both cases show distinct features corresponding to absorption due to water HO or oxygenated hemoglobin HbO . Among other requirements collecting hyperspectral reflectance images requires a means for filtering the incoming light destined for the camera detector so that each image represents the reflectance within a narrow range of wavelengths for example 20 nm wide bands.

We have built a hyperspectral human detection sensor that can automatically detect the presence of a human from long ranges 200 m or further . The sensor known and trademarked as SpectraSentry uses up to 3 cameras visible NIR and SWIR to span the range from 400 nm to approximately 1700 nm although human detection can typically be performed using a single SWIR camera operating in the 1000 nm to 1600 nm range. The sensor works by obtaining the hyperspectral signature from any exposed human skin e.g. hands face head neck etc. and comparing it to standard data representing an average human. The comparison between current and average or typical data is performed using one or more algorithms developed by the inventors and detailed in the next section. The average human data is obtained by collecting images cubes i.e. hyperspectral signatures from a large number of people and averaging the results.

Since death can be associated with lack of oxygen in the blood and as the hyperspectral signature of human skin depends quite significantly on hemoglobin and in particular the amount of oxygen in the hemoglobin the CET implementation of HSI is an excellent approach to use to determine if the object being imaged is alive or dead . In addition to being used to determine if a person is dead or live this approach can be used to detect the use of prostheses cosmetics masks or other means of disguise for defeating confusing or spoofing of biometric based access systems such as finger print readers and to a lesser extent iris scanners by confirming that the body part that is offered to the biometric device is in fact living tissue.

The algorithm that is used for human detection can also be used as a liveness algorithm. Since a typical human hyperspectral signature is known a priori a digitally stored signature can be obtained prior to the measurement for comparison with the signal from the person for whom liveness is to be determined. The simplest approach is on a pixel by pixel basis to look at the distance in a least squares sense between the measured data and the typical human signature. That is the spectral signature of a particular pixel in the subject image is compared with the spectral signature of an average human determined as described above . If the measured and predetermined average human spectral signatures are close enough below the threshold then that pixel is called human and may be marked in the image e.g. it may be colored red or some other unambiguous marking may be used. If the two spectral signatures are far apart above the threshold then that pixel is called non human and in one embodiment is marked in a different color say black. Typically for a particular embodiment of a viewer or imaging system the threshold can be determined empirically by measurement of a number of persons Nwho are representative of the target population and then selecting a threshold value that captures a specific fraction fof the live data distribution. The probable error rate can be determined by well known statistical methods that are based on the values of Nand f.

Other methods of determining if a pixel should be classified as human or non human include the spectral angle mapper SAM and the use of a neural network. The spectral angle mapper measures spectral similarity by finding the angle between the spectral signatures of two pixels. Since it uses only the direction of the signatures and not their length the SAM is insensitive to frequency dependent variations in the scene illumination.

In another embodiment a multi layer perceptron MLP feed forward neural network is used to improve detection accuracy at the expense however of needing initial training. Typical live human detection results are shown in . In the test scene is shown which contains the face of a live person and a picture of the same person. In the pixels are classified according to a Euclidian spectral distance measurement i.e. least squares with those pixels determined to be from a live person colored in red shown as vertical hatching in . In the classification is based on a 3 layer neural net algorithm again with the live person pixels indicated in red shown as vertical hatching in . Superior performance is seen in as the contiguous pixels corresponding to the live person s face and ears.

Spectral Angle Mapper SAM is an automated method for comparing image spectra to individual spectra or a spectral library Kruse F. A. Lefkoff A. B. Boardman J. W. Heidebrecht K. B. Shapiro A. T. Barloon J. P. and Goetz A. F. H. The spectral image processing system SIPS Interactive visualization and analysis of imaging spectrometer data v. 44 p. 145 163 1993 . The algorithm determines the similarity between two spectra by calculating the spectral angle between them treating them as vectors in a space with dimensionality equal to the number of bands N. Graphically this may be depicted as vector projections on multiple planes for each of which the coordinate axes are reflectivities in the spectral bands i and j 1

Artificial Neural Networks NN find currently broad application in hyperspectral imaging for classification and target detection. They represent a non determinstic approach to hyperspectral classification. The advantages of NN based approaches for classifying hyperspectral images have been recognized for a while see for example J. A. Bendicktsson P. H. Swain O. K. Ersoy Neural network approaches versus statistical methods of classification of multisource remote sensing data 28 540 1992 . NNs are considered to be powerful classification tools because of their nonlinear properties and the fact that they make no assumptions about the distribution of the data. This feature is useful in cases where no simple phenomenological model exists to accurately describe the underlying physical process that determines the data distribution. The NN system must be trained before use. During training an operator inserts multiple samples of various classes and allows the NN to acquire proper knowledge about a scene and objects subjects included in it. As the result the NN system generates internal criteria to be used in future image classification. The NN classification is flexible and precise but demands training and generally works slower than SAM and other deterministic algorithms.

There are some potential limitations to the liveness detection methods as described in the various embodiments above that can be overcome by practices well known in the art. One potential limitation is lack of detectability because of an insufficient number of photons reaching the sensor. The lack of received photons can be remedied by improved lighting as by the intentional illumination of the subject. This may be accomplished by one or more light sources that are situated away from the sensor. In this way the viewer and observer may have low detectability by an enemy while the subject is easily seen by the viewer. Improved detectability of the subject may also be obtained by use of a larger optical aperture or by longer integration time of the viewing sensor or by use of a more sensitive optical sensor.

There are some physical limitations to the sensing that are well known and typical of optical sensing systems. These include diffraction limitations of optical systems atmospheric attenuation and atmospheric turbulence. The adverse effects of such phenomena can be ameliorated by means well known to those practiced in the art.

Another limitation to the method is the determination of liveness for a person or animal that is dying or has recently died insofar as levels of oxygenated hemoglobin may remain above a liveness threshold criterion for a short period after death. During the dying process the legal or clinical definition of death may not be precisely correlated with the determined changes in optical characteristics that are associated with levels of oxygenated hemoglobin water content etc. in skin or tissue. Clinical evidence has shown that levels of oxygenated hemoglobin decrease rapidly when blood flow or breathing ceases. For an adult the loss of oxygenated hemoglobin is nearly complete within approximately 5 minutes of the cessation of breathing or heartbeat. As a consequence the detection of liveness by the method of this invention may become uncertain or indicate not live a few minutes after breathing or heartbeat stop although clinical or legal death may not occur for another few minutes.

Laboratory tests have been performed that demonstrate the Initial real time continuous live human skin detection using a hyper spectral imaging HSI system with an acousto optical tunable filter AOTF . An AOTF is a solid state electronically tunable spectral bandpass filter in which standing acoustic waves in a crystal produce index of refraction changes in the crystal so that the crystal essentially becomes a diffraction grating with the spacing set by the distance between acoustic wave peaks. A live human hand that is placed on the head of a manikin is shown in . shows the results of a pixel by pixel HSI based liveness determination superimposed on the image of the hand and the manikin shown as vertical hatching in . demonstrates that the system can discriminate between living tissue the hand and nonliving tissue the manikin which resembles living material in that the system only determined liveness for those pixels associated with the hand and not for the pixels associated with the manikin. The system has achieved real time 10 frames per second detection and can track a moving subject by using the liveness detection as the discriminant. In the example of the AOTF operated in the wavelength range of 950 nm to 1700 nm which is in the short wave infrared portion of the spectrum.

Laboratory outdoor and field testing have been performed with an embodiment of the viewer for liveness detection as seen in . An exterior view of the device is shown in and the interior of the device is shown in . The zoom lens assembly Nikkor 76 180 mm 1 4.5 5.6 D is seen on the right. The operator views the subject through an ocular with the viewing aperture on the side of the box being visible in while the ocular is seen in . A beamsplitter passes light to filtered detectors and reflects light to the ocular for observing. The viewer emits an audible sound when a live subject is viewed. The viewer is shown with the cover of its housing removed. The viewer is attached to a pan tilt swivel mounting for positioning when in use.

The method has also been applied to the detection of live persons at a distance. In the face and hands of a person are identified as live at a distance of 200 m when viewed outdoors and with a line of sight that is over pavement a pond and turf. Pixels corresponding to liveness are sensed by the method of the invention and displayed as red colored shown in as vertically hatched portions . Using an HSI system with a liquid crystal tunable filter LCTF with spectral resolution of 20 nm that is reflectance images are collected in successive adjacent 20 nm wide bands of the electromagnetic spectrum and an optical system with spatial resolution 

The method has also been used to identify the observable live skin of body parts of a group of persons i.e. a crowd . An analyzed image is shown in . Using a HSI system with LCTF the pixels corresponding to live are displayed as red colored shown as vertical hatching in . With the addition of spatial analysis to further classify groups of live identified pixels as specific body parts such as hands arms faces heads etc the liveness detection can be used to aid in counting the number of individuals in a crowd.

The detection of three live persons is shown in . A composite wavelength visible light image is shown in . The pixels that are classified as live are displayed in in red shown as vertical hatching . Spatial feature information can be used in addition to liveness detection to aid in counting the number of individuals.

Tests of the liveness detection with a non imaging viewer apparatus have been performed with pigs as subjects. Because pigs and humans have skin that is very similar pig skin is frequently used as a surrogate for human skin in research. The liveness detection method and spectral liveness detector SLD viewer were used to detect live and dead pigs. The results are shown in . After slaughter the dead pig skin was viewed and detected as dead by the method and viewer. The chart shows the normalized ratios of intensity values for 15 ratios of pairs of intensities measured as the differences of logarithmic amplifier outputs hence the possibility of negative values of the ratios at six wavelengths 450 500 550 600 650 750 nm which correspond to oxygenated hemoglobin and water. A typical live human data set is shown with the maximum and minimum liveness limits for all data. Data for live pigs not shown are very similar to data for humans. The dead pig data set clearly shows points that are below the liveness range live limit minimum and so correspond to a not live determination. Furthermore the data points of the data sets for live subjects typically are greater than the data points for dead subjects as shown in the example. The Reflectance Parameters numbered 1 15 in the graph of are the ratios of the logarithmic amplifier outputs for the various wavelengths.

From the foregoing description various modifications and changes in the design and method will occur to those skilled in the art without varying from the scope of the invention as defined in the following claims.

