---

title: Systems and methods for performing active LADAR and passive high resolution imagery
abstract: A system and method for performing high-resolution imagery of a target are provided. One embodiment is a method of performing high-resolution imagery of a target comprising: generating a chirped waveform that modulates a light signal transmitted toward a target for performing active LADAR of the target; generating a low-frequency local oscillator waveform for performing active imaging; and simultaneously performing passive imaging and active LADAR.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07411662&OS=07411662&RS=07411662
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07411662
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051020
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured used and licensed by or for the United States Government.

Currently there are a number of techniques for imaging with laser detection and ranging systems LADAR . LADAR systems have the ability to collect high angular and range resolution imagery of camouflaged targets hidden in deep clutter. LADAR systems use a laser to illuminate an area of interest and therefore the resulting imagery is not affected by variations in background illumination or self emission. However if detected the laser emission may be used to locate the position of the LADAR system. Furthermore because the LADAR is typically designed with a limited amount of available laser power LADAR systems generally operate over a narrow field of view FOV .

Passive imaging systems however operate using the available background illumination from light sources such as the sun or self emissions of radiation from a target. Because these radiation sources are subject to unpredictable variations for most cases images derived from passive imaging systems may not be reliable. These variations may also lead to high false alarm rates. Passive imaging systems however are covert because they do not rely on emissions of energy from the detection system to form an image. Furthermore passive imaging systems may be designed with focal planes that contain a large number of pixels. Therefore passive imaging systems typically have a wider FOV than LADAR systems.

Examples of laser detection ranging or passive imagery are disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 608 514 Stann et. al. 5 877 851 Stann et. al. 6 618 125 Stann 6 844 924 Ruff et. al. and 6 522 393 Higashino . Further for example U.S. Pat. No. 5 608 514 discloses a system where a detector is followed by a signal mixer 5 877 851 discloses a system where an electro optic light modulator is positioned in front of a detector and 6 844 924 discloses a self mixing detector which is also referred to as a metal semiconductor metal or an MSM detector. All of the above patents are fully incorporated herein by reference.

Systems and methods for performing both active LADAR and passive high resolution imagery of a target are provided. One such embodiment is a LADAR system comprising a chirp generator for generating a chirped waveform that modulates a light signal transmitted toward a target a passive waveform generator for generating a low frequency local oscillator waveform and a self mixing detector array that employs the low frequency local oscillator and the chirped waveforms the low frequency local oscillator waveform being used by the self mixing detector to perform passive imaging and the chirped waveform being used by the self mixing detector to perform active LADAR for measuring the range to the target.

Another embodiment is a LADAR system comprising means for generating a chirped waveform that modulates a light signal transmitted toward a target means for generating a low frequency local oscillator waveform and means for detecting signals the detecting means receiving the low frequency local oscillator and the chirped waveforms the low frequency local oscillator waveform being used by the detecting means to perform passive imaging and the chirped waveform being used by the detecting means to perform active LADAR for measuring the range to the target.

An embodiment of a method for performing high resolution imagery of a target comprises generating a chirped waveform that modulates a light signal transmitted toward a target for performing active LADAR of the target generating a low frequency local oscillator waveform for performing passive imaging and simultaneously performing passive imaging and active LADAR.

Another such embodiment of a method comprises generating a chirped waveform that modules a light signal transmitted toward a target for performing active LADAR of the target generating a low frequency local oscillator waveform for performing passive imaging and determining which of the chirped waveform and the low frequency local oscillator signal are to be provided to a detector.

Other systems methods features and or advantages will be or may become apparent to one with skill in the art upon examination of the following drawings and detailed description. It is intended that all such additional systems methods features and or advantages be included within this description and be protected by the accompanying claims.

This disclosure relates to various embodiments of systems and methods for performing both active LADAR and passive high resolution imagery of a target. Several embodiments are described below with reference to . As an introductory matter an exemplary non limiting embodiment of a laser detection and ranging LADAR passive imaging system hereinafter also referred to as the imaging system will be briefly described.

In general an embodiment of a LADAR passive imaging system provides two high resolution imaging modes 1 active LADAR and 2 passive imaging.

In active LADAR mode the imaging system operates by modulating a light signal with a known waveform and transmitting the modulated light signal toward a target. A portion of the transmitted laser intensity may be reflected from the target back toward the imaging system and received by detector s . The received light signal which contains the original transmitted laser intensity modulation is delayed in time due to travel along the path from the transmitter to the target and back to the receiver.

In active LADAR mode the imaging system images the target by detecting ranging data such as distance and amplitude from the received light signal. For instance the detector s may mix the received signal with a local oscillator waveform derived from the original waveform used to modulate the transmission signal In this manner an intermediate frequency IF waveform may be generated that can be further processed by the imaging system to determine the ranging data.

In passive imaging mode the imaging system operates by detecting the passive background illumination radiation from the target area. The imaging system may use a low frequency local oscillator LO waveform for passive imaging mode. The low frequency passive LO waveform is used to modulate the responsivity of the detector s . The imaging system images the target in passive imaging mode by mixing the received passive background signal with the low frequency passive LO waveform.

The imaging system may simultaneously image in both active LADAR mode and passive imaging mode using the same detector s . For instance the imaging system may multiplex the low frequency passive LO waveform used for passive imaging mode with the local oscillator signal derived from the waveform used to modulate the transmission signal. The multiplexed signal may be used to modulate the intensity of the detector s . In this manner the LADAR passive imaging system may form both active LADAR and passive images of the target at the same time and using the same detector s and optics. In alternative embodiments the simultaneous imaging in both modes may be disabled and or removed altogether. In further embodiments the imaging system may include a switching mechanism that enables the system to be switched back and forth between the two modes. Therefore rather than simultaneously imaging in both modes the imaging system may enable a user to select the particular imaging mode.

Referring to the active LADAR mode imaging system includes a trigger circuit that activates chirp generator for producing a chirp signal with a frequency that increases linearly as a function of time over a period of time T. The chirp signal is provided to a wideband RF power amplifier to a matching circuit that matches the driving impedance of the amplifier to the impedance of a laser diode .

Laser diode converts the chirp signal into a light waveform with power proportional to the driving current of the chirp signal. A divergent laser light beam produced by the laser diode is collected by transmission optics collimated and directed toward a target as indicated by arrow . The portion of transmitted light that is reflected by the target and propagated back to imaging system arrow is collected by reception optics and focused onto the active detection region of detector s . A variety of types of detectors may be employed such as those identified above in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 608 514 5 877 851 6 618 125 6 844 924 and 6 522 393.

Detector s convert the collected incident light into a low frequency waveform with an amplitude that is proportional to the power of the transmitted light and a frequency proportional to the range to the target.

A subtraction technique that is implementable with analog to digital converters memory chips and microwave switches is designed to eliminate self clutter problems. Referring to the embodiment of a switch may be opened to interrupt the transmission of light to the target therefore leaving only the self clutter signal present at the output of the detectors . The self clutter signal from is captured in the sample and store circuit and placed in a data file. For subsequent chirp periods the switch is closed and the total IF signal is then sampled and stored in a second file in the sample and store memory circuit . The clutter signal from the first file in the sample and store memory circuit is subtracted from the total IF signal stored in a second file in the second sample and store memory circuit.

As illustrated in the subtracted output is provided to discrete Fourier transform circuitry to map the received time domain IF signal into the frequency domain or equivalently the range domain to indicate the distance to the target. The updating rate of the stored self clutter signal is based on the rate of change of the self clutter signal and the degree of cancellation required to meet LADAR sensitivity requirements. In other words the operation of the switch can be performed as often as required to assure that the self clutter signal in the first sample and store memory circuit is constantly updated to reflect current conditions.

As mentioned above trigger circuit initiates generation of a linear frequency modulated sinusoidal chirp signal in chirp generator . The chirp signal will persist for some period T. A chirp signal is simply a sinusoidal waveform whose frequency linearly increases over T.

As illustrated in the embodiment of the chirp signal is fed into an amplifier e.g. a wideband radio frequency RF power amplifier that modulates the current driving laser diode . Wideband matching circuit matches the driving impedance of amplifier to laser diode over the modulation bandwidth. Matching the driving impedance of the amplifier causes the light beam intensity to be highly amplitude modulated AM and causes the peak intensity to be constant as a function of chirp frequency. Output from wideband matching circuit and a DC current V are summed in bias tee to provide the current drive for laser diode with a bandwidth at least equal to the chirp waveform.

The divergent laser beam from laser diode is collected by transmission optics which collimates the light in a beam that is sufficiently wide to encompass or floodlight the target scene of interest. As mentioned above a portion of the laser light is reflected from the target back toward the LADAR arrow and collected by reception optics . An electro optic light modulator in front of the detector may be driven by the original laser modulation waveform by receiving a portion of the output of amplifier local oscillator signal and providing the signal to the switch as described above. The local oscillator signal may be used to image in active LADAR mode by mixing the local oscillator signal with the light reflected from the target.

The electro optic modulator modulates mixes the received light from the target with the original chirp signal and the resulting mixed light signal is then focused onto a focal plane detector array. Each photo detector element in the focal plane detector array converts incident light power into an electric charge that is proportional to the integral of the light power taken over the sampling time of the array. Thus the modulator multiplies the optical signal from the target with the chirp waveform and passes the modulated optical signal to an optical detection array where it is converted into an electrical signal.

Amplifiers within the focal plane detector array convert the electric charge to produce a voltage proportional to the light energy. This voltage represents a sample of the intermediate frequency IF waveform normally recovered in frequency modulation FM radar systems. To collect a full IF waveform the focal plane detector array collects data periodically along the chirp period and sends it to a memory store N frames . The data set in the memory may contain for each pixel an intermediate frequency IF waveform which includes all of the magnitude range and phase information derived from the light reflected from the target.

After the chirp period T the dimensional data set in memory is passed to a signal processor which computes the range or forms range cells by performing the Discrete Fourier Transform DFT on the time signal resident in each pixel. The transformed data set is a three dimensional image file of the original illuminated scene e.g. active image file .

The active LADAR mode may be implemented using a number of alternative components waveforms such as those identified above in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 608 514 5 877 851 6 618 125 6 844 924 and 6 522 393. In one exemplary embodiment of LADAR passive imaging system the imaging system uses a self mixing detector assembly comprising a metal semiconductor metal MSM detector

With the active LADAR mode of imaging system having been described the passive imaging mode will now be described. As mentioned above imaging system comprises a passive waveform generator which generates a low frequency local oscillator signal to be used for passive imaging. The low frequency or passive waveform is provided to switch and if the control signal is appropriately enabled the waveform is provided to detector s . The low frequency passive LO waveform is used to modulate the responsivity of detector s which also multiplies the near constant passive background signal. This shifts the passive background signals to a frequency in the pass band of the subsequent detector amplifiers. The passive background signal can be amplified and processed in much the same manner as the LADAR waveforms described above. In this manner the passive imaging and the active LADAR may be combined to allow perfectly matched and pixel registered active and passive imagery. As illustrated in the image formed while imaging system is in LADAR mode may be saved as an active image file and the image formed in passive imaging mode may be saved as a passive image file .

For the active imaging mode blocks and in imaging system switches on laser chirp modulation and chirp modulation to detector s . Imaging system also triggers chirp generator to begin modulating the responsivity of detector s with local oscillator signal derived from the chirp signal. The processing of the output of detector s as described above is illustrated in block store N frames of data block perform discrete Fourier transform and block form active passive image .

It should be emphasized that many variations and modifications may be made to the above described embodiments. All such modifications and variations are intended to be included herein within the scope of this disclosure and protected by the following claims.

