---

title: Album art on devices with rules management
abstract: A system and method for transferring album art from a client computer to a portable media device (PMD). A graphical user-interface allows a user to select a track for transfer to the PMD. A media player application (MPA) verifies that the PMD is capable and authorized to receive album art. The MPA queries the PMD for an album object storing album art for the selected track. If an album object corresponding to the selected track exists, a reference to the selected track is added to the existing album object. If an album object corresponding to the selected track does not exist, the MPA transfers a new album object referencing the selected track and storing album art for the selected track to the PMD. The MPA further connects to a web site authorized to sell an audio CD associated with a track when a buy flag is detected on the PMD.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07593950&OS=07593950&RS=07593950
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07593950
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050330
---
The present invention relates to the field of processing digital media content. In particular this invention relates to an improved system and method for transferring premium metadata for media content between media devices.

Due to recent advances in technology computer users are now able to enjoy many features that provide an improved user experience such as playing various media and multimedia content on their personal or laptop computers. For example most computers today are able to play compact discs CDs so users can listen to their favorite musical artists while working on their computers. Many computers are also equipped with digital versatile disc DVD drives enabling users to watch movies.

In some multimedia environments a computer has access to a computer readable medium storing compressed media files. Common media file types include Moving Picture Experts Group audio layer 3 MP3 files and WINDOWS MEDIA technologies audio WMA and video WMV files. The computer typically organizes the media files into playlists when the compressed media files are played on the computer. The files may be organized according to metadata or other property data associated with the media content. Metadata for a digital media file such as an audio file usually includes general information pertaining to the media file itself. This information is typically stored within the file. For example an audio file may have metadata tags for the song title song artist album title and a rating. In another example in the case of audio media files the files may be organized by album artist genre date or some user specified selection and ordering of metadata. A user navigates through this organization using menus and graphical displays to render the desired media files.

Often users transfer media content from a personal computer to a variety of other devices including another personal computers or portable consumer electronic media devices e.g. MP3 players . Many of these portable media devices are beginning to have color displays that can display a rich user interface for interacting with the media on the device. Because premium metadata such as album art is an important part of the media experience on the desktop it is important to seamlessly integrate album art on such portable media devices in order to provide a complementary experience to the desktop. However copyright restrictions regarding the use of such premium metadata should be respected.

Accordingly a system for transferring premium metadata associated media files while respecting the copyright restrictions with respect to such premium metadata is desired to address one or more of these and other disadvantages.

The invention meets the above needs and overcomes one or more deficiencies in the prior art by providing improved user experience when transferring premium metadata associated with various media files from a computer to a portable media device. More specifically the invention provides a system that provides improved management of metadata by enhancing copyright protection and a user s experience when transferring a media file from a client computer to a portable media device. The present invention also permits the user to purchase premium metadata or physical goods such as audio CD s associated with a particular media file by automatically connecting to a web site authorized to sell the desired audio CD when a buy flag is detected on the portable media device.

In accordance with an aspect of the invention a computer readable medium includes computer executable instructions for transferring graphical information from a computer to a portable media device. A user interface is provided for identifying a track to be transferred to the portable media device. Retrieving instructions retrieve graphical information corresponding to the identified track. Determining instructions determine whether an album object is stored in the portable media device. The album object stores property data corresponding to the identified track and the retrieved graphical information. Creating instructions create a new album object when the determining indicates that an existing album object is not stored in the portable media device. Transferring instructions transfer the new album object and identified track to the portable media device when the determining indicates that the album object is not stored in the portable media device.

In accordance with another aspect of the invention a method is provided for transferring graphical information from a computer to a portable media device. The method includes presenting a user interface for identifying a media file to be transferred to the remote computer. The media file has a metadata field that includes property data. The method also includes retrieving graphical information corresponding to the identified media file. The method also includes determining whether an album object is stored in the remote computer. The album object stores property data corresponding to the identified media file and the retrieved graphical information. The method further includes creating the album object when the determining indicates that the album object is not stored in the remote computer. The method further includes transferring the created album object and identified media file to the portable media device when the determining indicates that the album object is not stored in the remote computer.

In accordance with another aspect of the invention a computer readable media having a searchable data structure is provided. The data structure includes a first field for storing data representing graphical information associated with an album. The data structure also includes a second field for storing data representing one or more tracks associated with the album. The graphical information included in the first field is associated with each of the one or more tracks stored in the second field.

Referring now to the drawings illustrates an exemplary computer system in which the present invention can be used. System includes a client computer that executes a media player application MPA . The media player application can be any suitable rendering filter or program that is configured to play digital media so that a user can experience the content embodied on the media. For example suitable MPAs include a CD media player application a digitally compressed file player application and or a DVD media player application. Executing the MPA allows the user to access a digital media file on a computer readable medium CRM such as a compact disc a network server or any other suitable computer storage media. Executing the MPA also enables the user or particularly enables MPA to access retrieve store and display for the user so called metadata. Those skilled in the art are familiar with metadata which is simply information about data. In the context of the present invention metadata involves information related to specific content of digital media file being played via the MPA . Basic metadata may include one or more of album title artist performer genre description of content and the like. Extended or premium metadata includes album art performer biographies reviews related performers where to buy similar items upcoming concerts ticket sales URLs to other related experiences including purchase opportunities and the like. The MPA accesses a memory for storing digital media files and includes a graphical user interface for displaying media files and organized metadata to the user on a display and for transferring media files and organized metadata to a remote device such as a portable media device communicatively connected to the computer .

In the examples herein the media content of digital media file refers to a single song track or a collection of tracks such as found on an audio CD. It is to be appreciated and understood that the media content can be embodied on any suitable media including digital files downloaded to the client computer s memory and that the specific examples described herein are given to further understanding of the inventive principles. The media content can include without limitation specially encoded media content in the form of for example an encoded media file such as media content encoded in Microsoft Windows Media format using the Microsoft Windows Media Player program.

The system allows improved management of metadata by enhancing copyright protection and user experience when transferring a media file from the client computer to a remote computing device such as a portable media device . More specifically the present invention permits a user to purchase premium metadata or physical goods such as audio CD s associated with a particular media file by enabling a buy now flag while or after viewing album art on a display of the portable media device during play back of the media file on the portable media device .

Referring briefly to FIG B a screen shot illustrates a display of an exemplary portable media device configured to display album art and other metadata. In this instance metadata such as the artist name 10 000 Maniacs album title In My Tribe track number 01 track title What s the Matter Here and album art as indicated by reference character can be viewed on the display of the portable media device . By using navigation tools not shown on the portable media device the user can displace i.e. slide over the album art to view an options menu on the display . The options menu includes various options such as shuffle play repeat play equalizer and purchase. See . Again using navigation tools on the portable media device the user can select a check box corresponding to the purchase option to indicate i.e. flag an intent to purchase this track album which is communicated back to the MPA .

As will be explained in greater detail in reference to below the buy now flag corresponds to a buy property value stored in the memory of the portable media device that indicates whether or not the user desires to purchase an audio CD corresponding to a transferred media file and or premium property data and is assigned by the user of the portable media device . The next time the portable device is connected to the client computer as indicated by line the MPA detects the enabled buy now flag and connects to a web site authorized to sell the desired audio CD. For example the MPA detects the enabled buy now flag and communicates with a server via the Internet to display a web page not shown that allows the user to purchase the desired audio CD.

As described in more detail below in reference to the MPA authenticates the portable device by verifying that it is configured to operate in compliance with copyright restrictions and that the device is configured to display album art. After the portable media device is authenticated the MPA creates an album object when transferring a first media file associated with a particular album to the portable media device . The album object defines album metadata for each track on an album such as album name artist name and premium metadata such as album art data. By creating the album object subsequent transfers of album property data for other media files associated with the same album are not required and thus the amount of time and storage space required to transfer a different media file from that same album is reduced as compared to the amount of time required for the first media file . For example after a first track from the album entitled Paradise by Kenny G is transferred to the portable media device an album object is created that includes in part the name of the album as specified by metadata included in the first track i.e. media file and album art data. Thereafter when a second track is being transferred the media player application can query data included in album objects stored in the memory of the portable media device to determine if the name of the album as specified by metadata included in the first track matches the name of the album specified by metadata included in the album object. If a match is detected the media player application will not transfer album art to the portable media device because the corresponding album art can be retrieved from the album object having metadata specifying the matching album name. As a result subsequent transfers of media files from the same album occur faster and premium metadata such as album art does not need to be retransmitted for each media file from the same album. Thus system provides improved management of the transfer of media files between a client computer and portable media device by permitting a user to simultaneously update and transfer premium metadata associated media files while respecting the copyright restrictions with respect to such premium metadata.

Referring next to the components of an exemplary media file e.g. media file are shown. In this case the media file represents a song track such as described above in reference to . The media file includes a body section and a header section . The body stores digital audio information that is used by the MPA to play the particular music track. Although the body is described herein as storing digital audio information it is contemplated that the body of a media file may include digital video information. The header includes digital information which is used by the MPA to display information i.e. metadata about the particular music track. For example the header may include track information such as the song title song artist and album title for the work as stored metadata. The header includes a plurality of metadata fields that each store property data for a particular category of metadata. Property data defines a particular property that the media file has within the particular metadata category. For instance metadata field 1 may store information related to a genre category and may have a property that indicates the genre is Rock or may have property that indicates the genre is both Rock and Ballad. 

Referring next to the components of an exemplary album object are show. In this case the album object represents an album having one or more song tracks such as described above in reference to . The album object includes a body section and a header section . The body includes one or more unique media file pointers that each reference a particular track of the album stored on the portable media device . The media file pointers are arranged in a sequence e.g. media file pointer 1 media file pointer 2 . . . media file pointer N that corresponds to the order the tracks appear on the album. For example consider a portable media device having five 5 tracks i.e. media files from a particular album. If the tracks on the portable media device correspond to tracks and from the album five media file pointers will be arranged as shown in Table 1.

Referring next to an exemplary block diagram illustrates basic components of a MPA e.g. MPA having computer executable instructions for storing and displaying media files e.g. media files authenticating portable media devices for data transfer and transferring data to portable media devices according to one embodiment of the invention. The MPA includes a media library e.g. memory for storing media files and a user interface UI for displaying and allowing a user to interact with media files . In this embodiment a client computer e.g. computer stores and executes a media device manager application and the MPA . The media device manager application monitors the client computer for connection to a portable media device . Notably the connection may involve a wired connection such as a USB cable or IEEE 1394 interface i.e. Firewire a wireless communication technology such as TCP IP 802.11 wireless networks Bluetooth GPRS CDMA or other cellular data transmission networks or any other computer to computer communications protocol. The media device manager application notifies the MPA when it detects a portable media device connected to the client computer .

The MPA executes in response to the notification from the media device manager application and identifies all media files on the computer it can process and transfers the identified files to the media library . If the MPA is running when the user copies audio files from a CD the Internet or other source the audio files are automatically directed to the media library for storage. The MPA is responsive to the notification from the device manager to display media files in the media library via the UI and allows the user to view and edit the stored metadata and or to designate one or more media files to transfer to the detected portable device .

Referring now to a screen shot illustrates an exemplary UI for displaying media files stored in the media library of Windows Media Player offered by Microsoft Inc. The UI displays a list of media files in a media file data section and the user designates media files to synchronize i.e. transfer to a portable media device . The user interacts with metadata and or media files being displayed via the UI by using commonly known navigation techniques. For example the user can use a mouse linked to the computer to navigate through the UI and to select media files by clicking a check box adjacent to a desired media file in a media file selection section . The UI of the invention allows a user to designate a single media file or a group of media files for transfer by adding the media files to a transfer list. In this case it can be seen that all the media files visible in the in the media file data section have check in the check box adjacent to the media files and thus are all designated for transfer to the portable media device .

Referring back to after the user designates one or more media files via the UI for transfer to the portable media device the MPA authenticates the portable media device . In one preferred embodiment two levels of authentication must be satisfied before media files and corresponding album art are transferred to the portable device . More specifically the MPA executes first and second authentication instructions to authenticate the portable media device .

The first authentication instructions determine if the portable media device supports Digital Rights Management DRM such as Windows Media Digital Rights Management for Portable Devices WMDRM10 PD code named Janus offered by Microsoft Inc. For example the first authentication instructions query the memory not shown of the portable device to determine if it has a valid DRM certificate. If the device does not have a valid DRM certificate an otherwise unprotected media file will be transferred to the portable media device . However premium metadata such as album art will not be transferred to portable media device .

If the first authentication instructions determine the portable media device supports DRM second authentication instructions are executed by the MPA to determine if the portable media device is capable of displaying album art. For example the second authentication instructions include instructions for querying data stored in the memory not shown of a portable media device to retrieve a value of the capability property. Generally the value of the capability property is assigned by the manufacturer of the portable device and indicates whether or not the device is capable of displaying premium property data such as album art. For instance if the portable media device is capable of displaying album art on the display of the portable media device the manufacturer assigns a value to the capability property that indicates the portable media device is configured to display album art. Alternatively if the portable media device is incapable of displaying album art on the display of the portable media device a value is assigned to the capability property that indicates the portable media device is not configured to display album art. If the retrieved capability property value indicates the portable media device is configured to display album art the portable media device is authenticated for the transfer of album art. On the other hand if the retrieved capability property value indicates the portable media device is not configured to display album art the portable device is not authenticated for the transfer of album art. Accordingly even if the device has a valid DRM certificate the device may not be capable or desire to receive transmission of album art.

Notably although the authentication process is described above as occurring after the user identifies media files and or data to transfer from the computer to the portable media device it is contemplated that authentication may occur when the device is first detected by the media device manager application . For example when the media device manager application detects a portable media device connected to the client computer the MPA executes the first authentication instructions to determine whether the device has a valid DRM certificate and executes second authentication instructions to identify the value of a capability property stored on the portable media device .

The media player application executes transferring instructions to transfer the appropriate data to the portable media device based on the results of the authentication process described above. If the portable media device is determined not to have a valid DRM certificate or not to have the capability to display album art i.e. fails either the first or second levels of authentication transferring instructions only transfer the selected media file and basic property data such as album title artist performer genre description of content. On the other hand if the portable media device is completely authenticated i.e. satisfies first and second levels of authentication the MPA executes transferring instructions to initiate the synchronization process and transfer a copy of the requested media file and appropriate property data such as album art to the portable media device . In this case the transferring instructions include instructions for querying the media files on the portable media device to determine if an album object corresponding to the retrieved album art is stored on the portable media device . In one embodiment the MPA queries the memory of portable media device to identify a unique identification code UID that matches a UID stored in the memory e.g. library of the MPA . The UID is a unique code generated by the portable media device . If matching UIDs are not identified the MPA executes creating instructions to create an empty album object and requests the portable media device to generate a corresponding UID. As described above in reference to the created album object includes metadata for each media file on an album such as album name artist name and premium metadata such as album art. The UID is generated by the portable media device and associated with the album object directly by the device . The transferring instructions store the media file to the device get a UID for the media file and then set a reference in the album object using the UID of the media file just added. During playback of the media file on the portable media device metadata in header of the media file is compared to data stored in one or more album objects to identify the album to which the media file belongs and to retrieve the appropriate album art for display.

In one embodiment the album object is created by the portable media device and stored in a particular folder hierarchy which is calculated by an algorithm as a function of metadata associated with the track. For example a music track will be stored in a folder hierarchy in the following form 

Accordingly the determination of whether an album object already exists when transferring subsequent media files can be managed by searching for the appropriately named .alb object in the directory in which it is expected to be stored by running the same algorithm each time. If the album object already exists then the new media files are added to the album objects by adding references to the UID s generated by the portable media device for each new track or tracks. Thus the existence of the album object can either be determined by locating it using a previously generated UID stored within the MPA s media library or by running a deterministic algorithm such as described above.

If transferring instructions determine if an album object designating the album art for the media file being transferred already exists on the portable media device then the transferring instructions transfer the media file to portable media device without album art data. That is because metadata associated with the media file being transferred and the metadata associated with the album object identify the same album there is no need to transfer album art to the portable media device . For example since both the media file and the album object include album name property data the MPA queries album object data stored on the portable media device to determine if the album name property data included in the media file being transferred matches album name property data included in any of the album art object data stored on the portable media device . If there is a match a reference to the UID and the new media file is added to the existing album object.

In another embodiment rather than comparing the album name property data of the media file and the album object to determine if the album object exist on the portable media device the MPA queries album object data stored on the portable media device to determine if a UID of an album object stored on in the memory of the MPA a matches a UID of an album object stored in the memory of the portable media device . As a result matching problems that occur for example when the album name or artist name is edited on the desktop computer s media library between synchronizations can be avoided since the UID cannot be changed by the user.

In one preferred embodiment the transfer instructions further include instructions for comparing property data of media files stored on the client computer to property data of media files stored on the portable media device to determine if there have been any changes or updates to media files previously transferred to the portable media device . For example the transferring instructions compares values of property data such as a rating of a particular media file or a play count of a particular media file as stored on the portable media device to corresponding vales of such property data stored on the client computer to determine if the property data has changed since the portable media device was last synchronized with the client computer . The rating of the album refers to a rating assigned by the user to a particular media file on the portable media device . The play count represents the number of times the particular media file has been played on the portable media device since it was last synced with the MPA . The MPA processes any changes to such data to the local media library to insure the media library has the user s current preferences. The transferring instructions further compare media files stored on the portable media device to the media files stored on the client computer to determine if media files have been added to or deleted from the portable media device since the portable media device was last synced with the client computer .

The transferring instructions further include instructions for determining a value of a buy property. The buy property value indicates whether or not the user desires to purchase an audio CD corresponding to a transferred media file and or premium property data and is assigned by the user of the portable media device . For instance a DRM requirement for transferring album art requires the portable media device to display a buy experience to the user. For example a Buy button is displayed along with the album art on the display of the portable media device . If the user of the portable media device selects or clicks the Buy button a buy value is assigned to the buy property to indicate that the user desires to purchase the audio CD. The transferring instructions query data stored in the memory of the portable media device media to detect buy properties having a buy value. If a buy value is detected the MPA communicates with the server via the Internet to display a web page not shown that allows the user to purchase the corresponding audio CD.

Referring now to an exemplary flow chart illustrates a method of transferring graphical information such as album art from a client computer connected to a portable media device according to the embodiment shown in . At the client computer is responsive to the connected portable media device to execute a MPA . The user using navigation techniques such as described above selects a track i.e. media file being displayed via graphical user interface for transfer to the portable media device at . At the MPA determines whether the portable media device is configured i.e. capable to display album art. For example as described above the MPA communicates with the portable media device to identify a value of a capability property that is stored on the portable media device and that indicates whether or not the device is capable of receiving premium property data such as album art. If the MPA verifies that the portable media device is capable to receive album art at the MPA queries the memory of the portable media device for a valid DRM certificate to determine if the portable media device supports DRM at . If the MPA determines that the portable media device is not capable of receiving album art at or determines that the portable media device does not support DRM at the MPA transfers the selected media file without album art at . If the MPA determines that the portable media device is capable of receiving album art at and determines that the portable media device does support DRM at the MPA performs a metadata round tripping operation between the portable media device and the computer to incorporate any metadata updates since the last synching operation at . See . At MPA transfers the selected track and track property data e.g. album name album artist track rating and play count to the portable media device . The MPA queries data stored in a memory of the portable media device to determine if an album object corresponding to the selected track is stored in the memory of the portable media device at . If the MPA determines that an album object corresponding to the selected track is already stored in the memory of the portable media device at then the MPA adds a reference to the selected track to the album object stored on the portable media device at . If the MPA determines that an album object corresponding to the selected track is not stored in the memory of the portable media device at the MPA creates a new album object storing album art corresponding to the selected track as premium property data track property data such as described above and a reference to the selected track to the portable media device at . At MPA transfers the new album object to the portable media device .

Referring now to an exemplary flow chart illustrates a metadata round tripping operation between the portable media device and the computer according to one embodiment of the invention. After MPA determines that the portable media device is capable of receiving album art and supports DRM See and the MPA retrieves media files and or property data of media files from the portable medium device that have been updated or changed since the computer was last synced with the portable media device at . For example the device is responsive to a request from the MPA for updated metadata to transfer new media files added since the computer was last synced with the portable media device . As another example the portable media device is responsive to a request from the MPA for updated metadata and or to transfer property data such as a rating of a particular track a play count of a particular track or the value of a Buy property that has changed since the computer was last synced with the device. At the MPA processes the value of the Buy property retrieved at to determine if the user of the portable media device desires to purchase the audio CD. If the MPA determines that the value of the retrieved Buy property indicates the user desires to purchase the audio CD at the MPA communicates with the server via the Internet to display a web page not shown that allows the user to purchase the corresponding audio CD at . At the MPA resets the value of the Buy property and transfers the reset Buy property to the device so the user is not presented with redundant purchase opportunities during a subsequent synching operation. The MPA processes changes to the other property data retrieved from the device to the local memory e.g. media library to insure the memory of the MPA has the user s current preferences at . Alternatively if the MPA determines that the value of the retrieved Buy property does not indicate the user desires to purchase the audio CD at the MPA processes changes to the other property data retrieved from the device to the memory to at .

The computer typically has at least some form of computer readable media. Computer readable media which include both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media may be any available medium that may be accessed by computer . By way of example and not limitation computer readable media comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media include volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. For example computer storage media include RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium that may be used to store the desired information and that may be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embody computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and include any information delivery media. Those skilled in the art are familiar with the modulated data signal which has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. Wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media are examples of communication media. Combinations of any of the above are also included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of removable and or non removable volatile and or nonvolatile memory. In the illustrated embodiment system memory includes read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. For example illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media. also shows a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that may be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a non volatile memory interface such as interface .

The drives or other mass storage devices and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components may either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies.

A user may enter commands and information into computer through input devices or user interface selection devices such as a keyboard and a pointing device e.g. a mouse trackball pen or touch pad . Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are connected to processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a Universal Serial Bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers often include other peripheral output devices not shown such as a printer and speakers which may be connected through an output peripheral interface not shown .

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to computer . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. LAN and or WAN may be a wired network a wireless network a combination thereof and so on. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and global computer networks e.g. the Internet .

When used in a local area networking environment computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a wide area networking environment computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external is connected to system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to computer or portions thereof may be stored in a remote memory storage device not shown . By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on the memory device. The network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Generally the data processors of computer are programmed by means of instructions stored at different times in the various computer readable storage media of the computer. Programs and operating systems are typically distributed for example on floppy disks or CD ROMs. From there they are installed or loaded into the secondary memory of a computer. At execution they are loaded at least partially into the computer s primary electronic memory. The invention described herein includes these and other various types of computer readable storage media when such media contain instructions or programs for implementing the steps described below in conjunction with a microprocessor or other data processor. The invention also includes the computer itself when programmed according to the methods and techniques described herein.

For purposes of illustration programs and other executable program components such as the operating system are illustrated herein as discrete blocks. It is recognized however that such programs and components reside at various times in different storage components of the computer and are executed by the data processor s of the computer.

Although described in connection with an exemplary computing system environment including computer the invention is operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. The computing system environment is not intended to suggest any limitation as to the scope of use or functionality of the invention. Moreover the computing system environment should not be interpreted as having any dependency or requirement relating to any one or combination of components illustrated in the exemplary operating environment. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics mobile telephones network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

The invention may be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules executed by one or more computers or other devices. Generally program modules include but are not limited to routines programs objects components and data structures that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

An interface in the context of a software architecture includes a software module component code portion or other sequence of computer executable instructions. The interface includes for example a first module accessing a second module to perform computing tasks on behalf of the first module. The first and second modules include in one example application programming interfaces APIs such as provided by operating systems component object model COM interfaces e.g. for peer to peer application communication and extensible markup language metadata interchange format XMI interfaces e.g. for communication between web services .

The interface may be a tightly coupled synchronous implementation such as in Java 2 Platform Enterprise Edition J2EE COM or distributed COM DCOM examples. Alternatively or in addition the interface may be a loosely coupled asynchronous implementation such as in a web service e.g. using the simple object access protocol . In general the interface includes any combination of the following characteristics tightly coupled loosely coupled synchronous and asynchronous. Further the interface may conform to a standard protocol a proprietary protocol or any combination of standard and proprietary protocols.

The interfaces described herein may all be part of a single interface or may be implemented as separate interfaces or any combination therein. The interfaces may execute locally or remotely to provide functionality. Further the interfaces may include additional or less functionality than illustrated or described herein.

In operation computer executes computer executable instructions such as those illustrated in to transfer graphical information from a client computer to a portable media device or remote computer.

The order of execution or performance of the methods illustrated and described herein is not essential unless otherwise specified. That is elements of the methods may be performed in any order unless otherwise specified and that the methods may include more or less elements than those disclosed herein. For example it is contemplated that executing or performing a particular element before contemporaneously with or after another element is within the scope of the invention.

When introducing elements of the present invention or the embodiment s thereof the articles a an the and said are intended to mean that there are one or more of the elements. The terms comprising including and having are intended to be inclusive and mean that there may be additional elements other than the listed elements.

In view of the above it will be seen that the several objects of the invention are achieved and other advantageous results attained.

As various changes could be made in the above constructions and methods without departing from the scope of the invention it is intended that all matter contained in the above description and shown in the accompanying drawings shall be interpreted as illustrative and not in a limiting sense.

