---

title: Wireless subscriber application and content distribution and differentiated pricing
abstract: Systems and methods for pricing and distributing applications and content to a wireless client device are disclosed. A first group can be formed by associating at least one item from a main catalog with a first subscriber ID (SID) associated with a first client device. A shopping catalog can be generated for the first client device from the main catalog based on at least one of platform ID, runtime API, and language. The first group can be included with the shopping catalog based on a first SID associated with the first client device. The pricing of the same item can be different in the first group and the main catalog.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09185538&OS=09185538&RS=09185538
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 09185538
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050531
---
 WIRELESS SUBSCRIBER BILLING AND DISTRIBUTION by Julie Yu Mitchell Oliver Jerry Horel Phil Nguyen Sandy Prast and Jaiteerth Patwari having filed concurrently herewith assigned to the assignee hereof and expressly incorporated by reference herein.

The present invention generally relates to communications between remote computing devices and servers. More particularly the invention relates to the creation and sending of billing events between a server and a remote client device.

Advances in technology have resulted in smaller and more powerful personal computing devices. For example there currently exist a variety of portable personal computing devices including wireless computing devices such as portable wireless telephones personal digital assistants PDAs and paging devices that are each small lightweight and can be easily carried by users. More specifically the portable wireless telephones for example further include cellular telephones that communicate voice and data packets over wireless networks. Further many such cellular telephones are being manufactured with relatively large increases in computing capabilities and as such are becoming tantamount to small personal computers and hand held PDAs. However these smaller and more powerful personal computing devices are typically severely resource constrained. For example the screen size amount of available memory and file system space amount of input and output capabilities and processing capability may each be limited by the small size of the device and in particular the small size of the user input unit e.g. the keyboard. Because of such severe resource constraints it is often typically desirable for example to maintain a limited size and quantity of software applications and other information residing on such remote personal computing devices client devices .

Some of the personal computing devices utilize application programming interfaces APIs sometimes referred to as runtime environments and software platforms that are installed onto their local computer platform and which are used for example to simplify operations of such devices such as by providing generalized calls for device specific resources. Further some such APIs are also known to provide software developers the ability to create software applications that are fully executable on such devices. In addition some of such APIs are known to be operationally located between the computing device system software and the software applications such that the computing device computing functionality is made available to the software applications without requiring the software developer to have the specific computing device system source code. Further some APIs are known to provide mechanisms for secure communications between such personal devices i.e. clients and remote devices i.e. servers using secure cryptographic information.

Examples of such APIs some of which are discussed in more detail below include versions of the Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless software BREW developed by QUALCOMM Inc. of San Diego Calif. BREW can cooperate with a computing device s e.g. a wireless cellular phone operating system and can among other features provide interfaces to hardware features particularly found on personal computing devices. BREW can also provide these interfaces on such personal computing devices at a relatively low cost with respect to demands on device resources and with respect to the price paid by consumers for devices containing BREW. Additional features of BREW include its end to end software distribution platform that provides a variety of benefits for wireless service operators software developers and computing device consumers. At least one such currently available end to end software distribution platform includes logic distributed over a server client architecture where the server performs for example billing security and application distribution functionality and the client performs for example application execution security and user interface functionality.

The enhanced computing capabilities and security features in client devices has enabled applications to be purchased directly from a carrier network and downloaded and installed on to a client device. Once an application is purchased a remote billing system can automatically generate billing to a subscriber account associated with the client device and can distribute the appropriate payment to the developers publishers. However current wireless server client systems provide for limited purchased options. Typically a one time purchase or a fixed number of uses can be purchased for a desired application or content. This results in limited flexibility for developers and content providers to package or up sell their applications.

The foregoing description of the related art is merely intended to provide an overview of some of the known uses of APIs and as an introduction to the BREW platform which can be used in embodiments of the invention. However the invention is not to be construed as being limited to a specific implementation operating platform or environment.

Exemplary embodiments of the present invention are directed to a system and method for generating and processing billing requests in a wireless network.

Accordingly an embodiment of the invention can include a method of distributing items to wireless client device comprising forming at least one group by associating at least one item from a main catalog with a first subscriber ID SID associated with a first client device generating a shopping catalog for the first client device from the main catalog based on at least one of platform ID runtime API and language and including the at least one group and associated at least one item in the shopping catalog based on a first SID associated with the client device.

Another embodiment of the invention can include a server comprising logic configured to form at least one group by associating at least one item from a main catalog with a first subscriber ID SID associated with a first client device logic configured to generate a shopping catalog for the first client device from the main catalog based on at least one of platform ID runtime API and language and logic configured to include a first group in the shopping catalog based on a first SID associated with the first client device.

Another embodiment of the invention can include an apparatus for distributing items to wireless client device comprising means for forming at least one group by associating at least one item from a main catalog with at least one subscriber ID SID means for generating a shopping catalog for a first client device from the main catalog based on at least one of platform ID runtime API and language and means for including the at least one group and associated at least one item in the shopping catalog based on a first SID associated with the client device.

Another embodiment of the invention can include an apparatus for distributing items to wireless client device comprising means for forming at least one group by associating at least one item from a main catalog with at least one subscriber ID SID means for generating a shopping catalog for a first client device from the main catalog based on at least one of platform ID runtime API and language and means for including the at least one group and associated at least one item in the shopping catalog based on a first SID associated with the client device.

Another embodiment of the invention can include a computer readable medium on which is stored a computer program for wirelessly presenting and distributing items to a client device the computer program comprising instructions which when executed causes the computing device to perform the process of forming at least one group by associating at least one item from a main catalog with a first SID associated with a first client device generating a shopping catalog for the first client device from the main catalog based on at least one of platform ID runtime API and language and including the at least one group and associated at least one item in the shopping catalog based on a first SID associated with the first client device.

Aspects of the invention are disclosed in the following description and related drawings directed to specific embodiments of the invention. Alternate embodiments may be devised without departing from the scope of the invention. Additionally well known elements of the invention will not be described in detail or will be omitted so as not to obscure the relevant details of the invention.

The word exemplary is used herein to mean serving as an example instance or illustration. Any embodiment described herein as exemplary is not necessarily to be construed as preferred or advantageous over other embodiments. Likewise the term embodiments of the invention does not require that all embodiments of the invention include the discussed feature advantage or mode of operation.

Further many embodiments are described in terms of sequences of actions to be performed by for example elements of a computing device. It will be recognized that various actions described herein can be performed by specific circuits e.g. application specific integrated circuits ASICs by program instructions being executed by one or more processors or by a combination of both. Additionally these sequence of actions described herein can be considered to be embodied entirely within any form of computer readable storage medium having stored therein a corresponding set of computer instructions that upon execution would cause an associated processor to perform the functionality described herein. Thus the various aspects of the invention may be embodied in a number of different forms all of which have been contemplated to be within the scope of the claimed subject matter. In addition for each of the embodiments described herein the corresponding form of any such embodiments may be described herein as for example logic configured to perform the described action.

One or more embodiments of the invention can be used in conjunction with a runtime environment or platform executing on the computing device. One such runtime environment is Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless software BREW previously discussed. However one or more embodiments of the invention can be used with other types of runtime environments or platforms that for example operate to control the execution of applications on wireless client computing devices.

Additionally it will be recognized to those skilled in the art that an application file type being distributed and executed may be describe herein for simplicity of description. However an application may also include files having executable content such as object code scripts java file a bookmark file or PQA file WML scripts byte code and perl scripts. In addition an application referred to herein may also include files that are not executable in nature such as documents that may need to be opened or other data files that need to be accessed.

The application download server is shown here on a network with other computer elements in communication with the wireless network . There can be a stand alone server and each server can provide separate services and processes to the client devices across the wireless network . There is preferably also at least one stored application database that holds the software applications and content which are downloadable by the wireless devices . However those skilled in the art will appreciate that the configuration illustrated in is merely exemplary. Accordingly embodiments of the invention can include one or more servers that can each perform all the described functions and contain all necessary hardware and software or can contain only selected functionality.

In a block diagram is shown that more fully illustrates system including the components of the wireless network and interrelation of the elements of the exemplary embodiments of the invention. System is merely exemplary and can include any system that allows remote client devices such as wireless client computing devices to communicate over the air between and among each other and or between and among components connected via a wireless network including without limitation wireless network carriers and or servers. The application download server and the stored application database along with any other servers such as server which can be used to provide cellular telecommunication services communicate with a carrier network through a data link such as the Internet a secure LAN WAN or other network. In the embodiment shown a server can include the application download server billing server and the stored application database . However these servers can also be independent devices.

The carrier network controls messages typically sent as data packets sent to a messaging service controller MSC . The carrier network communicates with the MSC by a network the Internet and or a public switched telephone network PSTN . Typically the network or Internet connection between the carrier network and the MSC transfers data and the PSTN transfers voice information. The MSC can be connected to multiple base stations BTS . In a similar manner to the carrier network the MSC is typically connected to the BTS by a network the Internet and or PSTN for data transfer and or voice information. The BTS can broadcast data messages wirelessly to the client devices such as cellular telephone by short messaging service SMS or other over the air OTA methods known in the art.

The client device here a wireless client computing device such as cellular telephone has a computer platform that can receive and execute software applications or content and or commands transmitted from the application download server server and or server . The computer platform can include an application specific integrated circuit ASIC or other processor microprocessor logic circuit or other data processing device. The ASIC or other processor executes the application programming interface API layer that interfaces with any resident programs in the memory of the wireless device. The memory can be comprised of read only or random access memory RAM and ROM EEPROM flash cards or any memory common to computer platforms. The computer platform also includes a local database that can hold applications not actively used in memory . The local database is typically a flash memory cell but can be any secondary storage device as known in the art such as magnetic media EEPROM optical media tape soft or hard disk and the like.

The wireless client computing device such as cellular telephone can have installed on it or otherwise downloads one or more software applications such as games news stock monitors and the like. For example the cellular telephone may receive one or more software applications and content downloaded from the download server . The software applications and content may be stored on the local database when not in use. The cellular telephone or other wireless computing device may upload resident applications stored on the local database to memory for execution on the API when so desired by the user or invoked by another API.

As used herein client device wireless device or client computing device includes for example one or more processing circuits executing resident configured logic where such computing devices include for example microprocessors digital signal processors DSPs microcontrollers portable wireless telephones personal digital assistants PDAs and paging devices or any suitable combination of hardware software and or firmware containing processors and logic configured to at least perform the operations described herein directed to application and content distribution between a client device and a server. The client computing device can be serviced by at least one remote server with respect processing the application and content distribution. Some examples of client devices which may be used in accordance with embodiments of the present invention include cellular telephones or other wireless communication units PDAs paging devices handheld navigation devices handheld gaming devices music or video content download units and other like wireless communication devices.

The wireless communication between the client device and the BTS can be based on different technologies such as code division multiple access CDMA time division multiple access TDMA frequency division multiple access FDMA the global system for mobile communications GSM or other protocols that may be used in a wireless communications network or a data communications network. The data communication is typically between the client device BTS and MSC . The MSC can be connected to multiple data networks such as the carrier network PSTN the Internet a virtual private network and the like thus allowing the client device access to a broader communication network. As discussed in the foregoing in addition to voice transmission data can be transmitted to the client device via SMS or other OTA methods known in the art.

Application purchasing options in conventional wireless systems are controlled by the carrier operator. Typically a client device browses for applications and or content selects and downloads the application and or content from lists presented from the carrier operator. In a conventional system the lists of applications and content presented e.g. by an application download server ADS to the user of the client device are derived from a main catalog that contains all the applications and content available for purchase download to the client devices. The catalog is typically structured as a series of folders that organize the applications and content. The catalog then serves as a basis to generate a display of applications and content presented by the ADS to a subscriber for browsing and purchasing. The applications and content from the catalog are typically filtered based on the platform ID runtime API e.g. BREW 3.0 and language e.g. English so that only the relevant applications and content are presented. This information is communicated between the client device and the ADS automatically so that the ADS can present the appropriate applications and content. However the conventional system will present the same catalog for all common client device configurations e.g. platform runtime API and language . Accordingly the flexibility of customizing the shopping experience e.g. item presentation SID directed items pricing and the like is limited in conventional systems.

Accordingly a shopping catalog can be generated for a client device from a main catalog based on platform ID runtime API and language in a conventional manner e.g. using folders items from main catalog as discussed above. However the shopping catalog can be augmented by including each group and items in each group e.g. Group A Group B My Apps associated with a SID in the shopping catalog based on the SID associated with the client device . Therefore the shopping catalog is customizable for each SID. Typically the shopping catalog is generated via the ADS which can use the SID platform ID runtime API and language to generate the SID specific shopping catalog .

In addition to presenting items in an alternative manner associating SIDs with specific groups that are derived from the main catalog allows for differentiated pricing for the same item. For example item e.g. an application in the main catalog can be offered for a full commercial price of 10.00. However in Group A which may be associated with a particular carrier price plan item may be included and can be offered at a reduced price of 8.00 e.g. higher monthly carrier subscriptions may have associated with them lower priced content applications . Further the same item can be contained in a SID directed group My Apps which may be offered for free. For example item may have been prepaid or a gift from another subscriber.

Accordingly an embodiment of the invention includes a server e.g. ADS and or group manager including logic configured to form at least one group by associating at least one item from a main catalog with at least one SID. The server also includes logic configured to generate a shopping catalog for a client device from a main catalog based on at least one of platform ID runtime API and language. Further the server can include logic configured to include the at least one group in the shopping catalog based on a SID associated with the client device. The server can also include logic configured to associate a first price structure with a first item e.g. item in a first group e.g. that is different from a main price structure e.g. retail price associated with the first item e.g. item in the main catalog . Each price structures can include at least one of a list price and a provider price. For example the list price can be the amount billed to the subscriber and the provider price can be the amount paid to the application developer of an application content distributor purchased and downloaded. However other pricing information can be included such as multiple source fees if the item is supplied from multiple sources e.g. developers publishers and the like . Typically in the multiple source configurations the sum of the source fees does not exceed the content price fee. The various price structures provide for differentiated pricing for the same application content based on SID and can facilitate accurate billing of the subscriber and settlement with the application developers content providers since the price paid to each can be included in each price structure.

In view of the foregoing disclosure those skilled in the art will recognize that embodiments of the invention include methods of performing the sequence of actions operations and or functions previously discussed. For example as illustrated in at least one embodiment includes a method of presenting and distributing items e.g. applications content to wireless client device including forming at least one group by associating at least one item from a main catalog with at least one subscriber ID SID block . A shopping catalog can be generated for a first client device from the main catalog based on at least one of platform ID runtime API and language block Then the at least one group and associated at least one item can be included in the shopping catalog based on a first SID associated with the first client device . Accordingly the group of applications and or content can be formed that is directed to a SID which can contain a subset of the applications content available in the main catalog and can also be associated with special pricing as discussed in the foregoing description.

Further if there is only one SID associated with the group that group and associated items are available to a client device associated with that SID. Therefore applications content can be directed to a specific subscriber with special price levels associated only with that SID. Optionally a second group can be generated by associating at least one item from a main catalog with the first SID and a second SID block . Therefore each SID can be a member of multiple groups and each group can likewise be associated with multiple SIDs. Further as discussed above each of these groups may have different price levels for each item so pricing for the same item i.e. application content can vary from group to group. Therefore another embodiment of the invention can include associating a first price structure with a first item in the first group that is different from a main price structure associated with the first item in the main catalog block .

Accordingly in one non limiting example when an item is downloaded from a group with special pricing. The pricing structure in the group e.g. retail pricing provider pricing and related download information can be used to generate a billing event that automatically can bill the subscriber if the retail price is not zero and credit the provider s in a similar manner as to the conventional systems. Since each group can have special pricing for the same item this allows carriers and or providers the flexibility to price the same item at specific levels for specific subscribers or groups of subscribers. For example a corporate client having a large number of client devices may get special pricing on a suite of applications for all SIDs client devices associated with that corporate client. Each client device which is associated with the corporate group can be presented with a listing of the suite of applications directed to members of that group along with the special pricing. Accordingly embodiments of the invention can provide improvements in the flexibility of pricing marketing and delivery of applications and content.

In further embodiments those skilled in the art will appreciate that the foregoing methods can be implemented by the execution of a program embodied on a computer readable medium such as the memory of a computer platform. The instructions can reside in various types of signal bearing or data storage primary secondary or tertiary media. The media may comprise for example RAM accessible by or residing within the client device and or server. Whether contained in RAM a diskette or other secondary storage media the instructions may be stored on a variety of machine readable data storage media such as DASD storage e.g. a conventional hard drive or a RAID array magnetic tape electronic read only memory e.g. ROM or EEPROM flash memory cards an optical storage device e.g. CD ROM WORM DVD digital optical tape paper punch cards or other suitable data storage media including digital and analog transmission media.

Accordingly an embodiment of the invention can include a computer readable medium on which is stored a computer program for wirelessly presenting and distributing items to a client device. The computer program comprising instructions which when executed causes the computing device which can include multiple computing devices to perform the process of forming at least one group by associating at least one item from a main catalog with a first SID associated with a first client device generating a shopping catalog can be generated for the first client device from the main catalog based on at least one of platform ID runtime API and language and including the at least one group and the associated at least one item in the shopping catalog based on a first SID associated with the first client device.

While the foregoing disclosure shows illustrative embodiments of the invention it should be noted that various changes and modifications could be made herein without departing from the scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims. The functions steps and or actions of the method claims in accordance with the embodiments of the invention described herein need not be performed in any particular order. Furthermore although elements of the invention may be described or claimed in the singular the plural is contemplated unless limitation to the singular is explicitly stated.

