---

title: Portable chemical sterilizer
abstract: A portable, lightweight, easy-to-carry, reusable, durable, and environmentally-friendly assembly for sterilizing contaminated equipment using conditions of a chemical sterilant, heat, and humidity generated in situ without requiring external electricity, fuels, or other exogenous energy sources for operation. The carry assembly includes a plastic carry-case or insulated aluminum pressure vessel having an inner chamber for accepting microbiologically contaminated objects, a vessel disposed in the chamber for serving as a reaction chamber and/or boiler, a chemical combination which upon mixing generates at least minimally sufficient conditions of the sterilant, heat, and humidity to effect sterilization of the objects, and outlet valves mounted on the carry-case for controllably venting pressures above ambient air pressure.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07625533&OS=07625533&RS=07625533
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of The Army
number: 07625533
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050413
---
This is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 988 442 filed Nov. 10 2004 in the names of Christopher J. Doona et al. which application is incorporated herein by reference.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by the U.S. Government for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalty thereon.

The present invention relates to lightweight portable self contained devices whose operation does not require external power sources to sterilize assemblages of microbiologically contaminated equipment therein. The invention more specifically relates to such a device that uses chemical methods for sterilization and disinfection of equipment such as medical and surgical instruments in field conditions where water electrical power and or fuel sources may be absent unavailable or of limited availability.

Far Forward Army Surgical Teams currently have no existing technology for conveniently sterilizing surgical instruments on site. Contaminated instruments are often transported with patients via aircraft to distant hospitals for sterilization in large steam autoclaves and then returned enclosed in sterile packaging to the surgical teams via aircraft for re use. Hospital steam autoclaves typically have 18 20 cubic foot chambers weigh several hundred pounds and require at a minimum permanent steam lines water lines and 110V electricity for operation.

Far forward teams sometimes transport electric autoclaves into the field for carrying out sterilization. Electric autoclaves are smaller than hospital steam autoclaves require some installation such as 120 and 208 240 volt electrical lines and consume significant amounts of water and power per sterilization cycle. For example a typical sterilization cycle in an electric autoclave runs for 50 60 minutes and consumes about 1.5 gallons of potable water and approximately 12 kilowatts of power at 236 volts . These electrical autoclaves are in fact difficult to transport in vehicles due to their weight 100 lbs. bulky dimensions and reliance on generators or other power sources for operation.

Currently there are no devices available for sterilizing surgical instruments that are portable sufficiently lightweight 3 35 lbs. to be easily hand carried do not require external power sources such as electricity and effect the sterilization process in 15 60 minutes.

In considering the design of a conveniently portable sterilizer a choice must first be made as to which method conventional moist heat radiation or chemical will be the best to effect sterilization. Conventionally generated heat requires bulky autoclaves and significant amounts of power usually electrical to generate steam. Radiation requires a power supply or shielded enclosures often both. Chemical methods have the potential to be conveniently portable which has led to claims of portable disinfection but not complete sterilization and the chemical methods generally are not accomplished in convenient times as short as 15 minutes.

Chemical sterilization involves the use of controlled chemical processes to kill microbial contaminants by either i directly transporting biocidal chemical agents in safety carriers or ii transporting the appropriate chemical precursors and chemically generating biocidal agents or sterilization conditions on site which often requires heavy duty generating equipment. In these cases it is important to distinguish the possibility of transporting chemicals or heavy duty equipment in vehicles from a truly portable system. A truly portable system can be conveniently moved lifted or carried by the individual user and includes the device equipment and chemicals involved in effecting the sterilization process.

Disinfectants such as chlorine ethylene oxide and fluorine containing interhalogens are stable but highly reactive chemicals that must be transported in bulky secure containers to ensure safety. While these chemicals can be transported they are not truly portable because of their inconvenient weight and the safety precautions that must be taken to prevent accidents during shipping.

Many other potent chemical disinfectants are unstable and must be generated on site from stable chemical precursors. The art of generating these chemical disinfectants has not been directed toward portability. For example methods for generating disinfectants such as hydrogen peroxide ozone and chlorine gas teach synthetic and electrochemical techniques that utilize heavy and bulky power supplies solution reservoirs fluid pumps vacuum lines and other gas handling systems. While this equipment can possibly be transported it is not truly portable because of its large weight and size. Additionally controlling this equipment requires electrical power and electrical circuitry and transporting this equipment requires additional steps for removal and installation before operation can commence.

As indicated above the established chemical methods currently being used to dispense or generate biocidal chemical agents or to chemically generate conditions for sterilization are not suited to lightweight portability. There is a need for a portable assembly for the sterilization or disinfection of microbiologically contaminated medical instruments and the like particularly one that involves using only a small amount approximately 0.25 lb. of safe dry chemical reagents. The chemical combination must be convenient to carry and mix with water readily to generate biocidal chemical agents or conditions sufficient for effecting sterilization.

Accordingly an object of the invention is to provide such a portable apparatus adapted to use a chemical combination and a number of variants thereof that consist of mixtures of specially formulated iron activated magnesium Mg Fe containing salt sodium chlorite NaClO sodium sulfite NaSO and sodium hydrogen ascorbate CHONa that react in water to controllably generate sterilization conditions inside the apparatus that include the production of biocidal chlorine dioxide heat and relative humidity.

Chlorine dioxide ClO is a potent broad based biocide that is effective against a wide variety of pathogenic microorganisms and bacterial spores. Chlorine dioxide is the EPA registered disinfectant that was used to decontaminate the Hart Senate Office Building and the Brentwood postal facility in Washington D.C. during the Anthrax attacks. In addition chlorine dioxide is FDA approved for disinfecting dental equipment and wastewater stores and is used to kill pathogens and spoilage microorganisms that decrease the shelf life of fresh and fresh cut vegetables. Industrially ClOis produced from large chlorine dioxide generators and is used to treat wastewater and kill disease carrying vectors while protecting the environment by reducing the production of chlorinated organic by products to very low levels compared with chlorine.

With the above and other objects in view a feature of the present invention is the provision of a closable portable easy to carry non powered assembly for the sterilization of a collection of contaminated objects. This portable power free assembly accommodates controlled chemical reactions that generate in situ conditions of chemical sterilant heat and humidity sufficient to effect the sterilization of objects contaminated with microorganisms.

The assembly includes a closable apparatus defining an outer chamber having an inner chamber for accepting microbiologically contaminated objects an interior vessel to act as a reaction chamber a chemical combination that upon being mixed with water generates at least minimally sufficient conditions of chemical sterilant heat and humidity to effect sterilization and valves dedicated to controllably preventing the accumulation of pressures above ambient air pressures and venting and deactivating chemical reaction products.

The preferred embodiment for this apparatus is a sterilization unit constructed from a plastic carry case preferably weighing about 3.0 35 lbs and of compact dimensions. The sterilization procedure entails placing the microbiologically contaminated equipment inside the carry case combining the dry chemicals and water in a reactor vessel within the case then closing and locking the case. Built in outlet valves prevent the accumulation of excess pressure inside the case by allowing controlled release of heated gaseous products. An inlet valve is used to flow air into the apparatus after the sterilization process and expel gaseous products through the outlet valves.

In an alternative embodiment the apparatus comprises a thermally insulated sterilizer unit with a vessel serving as a reaction chamber that is also called an internal boiler. This embodiment can be constructed from an aluminum vessel similar to a pressure cooker preferably weighing about 17.5 lbs. and equipped with Teflon covered foam insulation. The vessel is provided with a locking cover and is adapted to receive contaminated objects and the internal boiler receives the dry chemicals and water. A vent pipe covered by a pressure regulator allows internal pressures to exceed atmospheric pressure to the extent needed for thermal sterilization. The vent pipe ensures user safety by releasing enough gas to prevent the internal pressure from becoming too high and an accompanying dial gauge safely monitors the pressure. This embodiment is simply opened to expel gaseous products after the sterilization process although it could be fitted with additional outlet and inlet valves to carry out flushing.

In general the chemical combination used to effect sterilization is an ensemble of dry chemicals that react in water to controllably generate various levels of chlorine dioxide heat and relative humidity. The ensemble of dry chemicals consists of iron activated magnesium Mg Fe sodium chlorite NaClO sodium sulfite NaSO and sodium hydrogen ascorbate chemical formula CHONa and designated with the symbol AH . Variants of the ensemble can be formulated by removing chemicals or by adjusting the relative concentrations of the chemicals and these systems are still capable of inactivating contaminating microorganisms.

When all of the dry chemicals are present and mixed together in water the chemical combination generates large quantities of chlorine dioxide heat and humidity this method is referred to herein as combined sterilization. Specifically the combined sterilization method consists of Mg Fe ClO SO and AH mixed in water. In this case the chemical combination produces copious amounts of chlorine dioxide heat and humidity all of which act in concert to inactivate contaminating microorganisms.

A variant of the chemical combination can be formulated to generate large quantities of chlorine dioxide while concomitantly producing relatively low levels of heat and humidity this method is referred to herein as chlorine dioxide sterilization. In chlorine dioxide sterilization the chemical combination consists of ClO SO and AH mixed in water Mg Fe is excluded .

Another variant of the chemical combination generates large quantities of heat and humidity without producing chlorine dioxide this method is referred to herein as thermal sterilization. In the thermal method the Mg Fe H0 reaction acts alone to produce substantial heat Temperature 121 C. and steam in the absence of ClO. In certain low temperature or high altitude environments the Mg Fe HO reaction can also contribute a source of heat to pre warm or thaw the portable chemical sterilizer or frozen water.

The present invention provides for the removal of chlorine dioxide and other gases following the sterilization treatment. For outdoor environments the apparatus is simply opened to release the remaining sterilant gas.

For indoor environments air flushing is used in conjunction with simple chemical methods to safely purge ClOfrom the sterilization apparatus. Flowing air into the apparatus causes the expulsion of the chlorine dioxide gas through the outlet valves of the apparatus. The ClOgas passes through specially designed scrubber devices engrafted onto these outlet valves and common reductants embedded in the scrubber such as sulfite SO dithionite SO or thiosulfate SO safely deactivate the chlorine dioxide gas. The reduction of ClOoccurs readily with these ions and these chemical reactions convert chlorine dioxide and the reductant to the environmentally safe and inert ionic products of chloride Cl and sulfate SO respectively.

Additionally chlorine dioxide features chlorine atoms in the 4 intermediate oxidation state the oxidation states of chlorine range from 1 to 7 . When chlorine dioxide comes in contact with a base such as sodium carbonate NaCO the chlorine dioxide can disproportionate into likewise environmentally benign unreactive products chloride and chlorate ClO .

The above and other features of the invention including various novel details of construction and combinations of parts will now be more particularly described with reference to the accompanying drawings and pointed out in the claims. It will be understood that the particular devices embodying the invention are shown by way of illustration only and not as limitations of the invention. The principles and features of this invention may be employed in various and numerous embodiments without departing from the scope of the invention.

The present invention is directed toward a lightweight portable apparatus in the form of a convenient carry case or handled vessel or box for carrying out chemical reactions that convert chemical energy to forms usable for the sterilization of microbiological contaminants without the use of external sources of power. Within the apparatus sterilization is achieved in situ by chemically generating conditions involving a lethal sterilant heat and humidity such that exposure of the contaminated objects to this environment sterilizes objects contaminated with harmful pathogens or infectious microorganisms.

The preferred use of the portable sterilizers includes using a chemical combination that ensures the complete destruction of contaminating microorganisms in an optimal time. Therefore there follows below a detailed description of the chemical combination followed by descriptions of the embodiments of the apparatus in which the chemical combination is activated to effectuate sterilization.

The chemical combination in the preferred method for sterilization is a mixture that can be decreased or increased proportionately or that can be varied in the relative proportions of the components depending on factors such as the size of the container in which sterilization is to occur or to emphasize different characteristics of the chemical combination. A representative chemical combination used for combined sterilization utilizes about 600 mL of water and the following approximate proportions of dry chemicals 3.3 mole iron activated magnesium 85 g Mg Fe 2.04 mole chlorite ion 185 g NaClO 1.0 mole sulfite ion 126 g NaSO and 0.25 mole hydrogen ascorbate ion 50 g NaCHO . In one aspect designated chlorine dioxide sterilization the Mg Fe can be omitted from the chemical combination 300 mL H0 93 g NaClO 63 g NaSO and 25 g NaCHO in another aspect designated thermal sterilization only the Mg Fe H0 chemical reaction 600 mL H0 and 140 g Mg Fe is used and the remaining 3 components of the chemical combination are omitted.

Alternative chemical combinations are also possible. For example the magnesium can be activated by several different transition metals such as cobalt or nickel. Other metallic reductants such as calcium or sodium amalgam can be used as simple substitutions.

The chlorine containing oxidant ClO can derive from any one of several salts featuring different counter ions such as lithium sodium potassium or calcium cations. The hydrogen ascorbate salt acts as an effector and can be replaced by any appropriate effector such as ascorbic acid erythorbic acid tartaric acid or any of their respective ions. Any chemical combination such as those described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 988 442 incorporated herein by reference can be used. In the following description reference will be made to the chemical combination used in the preferred embodiment but this invention is not limited to the use of only this chemical combination and this preferred embodiment. Other reasonable substitutions for components of the chemical combination of the preferred embodiments which produce equivalent chemical or microbiological processes are obvious variants of the system described herein.

Referring to it will be seen that a preferred embodiment of the present invention is a sterilizer unit that uses a carry case that has sufficient capacity to hold at least a standard surgical autoclave tray not shown . The carry case preferably defines a volume of about 46 L. Two pressure release check valves are integrated into the back of the case using a protective framework not shown so that the valves do not protrude beyond the structure of the carry case and do not interfere with stacking of the carry cases. A smaller carry case defining a volume of about 3.5 L is shown in and features the capacity to hold a loose assemblage of contaminated instruments. The smaller carry case features a single 2 inch check valve installed in its roof . The valves are identical and are designed to withstand a maximum pressure of 50 psi gauge . The carry cases typically weigh about 3 35 lbs. and are provided with suitcase handles such that portability is readily facilitated.

The sterilization procedure for case entails the simple steps of placing the microbiologically contaminated equipment not shown inside the case on a support structure adding the chemical combination including water in a small interior reactor vessel and closing and locking the case as with latches . A similar sterilization procedure is carried out for case .

Depending on the selected chemical reaction conditions the corresponding chemical combination controllably generates sufficient conditions of ClO heat and humidity to sterilize the contaminating microorganisms within 15 120 minutes. Built in pressure release valves on cases and respectively prevent pressure from accumulating inside the apparatus chambers for both case and see by allowing the controlled release of heated gaseous products formed by the chemical combination.

The valves are initially in the closed position but open to relieve pressure inside the chamber at minimal levels. The valves accommodate the initial rapid pressure increase in the interior chambers of carry cases and caused by the rapid chemical production of gaseous chemicals heat and steam by the activated chemical combination. As a slight pressure builds up inside the cases from the formation of heated gases the valves open slightly and the heated gases vent outside of the cases through the opened valves. When the pressure has subsided sufficiently due to the escape of heated gases the valves flap shut and return to their original closed position. During the early parts of the reaction with the preferred chemical combination the pressure surges temporarily due to the chemical production of heated gaseous chemical products such as carbon dioxide CO and ClO and the valves open to alleviate the pressure. As the pressure subsides the valves close again.

After the sterilization or disinfection process is complete the units may be flushed with air to remove the remaining ClOgas. Following the air flushing process the user wears sterile gloves to open the case and remove the sterilized disinfected objects which were preferably wrapped in autoclave paper prior to the sterilization process.

The sterilizer carry case units are designed to control the removal of ClOremaining after the sterilization procedure in the following manner. A stainless steel inlet valve for both case and case does not allow gases to flow out of the case. After the sterilization treatment the inlet valve is connected to an air pump not shown that inflows air into the case. A filter is placed in the inlet valve to prevent the introduction of air borne particulate matter that might re contaminate the sterilized objects. Any portable hand held or foot operated pedal pump may be used to flow air into the apparatus. There may be instances where it may be possible desired or advantageous to employ compressed air tanks or electrically operated air pumps to carry out the flushing procedure. Electricity or external power is in no case required to effect either the sterilization procedures or flushing of the apparatus however the carry case sterilizer unit can accommodate battery operated air pumps for flushing in circumstances where their use may prove convenient.

The incoming air is distributed within the carry case units via 0.25 inch plastic tubing disposed in a semi circular or circular fashion around the interior perimeter of the carry case. Perforations in the plastic tubing are spaced at approximately 1 inch intervals allowing the incoming air to circulate throughout the carry case and mix with the remaining chlorine dioxide gas. This influx of air slightly increases the pressure inside the apparatus chambers and the mixture of air and chlorine dioxide gas flows out of the check valves and integrated into the back wall of the carry case and into the roof of the carry case respectively. The valves open and close periodically to ensure that the gases mix and that the flushing operation proceeds smoothly and safely.

A gas scrubber and is connected to each check valve and absorbs the chlorine dioxide gas exiting the apparatus during any stage of the sterilization process including flushing. Each scrubber may consist of two layers of wire gauze not shown sandwiching a porous sponge material filled with a common reductant such as sodium sulfite. The reductant readily inactivates the ClOgas in the stream flow exiting the apparatus and safely limits user exposure and environmental off gassing of ClO.

An alternative embodiment of the present invention is an aluminum pressure vessel that is equally suited for non powered lightweight portable sterilization of microbiologically contaminated objects by the in situ generation of sufficient conditions of chlorine dioxide heat and humidity using the chemical methods described above. This alternative embodiment of the sterilizer unit uses an aluminum pressure vessel of about 20 liter capacity with its exterior covered in insulating foam and wrapped in a Teflon jacket and its lid snugly fitted with a sealing ring and securely locked into place using brackets . An air vent exhausts air from the pressurized vessel and provides the first indication that heat and gases are building pressure inside the pressurized vessel. A vent pipe covered by a pressure regulator allows the controlled release of excess pressure and an accompanying pressure gauge registers the pressure inside the aluminum vessel chamber . The pressure vessel typically weighs about 35 lbs or less and is provided with handles and rendering the vessel and lid readily portable as a single carryable unit.

Inside the pressurized aluminum vessel an 1800 mL volume aluminum pot of approximately 7 inch diameter covered with a perforated lid is placed at the interior base of the vessel to act as the internal boiler and to allow for efficient mixing of the chemical combination. The apparatus in this arrangement is suitable for generating conditions capable of sterilizing microbiologically contaminated objects using various chemical combinations corresponding to the sterilization methods described above.

Using the pressurized aluminum vessel to carry out combined sterilization is accomplished by either combining all of the reagents into the single boiler or judiciously dividing the reactants into separate boilers not shown . The heat output of the Mg Fe HO chemical combination is intensified by the presence of chlorite peroxodisulfate or copper II ions that also act to decrease the volume of dihydrogen gas produced by scavenging specific chemical precursors. With chlorite as the scavenger the chemical combination is postulated to generate chlorine dioxide as an undetectable short lived reactive intermediate. The pressurized aluminum vessel readily accommodates the methods of chlorine dioxide sterilization and thermal sterilization. During thermal sterilization temperatures inside the pressurized vessel can exceed 121 C.

After sterilization is complete for all of the chemical combinations the aluminum pressure vessel can be opened outdoors to release any gaseous chemical reaction products or heat to the environment and the wrapped sterile instruments are removed using sterile gloves. The reaction vessel is easily rinsed and cleaned and the entire apparatus can be re used on a new set of contaminated instruments.

A series of sterilization tests were conducted using commercially available biological indicators live bacterial cells or live bacterial spores to demonstrate the Portable Chemical Sterilizer using the presently available variants of hardware configurations and chemical combinations. Specifically the sterilization tests used BT Sure Biological Indicator Tests for Steam Sterilizers designated BT strips and available from Barnstead International Dubuque Iowa USA Difco Hy check disinfection control for hygiene monitoring contact slides designated Hy check and available from Becton Dickinson Sparks Md. USA live cells of 10 ATCC 11229 and 11220 10each and 10 and live spores of 10 .

Cultures were suspended in Butterfield s phosphate buffer solution and placed inside the Portable Chemical Sterilizer and exposed to the conditions of biocidal chemical agent heat and humidity generated by the chemical combination inside the apparatus. was plated on Baird Parker Agar supplemented with Egg Yolk tellurite and incubated at 35 C. for 48 hours both strains and were plated on Nutrient Agar and incubated at 35 C. for 24 and 48 hours respectively and spores were plated on Antibiotic Assay Medium with 1 soluble Starch AAMS and incubated for 24 hours at 55 C. F E Feeherry D T Munsey and D B Rowley 1987 Appl Environ Microbiol 53 2 365 370 . The results of the sterilization tests are shown in Tables 1 3.

It will be understood that many additional changes in the details materials and arrangement of parts which have been herein described and illustrated in order to explain the nature of the invention may be made by those skilled in the art within the principles and scope of the invention as expressed in the appended claims.

