---

title: System and method for performing a search and a browse on a query
abstract: A search and a browse on a single user query is performed. A refined query is selected from the results of the first user query. Thereafter, a list of concepts from a first directory associated with the refined query is obtained. The concepts are defined in a hierarchical relationship with concepts having broader scope being higher in the hierarchy and concepts having a narrower scope being lower in the hierarchy. Additionally, a list of web sites associated with the search concept is obtained from a second directory.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07756864&OS=07756864&RS=07756864
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07756864
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051114
---
This application is Continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 037 993 filed Jan. 3 2002 which is related by subject matter to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 682 040 filed on Jul. 12 2001 entitled System and Method for Query Refinement to Enable Improved Searching Based on Identifying and Utilizing Popular Concepts Related to User s Queries. 

This invention relates generally to searching for relevant data entities using a communications network such as the Internet. In particular the invention relates to a technique that combines the functionality of a search based on a key word or words and a browse based on categories for a query thereby enabling a user to receive better results for a query.

The Internet contains a vast amount of information distributed over a multitude of computers connected by The Net hence providing users with large amounts of information on any topic imaginable. Although large amounts of information are available however finding the desired information is not always easy or fast.

Search engines have been developed to address the problem of finding desired information on the Internet. Typically a user who has an idea of the type of information desired enters a search term or search terms and a search engine returns a list of web pages that contain the term or terms. Alternately a user may want to browse through data as for example when a user is not sure what information is wanted. Some search engines such as YAHOO or LOOKSMART provide categories of information and categories within those categories for selection by a user who can thus drill down to an area of interest from a more general category.

The term search engine is frequently used to describe both crawler based search engines and engines based on human edited directories. Crawler based search engines generally work by indexing web pages automatically and usually contain a spider an index and search engine software. A search engine spider crawls through the web following links to other pages within the site and returns its results to an index or catalog. The index will contain a copy of every web page visited by the spider. Search engine software analyzes each page in the index to find matches to a search and ranks the pages in order of relevance.

Each search engine builds its index and ranks the web pages in the index in its own way which explains why a user is likely to receive different search results for the same search conducted on different search engines. Typically search engines rank hits based on a search engine specific algorithm involving the location and frequency of keywords on a web page. For example pages with the search term s appearing in the HTML hypertext markup language title tag are often assumed to be more relevant to the topic than others. A search engine also may check to see if the search keywords appear near the top of a web page. These search engines operate on the premise that any page relevant to the topic will contain the keywords within the title or within the first few paragraphs of the web page.

Frequency is another consideration in the determination of relevance. A search engine may analyze how often a keyword appears in relation to other words in a web page. Pages containing keywords appearing with a higher frequency are often deemed more relevant than other web pages.

The search engine returns a list of pages in order of relevance as the search engine determines relevance. Unfortunately this kind of search engine often returns irrelevant results because web pages frequently contain words that don t really relate to the query. For example if a user enters the search query Andalusian Horses the search may return a web page concerning Vacations to the Andalusian Mountains in Spain.

The problem is compounded when a very general query term is entered or the query term is capable of multiple meanings such as Java for example. Does the user want Java the programming language Java as in Where s my morning Java Java the island A user looking for web sites concerning Java the programming language may have to page through a number of site listings about coffee and Java the island to find Java the programming language.

A second kind of search engine e.g. YAHOO or LOOKSMART matches terms in a query to a human built directory of categorized web sites. A webmaster submits a short description of the site or editors write a description for a site. When a user enters a search query the search engine matches the terms in the query to the terms in the description and displays to the user only those web sites where a match is found between the word s in the query and the words in the description. Alternately a human editor may review each site and manually assign the site to a particular category.

This type of search engine also has drawbacks. For example in the case where a query is very broad it may be hard to guess a category to attach the query to. Also any web sites not editorially assigned to a category will be lost if the user picks the category. For example imagine that a user enters the word lincoln as his query. Entering the word lincoln may result in the return of the following categories U.S. States Nebraska Recreation Automotive Makes and Models and Arts Performing Arts Centers indicates that phrases to the right of the are subcategories of phrases to the left of the . But if a user picks the U.S. States Nebraska category only those sites the human editor has linked with that category will appear even if there are other good sites that would appear if the user merely searched for the terms Lincoln Nebraska . If the user misspells the query terms or uses a different word than is contained in the description relevant web sites may not appear at all.

A third type of search engine e.g. YAHOO or Google is a hybrid search engine that presents both crawler based results and human powered directory based listings. Typically a hybrid search engine will favor one type of listing over another. For example YAHOO is more likely to present human powered listings.

Search engines typically are unable to provide a hierarchical relationship between data entities. For example a search for Ford typically returns dozens of different FORD model links overwhelming different interpretations of the query e.g. Harrison Ford . There is no way in typical search engines to indicate that FORD Trucks is a superset of FORD F 150 FORD Ranger etc.

Finally for the same topic the search results returned from a browse and those returned from a search typically can be significantly different. In order to get the best search results it is often necessary to have both a browse window and a search window open concurrently which is inconvenient and requires a certain degree of sophistication and search engine savvy on the part of the user. Unsophisticated users unaware that a search engine may have multiple types of data sources may become mystified and frustrated with the results of a search or browse. Hence a need exists in the art for a method to process a search that enables each searcher to get great search results faster and more conveniently regardless of how much the searcher knows about the eccentricities of the search engine used.

The present invention provides systems methods and computer readable media for combining the functionality of browsing based on categories and searching based on key word s for a refined query. Results may be returned from multiple data sources. When a user selects a concept from a list of multiple concepts returned from a primary search both a browse and a search is performed on the node representing the selected concept. The following may be returned 

The browse functionality is conducted based on an underlying hierarchical data structure such as a directed graph the web directory composed of categorized and uncategorized nodes. Refining concepts sub categories of the selected concept may be returned by finding child nodes of the node representing the selected concept. Alternatively a broader browse can be performed by selecting parent nodes of the selected concept. Web sites associated with the selected concept and with the refining concepts may also be returned. An optimized full text search of the web directory and a second search database may also be conducted. Hence a combined set of results based on several data sources is returned where the results returned are more nearly restricted to the user s area of interest without requiring the user to enter multiple queries.

The supporting hierarchical data structure includes nodes where each node may include a data structure representing a concept associated with a category a data structure representing a concept not associated with a category or a category not associated with a concept. The concept data structure as used herein represents a concept and may include a concept title a group of terms related to the concept called herein key phrases a core key phrase as well as other data attributes. A concept data structure also may include one or more optimized query strings each tailored to a specific data provider.

A directed graph structure is created by editorially developing concepts and linking categories to the concepts when appropriate. A new data set the directed graph structure that establishes hierarchical relationships between the data is created therefrom.

When refining a concept the resulting sub concepts and or sub categories may be displayed in decreasing order of popularity where popularity is determined based on the average number of times a particular search term associated with the concept has been entered by searchers over the last several days.

The invention includes methods systems and computer readable media of varying scope. Other aspects and embodiments of the invention will become apparent by reading the detailed description and referring to the drawings.

The present invention provides a mechanism that facilitates searching in a network based environment. In such environments users are typically searching for database web sites and other connected data sources that are relevant to their search term or terms. Searching in such an environment is based on the recognition that words and phrases generally are not concise terms but rather have myriad definitions that are context dependent. Moreover the user may not know the precise term that will lead to the best information source. Rather the user may know a term relevant to the search and rely on search feedback to zero in on the most relevant information.

Humans are adept at understanding the context of a word and inferring the accepted meaning from that context. Computer systems on the other hand are less adept at making such inferences. The present invention provides the mechanism for the human searcher to provide a computer based system with additional contextual information so that the computer can help narrow the search results and provide a superior way for searchers to find the information most closely related to their search topic.

As stated above the invention operates as part of a computer network. In general the computer network may comprise both server computers and client computers deployed in a network environment. illustrates an exemplary network environment with a server in communication with client computers via a network in which the present invention may be employed. As shown in servers etc. are interconnected via a communications network which may be a LAN WAN intranet or the Internet with a number of client computers etc. In a network environment in which the communications network is the Internet for example the servers etc. can be Web servers with which the clients communicate via any of a number of known protocols such as hypertext transfer protocol HTTP . Each client computer can be equipped with a browser to gain access to servers etc.

The present invention is preferably deployed in a network environment particularly where that network is an Internet or Intranet environment. The term Internet is an abbreviation for Internetwork and refers commonly to the collection of networks and gateways that utilize the TCP IP suite of protocols which are well known in the art of computer networking. TCP IP is an acronym for Transport Control Protocol Interface Program. The Internet can be described as a system of geographically distributed remote computer networks interconnected by computers executing networking protocols that allow users to interact and share information over the networks. Because of such wide spread information sharing remote networks such as the Internet have thus far generally evolved into an open system for which developers can design software applications for performing specialized operations or services essentially without restriction.

While the Internet is a global network of millions of computers where with minor exceptions anyone anywhere in the world can access any web site an intranet is an internal web site tucked behind a firewall which allows certain users access to a web site but denies others access to the web site. An intranet is a private version of the Internet available typically only to individuals internal to an organization or to a partnership of organizations. A firewall can comprise software hardware or both. A firewall is essentially a filter between the inside and outside networks that only allows certain users to have access to the internal network from outside and only allows internal users access to certain outside network locations.

Electronic information transferred between data processing networks is usually presented in hypertext a metaphor for presenting information in a manner in which text images sounds and actions become linked together in a complex non sequential web of associations that permit the user to browse or navigate through related topics regardless of the presented order of the topics. These links are often established by both the author of a hypertext document and by the user depending on the intent of the hypertext document. For example traveling among links to the word iron in an article displayed within a graphical user interface in a data processing system might lead the user to the periodic table of the chemical elements i.e. linked by the word iron or to a reference to the use of iron in weapons in Europe in the Dark Ages. The term hypertext was coined in the 1960s to describe documents as presented by a computer that express the nonlinear structure of ideas as opposed to the linear format of books film and speech.

The term hypermedia on the other hand more recently introduced is nearly synonymous with hypertext but focuses on the non textual components of hypertext such as animation recorded sound and video. Hypermedia is the integration of graphics sound video or any combination thereof into a primarily associative system of information storage and retrieval. Hypermedia as well as hypertext especially in an interactive format where choices are controlled by the user is structured around the idea of offering a working and learning environment that parallels human thinking that is an environment that allows the user to make associations between topics rather than move sequentially from one to the next as in an alphabetic list. Hypermedia as well as hypertext topics are thus linked in a manner that allows the user to jump from one subject to other related subjects during a search for information. Hyper link information is contained within hypermedia and hypertext documents which allow a user to move back to original or referring network sites by the mere click i.e. with a mouse or other pointing device of the hyper linked topic.

A typical networked system that utilizes hypertext and hypermedia conventions follows a client server architecture. The client is a member of a class or group that uses the services of another class or group to which it is not related. Thus in computing a client is a process i.e. roughly a set of instructions or tasks that requests a service provided by another program. The client process utilizes the requested service without having to know any working details about the other program or the service itself. In a client server architecture particularly a networked system a client is usually a computer that accesses shared network resources provided by another computer i.e. a server .

A transmission of data as in a software tracking application can be sent by a client application program to a server. A server is typically a remote computer system accessible over a remote network such as the Internet. The server may transmit this data to another client application program. The client process may be active in a first computer system and the server process may be active in a second computer system communicating with one another over a communications medium thus providing distributed functionality and allowing multiple clients to take advantage of the capabilities of the server.

Client and server communicate with one another utilizing the functionality provided by Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP . The World Wide Web WWW or simply the Web includes those servers adhering to this standard i.e. HTTP which are accessible to clients via a computer or data processing system network address such as a Universal Resource Locator URL . The network address can be referred to as a Universal Resource Locator address. For example communication can be provided over a communications medium. In particular the client and server may be coupled to one another via TCP IP connections for high capacity communication. Active within the client is a first process known as a browser which establishes the connection with the server and presents information to the user. The server itself executes corresponding server software that presents information to the client in the form of HTTP responses. The HTTP responses correspond to web pages constructed from a Hypertext Markup Language HTML or other server generated data. Each web page can also be referred to simply as a page. 

The client typically displays the information provided through the network by the server using a software application known as a browser. Most browsers have modern graphical user interfaces that are capable of displaying and manipulating various types of data. A graphical user interface is a type of display format that enables a user to choose commands start programs and see lists of files and other options by pointing to pictorial representations icons and lists of menu items on the screen. Choices can be activated generally either with a keyboard or a mouse. Internet services are typically accessed by specifying a unique network address i.e. typically with a Universal Resource Locator . The Universal Resource Locator address has two basic components the protocol to be used and the object pathname. For example the Universal Resource Locator address http www.uspto.gov i.e. home page for the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office specifies a hypertext transfer protocol http and a pathname of the server www.uspto.gov . The server name is associated with one or more equivalent TCP IP address.

In order to locate information with the browser the user typically employs one of the many available search engines that index categorize and otherwise organize access to various ones of the many web sites. Accordingly the user would start off by connecting to a server such as server having a search engine . Search engine contains all of the algorithms and indexes to point the user to destination servers that have information relevant to the users search needs such as database maintained by server

The search engine provides an directory to help the user find relevant web sites and to navigate the web. Such a directory may take many forms. In accordance with the present invention illustrates a structure that is useful in organizing the search directory maintained by search engine in accordance with the present invention. The directory is made up of a hierarchical structure of nodes e.g. nodes preferably a tree structure or directed graph e.g. tree structure . Each node contains data relevant to a search topic of interest and is generally hierarchically organized from more general to more specific. For example Node A may contain information for searching on the topic of Sports while Node B contains information for searching on the topic of Golf and Node contains information for searching on the topic of Golfers and so on.

Preferably each node eventually contains data of three different types a concept data a category data or a concept data linked to category data. The three different nodes data structures are described below.

A concept data is derived from a data structure representing a search topic to which a group of key phrases synonymous with the search topic is associated as well as data sites such as web sites at which information concerning the search topic may be found and may include other data elements. These concept data structures are created manually by an editorial staff. An example of a group of key phrases for the search topic Tiger Woods might include Tiger Woods Tiger Woods Wood Tiger Wood all of which are words that a user may enter as a query when searching for information about Tiger Woods.

A category is a group to which the search topic belongs. For example for the category Golfers search topics belonging to the category might be Tiger Woods and Arnold Palmer . Associated with the category may be data sites such as web sites at which information concerning both Tiger Woods and Arnold Palmer may be found.

A multi source node is a concept that has been linked to a category. For example the two data structures listed above may be combined to create a data structure which links the category Golfers to the concept Tiger Woods and links the concept Tiger Woods to the category Golfer so that a user who enters Golfer when really looking for information about Tiger Woods may be returned a list of golfers Tiger Woods Arnold Palmer allowing the user to select Tiger Woods so that information about Arnold Palmer is no longer displayed. Similarly a user who enters the search query Tiger Woods but is actually interested in a number of golfers or another golfer can broaden the search results by selecting a broaden option such as Golfers and have search topics Arnold Palmer and Tiger Woods displayed.

Concept title represents one or more concept words that represent a concept to which key phrases and core key phrase may refer and may be a title of a concept that a user may wish to search for with a search engine. Concept title may be manually determined.

Key phrases for concept data structure are phrases of one or more words that a user may enter as a search query to find information regarding concept title . Key phrases may be alternative key words for concept title misspellings of concept title shorthand notation for concept title or other phrases for concept title . Key phrases are typically manually determined or edited for example by examining query logs of past search queries to determine how users search for the concept represented by concept data structure .

Core key phrase represents the key word or phrase that most users would enter in order to receive the results returned. Core key phrase may represent the key phrase that represents the search query that will result in optimal search results when sent as a query to internal and external data sources.

Associated web sites are web sites or other data entities that are returned to the user when the user searches for the concept represented by concept data structure . Although typically web sites are links to web sites related to concept web sites may also be music file links image file links or other types of files or links. Associated web sites are typically manually determined or edited as well.

ID is a numerical index by which the data structure can be retrieved from a database of data structures representing concepts.

Requeries and of requeries are manually determined values that are used respectively instead of Core Key Phrase as an optimized query term when present. Requery web directory is used as the optimized query term of the web directory and requery fall through is used as the optimized query term for searching a second database such as one purchased from Inktomi . Requery web directory and requery fall through may be the same or different.

Concept data structures generally contain information grouped accordingly to a particular topic. Popular topics will often be given their own data structure to accelerate the user s search experience. For example Britney Spears is a popular singer and is a topic that is searched on so frequently that she may warrant her own data structure. In such as case the concept data structure could be organized as described below.

The concept title of the concept data structure may be the words Britney Spears . Key phrases for the Britney Spears concept may be the word Britney britneyspears.com the title of Britney s albums misspellings of Britney s name such as Brittney Brittany and so on. Associated web sites may include the official Britney Spears web site as well as various fan sites sites at which fans can purchase her music and others. Web sites may also be edited. Web directory core key phrase may be Britney Spears representing the way most people would search for information on the singer while fall through core key phrase may be Britney . ID may be 123456 representing a numerical index into the web directory database for retrieving this concept. Key Phrase Weight may be 0 1 or 2 for the key phrase Britney Spears representing how closely the phrase is linked to the concept Britney Spears .

Category data as well as site data associated with the category in a preferred embodiment is imported daily from an external source such as a search engine or other data source such as but not restricted to LOOKSMART. A database of potential categories is created from this data. A long category name imported from the external source may be placed in a category display name data element in the database so as to give context free description of the category. Alternately a shorter title of the category may be placed in the display name data element. Data in the category database may be editorially modified.

The database created from the imported category data may be combined with a database of concepts to create or update the web directory structure with nodes . A node may be populated with one of a manually created concept a category formed by importation of data from another search engine or a multi source node formed by merging a concept and a category. The nodes are then linked into the directory structure .

In addition to the break down of nodes by concept category and multi source nodes are either approved or unapproved. Marking a node as approved or unapproved will affect how that node is used during a search.

During editing if a concept exists for which there is no corresponding category no link is created between the concept and a category. If a concept exists and one clearly corresponding category relating to the concept exists a link is created between concept and category resulting in the production of an approved node in step . In a preferred embodiment if an existing concept relates to a plurality of categories a plurality of nodes are created with concept sites listed first in associated web sites see followed by category specific sites. Alternately category sites are listed first and then concept sites. The node preferably uses category name as a concept title so that nodes with duplicate names are not created. If multiple concepts relate to one category all the concepts are linked to the one category. Multiple nodes are created in which each node lists the concept sites first and then lists the category specific sites. If there is one category and no related concept the node produced is an unapproved node. The unapproved node will not be returned as a sub category during a search. If there is one category and no related concept but the category is a desired category a concept may be editorially created resulting in the production of an approved node in step .

The following describes one method for combining node attributes i.e. linking categories and concepts at step 

In one embodiment concepts are only exported if the concept has exportable status the concept has at least one site attached and the concept was not auto created i.e. lower quality . If the concept has no key phrases and is associated with a category the node is exported as an unapproved node.

Query logs are imported daily in an automated process from an external source such as LOOKSMART. Query logs for a configurable number of days e.g. 3 are stored in a database of query logs. Query logs are used to compute the popularity of a concept key phrase as described below.

Query logs containing the query terms key phrases entered by users of a search engine during the previous day are imported and stored in a database. In a preferred embodiment query logs are imported daily and an alert is generated if the import fails. Query logs are stored in the database for a configurable number of days which in a preferred embodiment are the previous three days. In an alternate embodiment only the top N queries are imported where N is a configurable number of queries.

If an imported key phrase already exists in the key phrase database the query count for that key phrase is updated. If an imported key phrase does not exist in the key phrase database the phrase is added to the key phrase database with an indicator such as type Created by Keyphraser to distinguish these key phrases from key phrases that are created by human editors.

Periodically a garbage collector runs to remove key phrases created by the import that are not associated with a concept and have not had query count information updated in a configurable period of time. The garbage collector process serves to remove key phrases which experience a brief and transient period of popularity.

The term query log is used generally. A query log may be a historical log of queries that have been entered by users during a logging period and this is how it is predominantly used. However a query log may also be modified to actively affect the popularity of concepts. For example a query log may be populated with queries that were not actually entered so that the popularity of concepts are predictively modeled. For example if it is known that Super Bowl will be a popular search query in the coming months the query log may be modified to add this query a large number of times to the log. Other ways to affect the ensuing popularity of concepts for other predictive modeling or for demographic or for other reasons are also encompassed within the term query log.

At step the number of times each query term is entered for each of the previous N days is calculated and averaged producing an averaged query log which is used to calculate popularity in the following steps. In a preferred embodiment N 3 but N could be any suitable number. N may be a configurable value.

At step one popularity point is added to a concept each time the averaged query log query phrase matches a key phrase unique to the concept or contained in concept . For example the query Brittany may appear 350 times in the query log. For the concept Britney Spears there may be a key phrase Brittany that is unique to the Britney Spears concept. In this case 350 popularity points are added to the concept Britney Spears . As another example the query Britney Spears may appear 200 times in the query log. Because Britney Spears matches the concept title Britney Spears 200 popularity points are added to the concept.

At step for query phrases in the query log that match key phrases of more than one concept a number of popularity points equal to the number of times such a query phrase appears in the query log is divided among the concepts. For example the query tiger may appear 400 times in the query log. There may be two concepts that include the key phrase tiger the concept Tiger Woods and the concept tiger . In this case the 400 popularity points for the query tiger may be apportioned between the two concepts. One way to apportion the popularity points is to proportionally divide the points among the concepts based on their amassed popularity points resulting from step . For example the concept Tiger Woods may have 900 popularity points so far and the concept tiger may have 100 popularity points so far. Therefore 90 of the 400 popularity points for the query tiger are added to the concept Tiger Woods and 10 are added to the concept tiger . Other ways to apportion the popularity points can also be used however such as equally dividing the points among the concepts that have such matching key phrases.

Each concept has a number of popularity points added thereto based on the matching of query phrases to the key phrases of the concept. This is shown in . The concept has a number of popularity points 6023. Each key phrase . . . contributes a number of popularity points . . . respectively to the number of popularity points of the concept itself. Adding the popularity points . . . together yields the number of popularity points of the concept itself.

Referring back to two other parts of the popularity calculation may be optionally performed. At step a relative popularity measure of each concept may be determined. Relative popularity measure reflects the popularity of each concept as compared to the other concepts as the concepts appear in the averaged query log by concept title and key phrases . Relative popularity may be calculated in many different ways. For example relative popularity may be measured on a scale from zero to five where zero means the concept is least popular and five means the concept is most popular. In such a case the popularity measure of a concept can be determined in this implementation as five times the log of the popularity points attributed to the concept divided by the log of the popularity points attributed to the most popular concept.

The calculated popularity is stored in a calculated popularity field of the synset. Calculated popularity can be overridden editorially by entering a value for a concept popularity override field so that if a value is present in the concept popularity override field that value is used during export but if no value for concept popularity override field exists calculated popularity is used for export.

Results returned from entering different search queries for the same search concept are compared and the best term to use is determined. The term that results in the best search results is entered as core key phrase . The entry in the Core key phrase attribute may be used when a user selects a popular search topic for refinement or to broaden the search. Core key phrase may be used for searching the web directory or the external data source if no value exists in web directory optimized query or fall through optimized query respectively. Optimized query strings can be updated editorially to override the value stored in the core key phrase attribute. If an override string is present the override field is used for export. If no override string is defined refined query strings for Web Directory and fall through search engine defaults to core key phrase. If no core key phrase is defined refined query strings default to the concept title.

The nodes that are used for searching and browsing in accordance with an aspect of the invention described below are configurable by setting a node s use as follows 

Preferably the default used is option three 3 approved nodes only for the United States and option six 6 unapproved nodes for International markets.

After returning the search window A above the user is presented with a number of PSTs. Notably the only commonality among the PSTs is that they all match the initial search query e.g. search query lincoln . However it is unlikely that a user is interested in Lincoln car company and Lincoln Nebr. USA . Rather the user is most likely interested in some information related to one or the other but not both. Additionally the information returned maybe from any number of unrelated nodes retrieved from the hierarchical data structure on the basis of a match. No information is provided about surrounding nodes to provide a context for the user. The present invention provides systems and methods to address this issue in the form of a search browse.

If a searcher i.e. user selects one of the concepts e.g. displayed in section of the server e.g. retrieves information from a portion of the hierarchical data structure around the selected node and returns this information for display in an updated window such as the window illustrated in .

The updated window illustrated in may include the following sections query section including query box for search query refine topics section web directory sites section and web pages section . Refine topics section may include a title such as REFINE TOPICS which may be followed by sub categories of the selected PST. Web directory sites section may include a title such as WEB DIRECTORY SITES and may be followed by web sites associated with the selected PST and sub categories of the selected PST. Web pages section may include title such as WEB PAGES which may be followed by web pages returned when a full text search is conducted on a database from an external source.

When a user selects a PST called refining a search both a search and a browse may be conducted to return the results. The search query term may be replaced by a more specific query phrase associated with the PST selected as illustrated in which shows the flow of query string data in a search browse. For example a browse on a node associated with the PST selected in a first database a web directory may be performed using a node ID and any sub categories available for the selected PST may be retrieved and displayed in section . In section directory web sites associated with the selected PST may be displayed. These sites may be followed by sites associated with the sub categories of the selected PST retrieved by doing a search on the web directory using a query string that has been optimized for the web directory so that better results may be obtained. Finally web pages returned from a full text search of a second database on a query phrase associated with the selected PST and selected to optimize results may be displayed in web pages section .

Assume for example that a searcher has selected concept Lincoln Nebr. USA in . Search query term e.g. lincoln may be replaced by a more specific query phrase e.g. lincoln Lincoln Nebr. USA associated with selected PST and may be displayed in section . It should be noted that the more specific query phrase may show the pathway followed to get to the present level of refinement. In the entries displayed in section e.g. Lincoln Nebr. entertainment Lincoln Nebr. lodging Lincoln Nebr. weather are sub categories of the PST Lincoln Nebr. selected by the user in the first window illustrated in . Sub categories may be displayed in order of popularity as described above.

In web directory section sites for the node associated with selected PST are returned City of Lincoln Downtown Lincoln Association and so on followed by sites associated with the subcategories Lincoln Nebr. entertainment Lincoln Nebr. lodging Lincoln Nebr. weather such as Lincoln Visitors Bureau entertainment lodging . . . . Sites associated with descendents of the PST may also be shown. Thus web sites are web sites that relate to the concept selected by the user in the window illustrated in . Web page section may list web pages returned by a full text search of the words in the optimized search query fall through string and thus are web pages relating to the concept selected by the user.

Sub categories also called REFINE TOPICS if any of the PST selected by the user are displayed by performing a lookup browse in a directed graph structure of nodes using a category ID obtained from the selected PST to find sites associated with the PST and child nodes of the node representing the PST. The type of nodes used can be specified for each market e.g. United States Canada Great Britain by the use of a configurable parameter described more fully below.

In one embodiment if the specified type of node is found a display name for the child node or nodes is displayed. A user may then click on the display name to further refine results.

Any number of sub categories may be returned. In one embodiment section will be displayed if a minimum of two sub categories are found for the search query. If more than six sub categories are found for the selected PST sub categories one to three e.g. may be displayed in the first column and sub categories four to six not shown may be displayed in the second column. If the sub category name is too long to fit in the column the name may be truncated and terminated by . . . . Any remaining sub categories may be displayed by clicking on a message and link that states Show All Refine Topics . . . not shown . Remaining sub categories may then be displayed in section

In one embodiment if there are fewer than five sub categories one column of sub categories may be displayed. If there are five matching sub categories two columns may be displayed where column one includes sub categories and column two includes matches and not shown .

In section web sites for the current nodes may be displayed by browsing the node and displaying web sites associated with the node. Remaining sites for the node descendents may be displayed by doing a restricted search using a web directory optimized query string. If fewer than a configurable number e.g. 15 results are returned a full text search on a second database such as one purchased from Inktomi is performed using a fall through optimized query string. If no optimized query string exists the sites attached directly to the node are displayed.

Alternately a user may determine that the topic of interest has been narrowed too much and may wish to broaden the area of the user s search drilling up instead of drilling down . For example in in section may display a message such as Broaden Your Search followed by a display listing choices such as Nebraska Statewide Resources Travel for Lincoln Nebr. USA . Selection of Travel may result in the display of a list of directory websites such as Genuine Nebraska search for attractions lodgings and events in specific county or region tourism offices and TravelNow Nebraska search by area or by city to find a list of local accommodations . . . . Hence the topic of Travel is broadened from Lincoln Nebr. to the state of Nebraska.

To display the broadening topics of the categories in the PST area non duplicate parents of the categories matched in the PST area are displayed. In one embodiment only parents that have at least three children in the result set will be selected for display. In one embodiment display of parents will be in order of the number of children of the parents so that those parents with more children are displayed before those parents with fewer children. It should be appreciated that the broaden feature described above may be available from a primary search as well as a refined search screen.

The system described herein may be implemented in a number of computing environments. depicts an exemplary computing system in accordance with the invention. Computing system is capable of executing a search and a browse on a single query in accordance with the invention. Exemplary computing system is controlled primarily by computer readable instructions which may be in the form of software wherever or by whatever means such software is stored such as on computer readable media. Such software may be executed within central processing unit CPU to cause data processing system to do work. In many known workstations and personal computers central processing unit is implemented by a single chip CPU called a microprocessor. Coprocessor is an optional processor distinct from main CPU that performs additional functions or assists CPU . One common type of coprocessor is the floating point coprocessor also called a numeric or math coprocessor which is designed to perform numeric calculations faster and better than general purpose CPU . Recently however the functions of many coprocessors have been incorporated into more powerful single chip microprocessors.

In operation CPU fetches decodes and executes instructions and transfers information to and from other resources via the computer s main data transfer path system bus . Such a system bus connects the components in computing system and defines the medium for data exchange. System bus typically includes data lines for sending data address lines for sending addresses and control lines for sending interrupts and for operating the system bus. An example of such a system bus is the PCI Peripheral Component Interconnect bus. Some of today s advanced busses provide a function called bus arbitration that regulates access to the bus by extension cards controllers and CPU . Devices that attach to these busses and arbitrate to take over the bus are called bus masters. Bus master support also allows multiprocessor configurations of the busses to be created by the addition of bus master adapters containing a processor and its support chips.

Memory devices coupled to system bus include random access memory RAM and read only memory ROM . Such memories include circuitry that allows information to be stored and retrieved. ROMs generally contain stored data that cannot be modified. Data stored in RAM can be read or changed by CPU or other hardware devices. Access to RAM and or ROM may be controlled by memory controller . Memory controller may provide an address translation function that translates virtual addresses into physical addresses as instructions are executed. Memory controller may also provide a memory protection function that isolates processes within the system and isolates system processes from user processes. Thus a program running in user mode can access only memory mapped by its own process virtual address space it cannot access memory within another process s virtual address space unless memory sharing between the processes has been set up.

In addition computing system may contain peripherals controller responsible for communicating instructions from CPU to peripherals such as printer keyboard mouse and disk drive .

Display which is controlled by display controller is used to display visual output generated by computing system . Such visual output may include text graphics animated graphics and video. Display may be implemented with a CRT based video display an LCD based flat panel display gas plasma based flat panel display or a touch panel. Display controller includes electronic components required to generate a video signal that is sent to display . Further computing system may contain network adapter which may be used to connect computing system to an external communication network . Communications network may provide computer users with means of communicating and transferring software and information electronically. Additionally communications network may provide distributed processing which involves several computers and the sharing of workloads or cooperative efforts in performing a task. It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

It is noted that although specific embodiments have been illustrated and described herein it will be appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art that any arrangement that is calculated to achieve the same purpose may be substituted for the specific embodiments shown. This application is intended to cover any adaptations or variations of the present invention. Therefore it is manifestly intended that this invention be limited only by the claims and equivalents thereof.

The programming necessary to effectuate the processes performed in connection with the present invention is relatively straight forward and should be apparent to the relevant programming public. Accordingly such programming is not attached hereto. Any particular programming then may be employed to effectuate the present invention without departing from the spirit and scope thereof.

In the foregoing description it can be seen that the present invention comprises a new and useful mechanism for performing a search and a browse on a query. It should be appreciated that changes could be made to the embodiments described above without departing from the inventive concepts thereof. It should be understood therefore that this invention is not limited to the particular embodiments disclosed but it is intended to cover modifications within the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims.

