---

title: Stability augmentation system
abstract: A stability augmentation system for stabilizing human limbs from against limb tremors. The stability augmentation system includes: and arm brace; a plurality of piezoelectric sensors fixed on said arm brace for sensing angular motion about a first axis of a limb induced by alternating perturbations; and a plurality of piezoelectric actuators coupled to the limb and piezoelectric sensor, said piezoelectric actuator being responsive to the piezoelectric sensors for selectively applying a torque to the limb representative of the sensed angular motion such that the angular motion about the first axis induced by the perturbation is cancelled, said plurality of piezoelectric actuators concurrently applying a reactive torque, equal and opposite to the applied torque, to the limb.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07883479&OS=07883479&RS=07883479
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Air Force
number: 07883479
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050805
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalty thereon.

The invention relates generally to electro mechanical and piezoelectric biomedical controllers and more specifically it relates to a stability augmentation system.

With old age people tend to develop a jitter which is a direct result of degeneration of their nerves. Since both the nerves and the brain control area have degenerated to a point where there is a significant lag between knowledge of the position of the body part and commands from the brain that move the muscles and affect the position of the body part. Patented art of interest includes the following U.S. Patents the disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference 

U.S. Pat. No. 6 356 784 Mar. 12 2002 Method of treating movement disorders by electrical stimulation and or drug infusion of the pendunulopontine nucleus Lozano Andres M 

U.S. Pat. No. 6 323 391 Nov. 27 2001 Methods and transgenic mouse model for identifying and modulating factors leading to motor neuron degeneration Schlaepfer William W 

U.S. Pat. No. 5 643 329 Jul. 1 1997 System for maintaining a desired spinal curvature of a user suffering from improper alignment of the vertebrae of the spine Solomonow Moshe 

U.S. Pat. No. 5 551 445 Sep. 3 1996 Apparatus and method for movement coordination analysis Nashner Lewis M. 

U.S. Pat. No. 6 839 594 entitled Actuation and Control of Limbs Through Motor Nerve Stimulation issued to Cohen et al.

The Lozano patent describes techniques for treating movement disorders by electrical stimulation and or drug infusion. It utilizes an implantable signal generator and an electrode and or an implantable pump and catheter. High electrical stimulation pulses and or drug therapy is provided to the Pedunculopontine Nucleus PPN . A sensor is also used to detect various symptoms of the movement disorders with a microprocessor algorithm to analyze the output from a sensor to regulate the stimulation and or drug therapy delivered to the PPN.

The Schlaepfer patent describes methods of identifying factors involved in motor neuron degeneration by identifying factors affected by alterations in a C binding complex of a ribonucleotide protein complex isolating and purifying the factors or nucleic acid sequences encoding the factors in a transgenic mouse.

The Solomonow patent describes a system for maintaining a desired spinal curvature of a user suffering from improper alignment of the vertebrae of the spine. In its broad aspects it comprises a sensor feedback system and electrodes. The sensor feedback systems measures spinal curvature determines whether selected conditions have been met warranting the application of electrical stimulation and provides information regarding the determination of an electronic stimulator. The electrodes are space ably mounted on selected portions of the user s back. They are in electrical communication with the electronic stimulator for casing contraction of the back muscles at selected levels thus providing alignment of the spinal vertebrae. The sensor feedback system includes a sensor assembly which comprises an upper elongated rigid segment a lower elongated rigid segment and a sensor.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 551 445 describes methods and devices are provided for evaluating among the limbs of a subject the distribution of impairments of the subject s ability to coordinate the muscular contractions to execute effective postural movements. The subject may be placed on two independently movable support surfaces either of which may be fixed or sway referenced. The subject s ability to maintain his or her equilibrium position is then monitored.

The Kidd patent describes a method and apparatus are disclosed for the electrotrophic stimulation of muscle that is stimulation using pulses trains onto which information which will cause long term functional and or structural changes in the muscle tissue. This information is coded into the interval between successive pulses of the series. Also disclosed is a method and apparatus for acquiring trophic data from motor until action potential series.

Patients with neurodegenerative diseases or trauma like cerebral infarct or spinal cord injury can have a variety of movement and muscle control problems like resting postural intention or action tremor dystonia improper muscle tone spasticity undesirable movements or muscle co contraction dyskinesia poorly executed movements or involuntary movements like ballismus choreiform movements are torticollis inappropriate movements or limbs control . Many of these problems can be called hyperkinesias. Although they can be chronic or worse progressive they also may have times of relative remission. Such problems are found at certain stages for patients with Parkinson s disease multiple sclerosis cerebral palsey secondary to deafferentation pain post stroke pose apoplexy or anoxia post head or spinal trauma post poisoning cerebella disease etc. Dyskinesia also may result from long term usage of levodopa or other especially for Parkinson s patients.

A number of techniques are used for treating these and other movement disorders. Electrical stimulation and drug infusion techniques have become increasingly popular. In the case of electrical stimulation an electrical lead having one or more electrodes is typically implanted near a specific site in the brain or spinal cord or a patient. The lead is coupled to a signal generator which delivers electrical energy through the electrodes to nearby neurons and neural tissue. The electrical energy delivered through the electrodes creates an electrical field causing excitation or inhibition of the nearby neurons. For example stimulation of the vagus nerve as described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 702 254 4 867 164 and 5 025 807 has been used to reduce the likelihood that a person with epilepsy will experience a seizure. For example U.S. Pat. No. 5 716 377 entitled Method of Treating Movement Disorders by Brain Stimulation discloses techniques for stimulation of various portions of the brain.

The systems cited above can be improved since the response delay can be directly modeled as a time lag in a control system. The system itself could theoretically be modeled as least on first pass as a linear second order system with a certain crossover and phase margin. The muscles provide a force and yield an acceleration. The eyes and other feedback mechanisms yield position as well as velocity . As the response time increases the modeled time delay increases. At a lower phase margin the control system becomes oscillatory and marginally stable. There are higher orders damping terms that help keep the system stable where it would be modeled as unstable. The introduction of damping or additional feedback loops into this system could potentially stabilize or reduce jitter in the system. The likely result is a reduced bandwidth system that has a higher phase margin and lower crossover frequency.

The reader s attention is now directed towards . The present invention is a stability augmentation system for stabilization human limbs from against limb tremors. In one embodiment the stability augmentation system includes an arm brace a plurality of piezoelectric sensors fixed on said arm brace for sensing angular motion about a first axis of a limb induced by alternating perturbations and a plurality of piezoelectric actuators coupled to the limb and piezoelectric sensor and piezoelectric actuator being responsive to the piezoelectric sensors for selectively applying a torque to the limb representative of the sensed angular motion such that the angular motion about the first axis induced by the perturbation is cancelled said plurality of piezoelectric actuators concurrently applying a reactive torque equal and opposite to the applied torque to the limb.

The stability augmentation system includes a feedback control system for measuring the angular rotation about said limb and the arm brace is a Velcro arm strap which holds and aligns the plurality of piezoelectric actuators along a path of an expected tremor.

The plurality of piezoelectric actuators includes a series of horizontal stacks each separated by a brace element such that the piezoelectric actuators have the dual ability to apply force based on electrical stimulation and to create a differential based on mechanical displacement.

The present invention includes a stability augmentation system similar to the above cited Kaiser patent. In the present invention the addition of another control loop to compensate for the jitter is proposed. The proposed solution can be implemented in a number of manners and fashions including but not limited to stimulating muscles with low voltage current pulses using piezoelectric actuators to apply pressure of force to the appropriate locations sensing the motion of the muscles and firing of the nerves using electrodes or similar devices as well as using pies electric devices to both sense and gain energy from the movement of the body part. In additional the controller could be tuned to remove only certain frequencies of motion in such as way as to only hinder the vibration and not the normal motion in such as way as to only hinder the system might be less responsive at certain frequencies but this might be an acceptable loss at times such as when holding a knife or fork while eating.

Electrical methods would likely not be the way to go unless they could be implemented in such a way that they were not felt or were minimally bothersome. The key to the successful implementation will be in a simple easy to use implementation likely a fairly cheap medical device or aid the equivalent of a knee brace or arm brace. In addition finding the parts to push pull torque will be important in implementing the design. Muscle fibers or other electrically actuated devices could be used.

This could be used to build or exercise muscles monitor patients movements or muscle strength over periods of time. Additions to the design could actually improve speed and motion. There is the potential to use this for military or hunting or any other case where stability of the arms is key.

As noted in prior art human tremor is an involuntary trembling or shaking of the muscles of the body associated with physical weakness emotional stress or excitement. Tremor can detrimentally affect task performance for a number of different tasks including microsurgery marksmanship photography videotaping and microcircuit assembly as well as the simple use of a pen by a person afflicted with mild Parkinson s disease.

The reader s attention is directed towards which is the prior act Active tremor control system of the Kaiser patent which provides stabilization of device subject to alternating perturbations such as those experienced with human tremor. In Kaiser Device is any hand held device for example a firearm camera scalpel or writing implement. Device is fitted with at least one inertial sensor which senses motion about at least one control axis. This is not a necessary limitation of the invention however as additional sensors may be used depending on the number of degrees of movement to be monitored e.g. pitch yaw or roll or a single sensor may be used which senses motion about multiple axes.

Inertial sensor detects angular motion about the control axis and sends a signal representative of the detected motion to preamplifier which conditions and amplifies the signal. The conditioned signal is sent to compensator which in response generates a reaction signal which is amplified by power amplifier and then applied to actuator coupled to device . Actuator in response to the reaction signal generates a torque equal and opposite to the sensed angular motion and applies the torque to device . However actuator must simultaneously apply a reactive torque to independent mass thereby allowing actuator to push or mass such that the angular motion about the control axis caused by the tremor is cancelled.

Thus the closed loop system of the present invention satisfies Newton s third law of reaction force. The system quickly and effectively cancels the disturbance sensed by pushing on the mass thereby allowing the torque applied to the device to cancel the alternating perturbations induced by tremor. This system unlike the prior art is a closed loop system which physically counteracts the disturbance rather than merely compensating for it.

The reader s attention is now directed towards . The present invention is a stability augmentation system for stabilization human limbs from against limb tremors. In one embodiment the stability augmentation system includes an arm brace a plurality of piezoelectric sensors fixed on said arm brace for sensing angular motion about a first axis of a limb induced by alternating perturbations and a plurality of piezoelectric actuators coupled to the limb and piezoelectric sensor said piezoelectric actuator being responsive to the piezoelectric sensors for selectively applying a torque to the limb representative of the sensed angular motion such that the angular motion about the first axis induced by the perturbation is cancelled said plurality of piezoelectric actuators concurrently applying a reactive torque equal and opposite to the applied torque to the limb.

The stability augmentation system includes a feedback control system for measuring the angular rotation about said limb and the arm brace is a Velcro arm strap which holds and aligns the plurality of piezoelectric actuators along a path of an expected tremor.

The plurality of piezoelectric actuators includes a series of horizontal stacks each separated by a brace element such that the piezoelectric actuators have the dual ability to apply force based on electrical stimulation and to create a differential based on mechanical displacement.

While the invention has been described in its presently preferred embodiment it is understood that the words which have been used are words of description rather than words of limitation and that changes within the purview of the appended claims may be made with departing from the scope and spirit of the invention in its broader aspects.

