---

title: Data transfer utilizing preview data
abstract: In an image data server, a preview data generation unit generates preview data corresponding to image data, and a transmission controller transmits the preview data to a computer system in an image receiver apparatus. In accordance with another possible application, the preview data is not generated by the image data server, but is generated by a computer system in an image transmitter apparatus, which transmits the image data to the image data server, and transmitted to the image data server. In the computer system in the image receiver apparatus, a display controller causes the contents of the preview data to be displayed on the screen of a monitor. The user determines whether or not the image data corresponding to the displayed preview image is required.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07711766&OS=07711766&RS=07711766
owner: Seiko Epson Corporation
number: 07711766
owner_city: Tokyo
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050823
---
This application is a continuation application of application Ser. No. 10 289 390 filed Nov. 7 2002 which in turn is a continuation application of application Ser. No. 09 210 764 filed Dec. 14 1998 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 505 252 which in turn claims priority to Japanese Patent Application Nos. 9 367107 filed Dec. 24 1997 and 10 051360 filed Feb. 16 1998. The entire contents of the above applications and patents are incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention relates to a technique for transmitting data between apparatuses respectively connected to a network.

Facsimile and E mail are known means for transmitting image data between apparatuses respectively connected to a telephone communication network the Internet or an intranet.

These known means transmit image data irrespective of the intentions of a receiver and do not allow the receiver to selectively receive only the required image data. The image data generally has an extremely large data capacity. In the case where the transmitted image data is not required such data transmission wastefully consumes the communication resources as well as the resources in the receiver such as printing paper in the case of facsimile and the data storage area in the case of E mail .

The object of the present invention is thus to provide a data transfer system and a method of data transmission that allow a receiver to selectively receive only required data.

At least part of the above and the other related objects is realized by a data transfer system including a transmitter and a receiver connected to the transmitter via a network. The transmitter includes a memory that stores original data a first transmission unit that transmits the original data and preview data created corresponding to the original data and a first controller that controls operation of the transmitter. The receiver includes a second transmission unit that receives at least the preview data an input unit an output unit and a second controller that controls operation of the receiver. The first controller causes the first transmission unit to send the preview data to the receiver whereas the second controller receives the preview data from the second transmission unit and subsequently causes the output unit to output a preview image represented by the preview data. The second controller causes the second transmission unit to send a request for transfer of the original data to the transmitter when an instruction for transfer of the original data is input into the receiver via the input unit. The first controller causes the first transmission unit to send the original data stored in the memory to at least one of the receiver and another apparatus connected to the network when receiving the request for transfer of the original data from the first transmission unit.

The present invention is also directed to a transmitter for transmitting data to a receiver via a network. The transmitter includes a memory that stores original data a transmission unit that transmits the original data and preview data created corresponding to the original data and a controller that controls operation of the transmitter. The controller causes the transmission unit to send the preview data to the receiver. The controller causes the transmission unit to send the original data stored in the memory to at least one of the receiver and another apparatus connected to the network when receiving a request for transfer of the original data transmitted from the receiver via the transmission unit.

The present invention is also directed to a receiver for receiving data from a transmitter via a network. The receiver includes a transmission unit that receives at least preview data created corresponding to original data an input unit an output unit and a controller that controls operation of the receiver. The controller causes the output unit to output a preview image represented by the preview data when receiving the preview data transmitted from the transmitter via transmission unit. The controller causes the transmission unit to send a request for transfer of the original data to the transmitter when an instruction for transfer of the original data is input into the receiver via the input unit.

The present invention is also directed to a method of transmitting data between a transmitter and a receiver each connected to a network. The method includes the steps of a causing the transmitter to transmit preview data created corresponding to original data to the receiver b causing the receiver to output a preview image represented by the preview data when the receiver receives the preview data c causing the receiver to transmit a request for transfer of the original data to the transmitter when an instruction for transfer of the original data is input into the receiver and d causing the transmitter to transmit the original data to at least one of the receiver and another apparatus connected to the network when the transmitter receives the request for transfer.

The present invention is also directed to a computer program product that causes a computer to transmit data to a receiver via a network. The computer program product includes a computer readable medium a first program code unit that causes the computer to transmit preview data created corresponding to original data to the receiver a second program code unit that causes the computer to receive a request for transfer of the original data when the receiver transmits the request for transfer and a third program code unit that causes the computer to transmit the original data to at least one of the receiver and another apparatus connected to the network when the computer receives the request for transfer wherein each of the program code units is stored on the computer readable medium.

The present invention is also directed to a computer program product that causes a computer to receive data from a transmitter via a network. The computer program product includes a computer readable medium a first program code unit that causes the computer to receive preview data created corresponding to original data when the transmitter transmits the preview data a second program code unit that causes the computer to output a preview image represented by the preview data when the computer receives the preview data and a third program code unit that causes the computer to transmit a request for transfer of the original data to the transmitter when the computer receives an instruction for transfer of the original data wherein each of the program code units is stored on the computer readable medium.

In the arrangement of the present invention the transmitter transmits the preview data which has been created corresponding to the original data to the receiver. The receiver then outputs the preview image represented by the transmitted preview data to enable the visual check. For example the receiver causes the preview image represented by the preview data to be displayed on the screen of a monitor or to be printed on printing paper by a printer in order to enable the user to visually check the output.

The user of the receiver visually checks the preview image represented by the preview data and determines whether or not the original data corresponding to the preview data. In the case where the corresponding original data is required the user inputs an instruction for transfer of the original data to the receiver through the operation of the input unit. The receiver transmits a request for transfer of the original data to the transmitter in response to the input instruction. The transmitter receives the request for transfer and transmits the required original data to a preset apparatus. The preset apparatus may be identical with or different from the receiver.

The data transfer system of the present invention transmits the preview data irrespective of the intentions of the user of the receiver. The preview data has however an extremely smaller data capacity than that of the original data. This accordingly does not wastefully consume the communication resources or the resources of the receiver. The receiver visually checks the contents of the preview data and issues a request for transfer of only the required original data so as to enable only the required original data to be received by a preset apparatus. This arrangement effectively prevents the communication resources and the resources in the receiver from being wastefully consumed.

These and other objects features aspects and advantages of the present invention will become more apparent from the following detailed description of the preferred embodiments with the accompanying drawings.

The image data transfer system of the embodiment includes a computer system in an image receiver apparatus and an image data server . The computer system in the image receiver apparatus is connected with the image data server via the Internet as shown in . A computer system in an image transmitter apparatus as well as a mobile terminal is also connected to the Internet . Although the respective apparatuses are directly connected to the Internet in the illustration of these apparatuses are generally connected to the Internet indirectly via a telephone communication network or another network such as LAN.

Referring to the computer system in the image receiver apparatus includes a CPU that carries out a variety of processing and control operations according to computer programs an I O unit that transmits data to and from a variety of peripheral devices and a memory in which the computer programs are stored and data obtained in the course of processing are temporarily registered. The computer system further includes an input device that is used to input for example an instruction from a user a monitor on which the contents of data are displayed a communication device that communicates with another apparatus via the network a hard disk drive in which a variety of data are stored a printer that is used to print the contents of data and a CD ROM drive .

The CPU carries out the processing and control operations according to the computer programs so as to function as a transmission control unit an input control unit a display control unit and a print control unit .

Like the computer system in the image receiver apparatus the image data server includes a CPU an I O unit a memory an input device a monitor a communication device a hard disk drive and a CD ROM drive .

The CPU carries out a variety of processing and control operations according to computer programs stored in the memory so as to function as a transmission control unit an input control unit a display control unit and a preview data generation unit .

In this embodiment the computer programs that is applications programs recorded in recording media CD ROMs and are respectively read by the CD ROM drives and and taken into the computer system in the image receiver apparatus and the image data server . The input computer programs are transferred to the hard disk drives and and transmitted to the memories and for example at the time of starting the operation.

This embodiment utilizes the CD ROMs as the recording media in which the computer programs are recorded in a computer readable manner. A variety of other computer readable media may also be used for the recording media for example flexible disks magneto optic discs IC cards ROM cartridges punched cards prints with bar codes or other codes printed thereon and internal storage devices memories such as RAM and ROM and external storage devices of the computer.

Instead of reading the computer programs stored in such recording media the user may access a program server not shown for supplying computer programs via the network and take the computer programs from the program server into the computer system in the image receiver apparatus or the image data server .

In this embodiment the software actualizes the functions of the transmission control unit the input control unit the display control unit and the print control unit in the computer system of the image receiver apparatus as well as the transmission control unit the input control unit the display control unit and the preview data generation unit in the image data server . The functions of these units may otherwise be actualized by the hardware structure.

Referring to the computer system in the image transmitter apparatus transmits required image data to the image data server via the Internet at step S. The image data for example consists of gray scaled bit map data of R G and B. In the image data server shown in the communication device receives the transmitted image data and the transmission control unit of the CPU stores the input image data into the hard disk drive via the I O unit . The hard disk drive stores such transmitted image data as well as user interface data discussed later.

The preview data generation unit reads the image data from the hard disk drive generates preview data based on the input image data and stores the preview data into the hard disk drive at step S. One concrete procedure causes the image data to undergo an image processing operation such as a data skipping operation and generates reduced image data as the preview data. Another concrete procedure extracts attribute information for example the creator or transmitter of the image the date of creation the name and the type of the image from the information attached to the image data and generates attribute data as the preview data.

The transmission control unit subsequently reads the generated preview data from the hard disk drive and transmits the input preview data via the communication device to the client or the computer system in the image receiver apparatus at step S. The transmission control unit also reads the user interface data from the hard disk drive and transmits the input user interface data to the computer system in the image receiver apparatus at step S.

In the computer system of the image receiver apparatus the communication device receives the transmitted preview data and user interface data and the transmission control unit of the CPU stores the input preview data and user interface data into the hard disk drive via the I O unit .

When the user of the computer system in the image receiver apparatus inputs an instruction for displaying a preview image through the operation of the input device the input control unit transmits the instruction to the display control unit . The display control unit then reads the preview data and the user interface data from the hard disk drive and causes the contents of the preview data and the user interface data to be displayed on the screen of the monitor at step S. A preview image corresponding to the preview data is accordingly displayed in a window based on the user interface data on the screen of the monitor .

The user checks the displayed preview image and determines whether or not the original image data corresponding to the preview data is required at step S. When the corresponding original image data is not required the user inputs an instruction for terminating the display of the preview image and concludes a series of the processing. When the corresponding original image data is required on the other hand the user inputs an instruction for displaying a window for print settings that is a window for enabling input of various pieces of setting information that are used to print the image represented by the original image data on a sheet of printing paper. In one exemplified structure the user interface data provides specific buttons in the window that respectively correspond to the instruction for terminating the display of the preview image and the instruction for displaying the window for print settings. The user clicks the required button through the operation of the input device to input the desired instruction.

In the case where the instruction for displaying the window for print settings is input the input control unit transfers the instruction to the transmission control unit and the transmission control unit transmits a request for transfer of the required user interface data which is used to display the window for print settings via the communication device to the image data server at step S.

In the image data server the communication device receives the transmitted request for transfer and the transmission control unit reads the user interface data which is used to display the window for print settings from the hard disk drive and transmits the input user interface data to the computer system in the image receiver apparatus via the communication device at step S.

In this embodiment the user interface data provided in the image data server is not exclusively used by the computer system of the image receiver apparatus but is generally used by a large number of clients connected to the Internet . The user interface data thus mainly consists of HTML data written in HTML HyperText Markup Language .

The Internet is in the environment where various machine types coexist. It is difficult for the image data server to check the machine type of each client. In the case where the user interface data is generated according to a program that depends upon a specific machine type and is supplied to each client some clients naturally can not utilize the user interface data. It is however practically impossible to provide the user interface data for each machine type and supply the required user interface data corresponding to the machine type of each client. This embodiment thus generates the user interface data written in the HTML that is independent of the machine type and is easily utilized.

The HTML data includes image data such as GIF graphics Interchange Format and JPEG Joint Photographic Experts Group and other data related thereto with predetermined tags. Data written in JAVA a programming language developed by Sun Microsystems Corp. that is also independent of the machine type may be used instead of the HTML data.

In the computer system of the image receiver apparatus when the communication device receives the transmitted user interface data while the transmission control unit stores the input user interface data into the hard disk drive the display control unit displays the user interface window represented by the user interface data that is the window for print settings on the screen of the monitor at step S. As described previously the user interface data is the HTML data and thus readily displayed using a known Web browser software.

The window for paper settings as shown in is first displayed on the screen of the monitor . The user of the computer system in the image receiver apparatus inputs details of paper settings which include the paper size the paper source the orientation and the print size corresponding to the printing paper set in the printer through the operation of the input device . On conclusion of the input the user clicks an OK button . This causes the window for print specification as shown in to appear. The user then inputs details of print specification which include the number of copies the printing range the printing quality the paper type and the ink color according to the requirements through the operation of the input device . At step S the user clicks an OK button when it is required to transmit the original image data and print the image represented by the original image data whereas the user clicks a Cancel button when it is not required.

The input control unit transmits the various pieces of input setting information and the results of button clicking to the transmission control unit . In the case where the Cancel button is clicked in the window for print specification the transmission control unit concludes the series of processing. In the case where the OK button is clicked in the window for print specification on the other hand the transmission control unit transmits a request for transfer of the original image data as well as the input setting information to the image data server via the communication device at step S.

In the image data server when the communication device receives the transmitted request for transfer and setting information the transmission control unit transmits back all or part of the setting information via the communication device to the computer system in the image receiver apparatus at step S. As described previously the user interface data fed from the image data server to the computer system in the image receiver apparatus is the HTML data. The user interface data may thus have a mechanism for calling a software component in order to utilize a CGI Common Gateway Interface function on the image data server . This embodiment takes advantage of this mechanism set in the user interface data and causes the setting information transmitted from the computer system in the image receiver apparatus to be transmitted back from the image data server to the computer system in the image receiver apparatus.

Simultaneously with transmitting back the setting information the transmission control unit reads the original image data which is the target of the request for transfer from the hard disk drive and transmits the original image data via the communication device to the computer system in the image receiver apparatus at step S.

In the computer system of the image receiver apparatus when the communication device receives the transmitted setting information and the original image data the transmission control unit transfers the input setting information and original image data to the print control unit . The print control unit is actualized by a printer driver software which is exclusive for the printer and includes a resolution conversion element a color conversion element and a halftone processing element as shown in .

The respective constituents of the print control unit cause the input image data to be subjected to the following processing operations in order to create a desired printed image based on the input setting information. The resolution conversion element first performs a resolution conversion process such as interpolation or data skipping for the input image data so as to cause a printed image to have a desired resolution. The color conversion element then converts the RGB image data into for example CYMK data corresponding to the input of the printer . The halftone processing element subsequently carries out a known dither operation or error diffusion operation for the image data so as to cause the printed image to attain a desired tone expression.

On conclusion of the processing the print control unit outputs the processed image data via the I O unit to the printer so that the printer prints an image corresponding to the image data on the printing paper at step S.

In this manner the image data is transmitted from the computer system of the image transmitter apparatus via the image data server to the computer system of the image receiver apparatus and is printed in the computer system of the image receiver apparatus. The user of the computer system in the image receiver apparatus can thus receive a desired image.

As described above in this embodiment the image data server generates preview data corresponding to the input image data and transmits the preview data to the computer system of the image receiver apparatus. This means that the preview data is transmitted to the computer system of the image receiver apparatus irrespective of the intentions of the user of the computer system in the image receiver apparatus that is the receiver . The preview data has however an extremely smaller data capacity than that of the original image data and thereby does not significantly increase the traffics on the Internet nor wastefully consumes the communication resources. The preview data does not wastefully consume the storage capacity of the hard disk drive in the computer system of the image receiver apparatus.

The arrangement of the embodiment enables the user of the computer system in the image receiver apparatus to check the contents of the preview data and issue a request for transfer with respect to only the required original image data so as to selectively receive only the required original image data. This effectively prevents the communication resources and the resources in the receiver apparatus from being wastefully consumed.

In this embodiment the computer system in the image receiver apparatus utilizes the user interface data provided by the image data server . Namely the computer system in the image receiver apparatus is not required to provide a special user interface for displaying the window for print settings. A modification of the user interface data in the image data server enables the user interfaces to be changed at the same time in all the clients that utilize the user interface data. This facilitates the maintenance and management of the user interface. As discussed previously the user interface data consists of the HTML data and is thereby independent of the machine type of the client.

In the first embodiment discussed above the original image data is transmitted to the apparatus that receives the transmitted preview data. In accordance with another configuration the apparatus that receives the transmitted preview data may be different from the apparatus that receives the transmitted original image data. The following describes such configuration as another embodiment.

Referring to the mobile terminal includes a CPU for carrying out a variety of processing and control operations according to programs an I O unit that transmits data to and from a variety of peripheral devices a memory that stores the programs and temporarily registers data obtained in the course of the processing an input device for inputting for example an instruction from the user a monitor for displaying the contents of the data and a communication device that carries out communication with another apparatus through the network.

The CPU carries out the operations according to the programs and thereby functions as a transmission control unit an input control unit and a display control unit .

In this embodiment the variety of peripheral devices are integrally attached to the mobile terminal . The mobile terminal has the size and the weight that enable the user to freely carry the mobile terminal .

In this embodiment while the preview data is transmitted to the mobile terminal the original image data is transmitted to the apparatus that is specified by the user of the mobile terminal . As shown in the mobile terminal does not have a hard disk drive or a printer. It is accordingly impossible for the mobile terminal to store the original image data and print the contents of the image data even when the original image data is transmitted from the image data server . The original image data is accordingly transmitted to a desired apparatus other than the mobile terminal .

The following describes the operations of the second embodiment with referring to . Among the operations of the second embodiment the operations up to generation of the preview data in the image data server are identical with those of the first embodiment and are thereby not specifically described here.

In the image data server the transmission control unit reads the generated preview data from the hard disk drive and transmits the preview data via the communication device to the client or mobile terminal . The transmission control unit also reads the user interface data from the hard disk drive and transmits the user interface data to the mobile terminal .

In the mobile terminal the communication device receives the transmitted preview data and user interface data and the transmission control unit of the CPU stores the input preview data and user interface data into the memory . The preview data has an extremely smaller data capacity than that of the original image data and can thus be stored in the memory without any troubles.

When the user of the mobile terminal inputs an instruction for displaying a preview image through the operation of the input device the input control unit transfers the instruction to the display control unit . The display control unit then reads the preview data and the user interface data from the memory and causes the contents of the preview data and the user interface data on the screen of the monitor .

The user checks the preview image and determines whether or not the original image data corresponding to the preview data is required. When the corresponding original image data is required the user inputs an instruction for displaying the window for print settings. The input control unit then transfers the instruction to the transmission control unit and the transmission control unit transmits a request for transfer of the user interface data which is used to display the window for print settings to the image data server via the communication device .

In the image data server the communication device receives the transmitted request for transfer and the transmission control unit reads the user interface data for displaying the window for print settings from the hard disk drive and transmits the user interface data to the mobile terminal via the communication device .

In the mobile terminal the communication device receives the transmitted user interface data and the transmission control unit stores the input user interface data into the memory . Simultaneously the display control unit causes the user interface window of the user interface data that is the window for print settings to be displayed on the screen of the monitor .

The windows for print settings displayed in the second embodiment are similar to those shown in except several additional data areas. The additional data areas include a data area for setting an address of transmission of the image data and a data area for setting a date and time for reserved transmission of the image data.

Information representing the location of an apparatus to which the original image data is to be actually transmitted that is an apparatus selected by the user to receive the original image data on the Internet is input into the data area for setting the address of transmission of the image data. Concrete examples of such information include an IP Internet Protocol address or URL Uniform Resource Locator of the desired apparatus. The apparatus to which the original image data is to be transmitted should have the capability to store the transmitted image data and print the contents of the image data. It is thus required for the user of the mobile terminal to specify an appropriate apparatus having such capability as the address of transmission of the image data. In this embodiment the computer system in the image receiver apparatus is specified as the address of transmission of the image data. The user accordingly inputs the IP address of the computer system in the image receiver apparatus into the data area for setting the address of transmission of the image data.

The date and time when the original image data is to be transmitted from the image data server to the specified address is input into the data area for setting the date and time for reserved transmission of the image data. For example when the computer system in the image receiver apparatus specified as the address of transmission of the image data is remote from the mobile terminal the user of the mobile terminal can not grasp the current state of the computer system in the image receiver apparatus. Even when the image data is transmitted from the image data server there is a possibility that the computer system in the image receiver apparatus can not receive the image data or print the contents of the image data. One preferable procedure specifies in advance the date and time when the image data server will transmit the original image data and causes the computer system in the image receiver apparatus specified as the address of transmission of the image data to prepare for receiving the image data. This arrangement enables the computer system in the image receiver apparatus to securely receive the transmitted image data and print the contents of the image data.

The input control unit transmits the various pieces of input setting information and the results of button clicking to the transmission control unit . When the OK button is clicked in the window for print specification the transmission control unit transmits the setting information as well as the request for transfer of the original image data to the image data server via the communication device .

In the image data server when the communication device receives the transmitted request for transfer and setting information the transmission control unit sets the date and time for reserved transmission of the image data into a timer while storing the setting information into the hard disk drive . The transmission control unit then reads the original image data which is the target of the request for transfer and the setting information from the hard disk drive on the date and time set in the timer for reserved transmission of the image data. The transmission control unit subsequently transmits the image data and the setting information to the computer system in the image receiver apparatus based on the information representing the address of transmission of the image data.

The operations after the transmission of the image data from the image data server in the second embodiment are identical with those of the first embodiment and are thereby not specifically described here.

As described above the structure of the second embodiment enables the user of the mobile terminal to visually check the preview image displayed on the mobile terminal . In the case where the original image data corresponding to the preview data is required the user can receive the desired original image data in a desired apparatus.

The user interface data consists of the HTML data as described previously. When the user interface data has the mechanism for calling the software component to utilize the CGI the mobile terminal can remote control the functions of the image data server . This arrangement enables the image data server to be in charge of the high performance processing when the CPU of the mobile terminal has a relatively low processing capacity.

The present invention is not restricted to the above embodiments or their modifications but there may be many other modifications changes and alterations without departing from the scope or spirit of the main characteristics of the present invention.

In the above embodiments the preview data is generated in the image data server . It is however not necessary to generate the preview data in the image data server . Another possible application generates the preview data in the computer system of the image transmitter apparatus and transmits the preview data together with the corresponding original image data to the image data server .

In the above embodiments the required image data is once transmitted from the computer system in the image transmitter apparatus to the image data server . The preview data and the image data are then transmitted from the image data server to the receiver for example the computer system in the image receiver apparatus or the mobile terminal . The principle of the present invention is however not restricted to this arrangement. In the case where the computer system in the image transmitter apparatus has the functions equivalent to those of the image data server the preview data and the image data may be transmitted directly from the computer system in the image transmitter apparatus to the receiver.

The above embodiments regard the transmission of image data. The principle of the present invention is however not restricted to this arrangement but is applicable for transmission of text data. Namely the original data in this specification means various types of data such as image data and text data. In the case of transmission of text data the preview data generated corresponding to the text data may be abstract data representing an abstract of the text data extraction data representing first several rows in the text data or attribute data obtained by extracting the attribute information attached to the text data as discussed in the above embodiments. Namely the preview image in this specification means various types of images represented by data such as preview image data and preview text data.

In the above embodiments the image data server is connected to the receiver via the Internet . The principle of the present invention is however not restricted to the Internet but these apparatuses may be connected to each other via a telephone communication network a LAN a WAN including an intranet or any other network.

In the above embodiments the contents of the preview data are displayed on the screen of the monitor. Alternatively the contents of the preview data may be printed on the printing paper with the printer. The contents of the image data are printed on the printing paper with the printer in the above embodiments. Alternatively the contents of the image data may be displayed on the screen of the monitor. Both the data may be output by any output means other than the monitor or the printer in order to enable the user to visually check the contents of the data.

In the above embodiment the image data transmitted from the computer system in the image transmitter apparatus to the receiver via the image data server consists of the gray scale bit map data of R G and B. The principle of the present invention is however not restricted to such image data but is applicable to any image data having the data structure that is independent of the control codes of the printer or the like.

It should be clearly understood that the above embodiments are only illustrative and not restrictive in any sense. The scope and spirit of the present invention are limited only by the terms of the appended claims.

