---

title: Restrictive reuse set management algorithm for equal grade of service on FL transmission
abstract: Systems and methodologies are described that facilitate restrictive reuse resource set management with equal grade of service on forward link transmission. User throughput over a resource reuse set can be estimated, and an iterative method can be employed to reallocate users with poor spectral efficiency to reuse sets exhibiting high throughput to optimize overall throughput in a wireless network or a portion thereof.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08032145&OS=08032145&RS=08032145
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 08032145
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050812
---
The present Application for Patent is a continuation in part of patent application Ser. No. 11 021 189 entitled RESTRICTIVE REUSE SET MANAGEMENT filed Dec. 22 2004 issued as U.S. Pat. No. 7 257 406 on Aug. 14 2007 and assigned to the assignee hereof and hereby expressly incorporated by reference herein which claims priority to patent application Ser. No. 60 590 549 entitled RESTRICTIVE REUSE SET MANAGEMENT filed Jul. 23 2004.

The following description relates generally to wireless communications and more particularly to improving mobile device throughput by dynamically reassigning mobile devices among orthogonal resource reuse sets.

Wireless networking systems have become a prevalent means by which a majority of people worldwide has come to communicate. Wireless communication devices have become smaller and more powerful in order to meet consumer needs and to improve portability and convenience. The increase in processing power in mobile devices such as cellular telephones has lead to an increase in demands on wireless network transmission systems. Such systems typically are not as easily updated as the cellular devices that communicate there over. As mobile device capabilities expand it can be difficult to maintain an older wireless network system in a manner that facilitates fully exploiting new and improved wireless device capabilities.

More particularly frequency division based techniques typically separate the spectrum into distinct channels by splitting it into uniform chunks of bandwidth for example division of the frequency band allocated for wireless cellular telephone communication can be split into 30 channels each of which can carry a voice conversation or with digital service carry digital data. Each channel can be assigned to only one user at a time. One commonly utilized variant is an orthogonal frequency division technique that effectively partitions the overall system bandwidth into multiple orthogonal subbands. These subbands are also referred to as tones carriers subcarriers bins and frequency channels. Each subband is associated with a subcarrier that can be modulated with data. With time division based techniques a band is split time wise into sequential time slices or time slots. Each user of a channel is provided with a time slice for transmitting and receiving information in a round robin manner. For example at any given time t a user is provided access to the channel for a short burst. Then access switches to another user who is provided with a short burst of time for transmitting and receiving information. The cycle of taking turns continues and eventually each user is provided with multiple transmission and reception bursts.

Code division based techniques typically transmit data over a number of frequencies available at any time in a range. In general data is digitized and spread over available bandwidth wherein multiple users can be overlaid on the channel and respective users can be assigned a unique sequence code. Users can transmit in the same wide band chunk of spectrum wherein each user s signal is spread over the entire bandwidth by its respective unique spreading code. This technique can provide for sharing wherein one or more users can concurrently transmit and receive. Such sharing can be achieved through spread spectrum digital modulation wherein a user s stream of bits is encoded and spread across a very wide channel in a pseudo random fashion. The receiver is designed to recognize the associated unique sequence code and undo the randomization in order to collect the bits for a particular user in a coherent manner.

A typical wireless communication network e.g. employing frequency time and code division techniques includes one or more base stations that provide a coverage area and one or more mobile e.g. wireless terminals that can transmit and receive data within the coverage area. A typical base station can simultaneously transmit multiple data streams for broadcast multicast and or unicast services wherein a data stream is a stream of data that can be of independent reception interest to a mobile terminal. A mobile terminal within the coverage area of that base station can be interested in receiving one more than one or all the data streams carried by the composite stream. Likewise a mobile terminal can transmit data to the base station or another mobile terminal. Such communication between base station and mobile terminal or between mobile terminals can be degraded due to channel variations and or interference power variations. For example the aforementioned variations can affect base station scheduling power control and or rate prediction for one or more mobile terminals.

Restrictive reuse is a technique designed to reduce inter cell interference in wireless communication systems. Restrictive reuse is a global planning scheme that takes into account the channel and interference measured by users of a wireless network. Restrictive reuse seeks to reuse orthogonal resources such as frequencies time codes beams spatial dimensions etc. for selected users based on channel quality associated therewith. In view of at least the above there exists a need in the art for a system and or methodology of improving wireless communication and orthogonal resource allocation to user devices in a wireless network environment to improve user device throughput.

The following presents a simplified summary of one or more embodiments in order to provide a basic understanding of such embodiments. This summary is not an extensive overview of all contemplated embodiments and is intended to neither identify key or critical elements of all embodiments nor delineate the scope of any or all embodiments. Its sole purpose is to present some concepts of one or more embodiments in a simplified form as a prelude to the more detailed description that is presented later.

In accordance with one or more embodiments and corresponding disclosure thereof various aspects are described in connection with improving user device throughput in a wireless network environment. According to one aspect a restrictive reuse set management algorithm for equal grade of service on forward link transmission is provided. The algorithm can improve the signal to interference and noise ration SINR of weak users in interference limited networks. Bandwidth allocated to each reuse set reuse set loading and the harmonic mean of the spectral efficiencies of all users sharing the reuse set can be employed to estimate the equal grade of service EGoS user throughput over the reuse set. An iterative algorithm can then be utilized to maximize sector throughput under the constraint of equal user throughput over all reuse sets.

In this document frequency sets will be used as an example of orthogonal resource sets to explain the restrictive reuse set management algorithm. Such algorithm is directly applicable to other embodiments of orthogonal resources such as time slots carriers codes spatial dimension frequency time interlaces and beam forming beams.

According to an aspect a method of optimizing signal transmission throughput in a wireless network can comprise approximating aggregated throughput of frequency reuse sets employing one or more EGoS schedulers to enforce fairness constraints for resource allocation to at least one user device within each resource reuse set and employing a restrictive reuse set management algorithm to enforce fairness constraints for resource allocation between resource reuse sets. The method can further comprise identifying user devices with poor connections due to low spectral efficiency and reassigning such devices to resource sets exhibiting high throughput to improve overall network throughput.

According to another aspect a system that facilitates optimizing user device throughput in a wireless network environment can comprise a restrictive reuse component that assesses spectral efficiency of user devices in a wireless network and enforces fairness constraints between resource reuse sets and one or more equal grade of service EGoS schedulers that enforce fairness constraints within the resource reuse sets. The system can further comprise an assignment component that facilitates generating initial assignments of devices to resource reuse sets as well as device reassignments to optimize throughput.

According to another aspect an apparatus that facilitates improving spectral efficiency of user devices in a wireless network can comprise means for enforcing fairness constraints related to resource allocation to user devices within a resource reuse set in a wireless network and means for enforcing fairness constraints related to resource allocation to one or more resource reuse sets in the wireless network. The apparatus can additionally comprise means for assigning user devices to a resource reuse set means for evaluating spectral efficiency of one or more user devices and means for identifying a resource reuse set in which a user device can experience improved spectral efficiency. The means for assigning can reassign a user device with low spectral efficiency to the identified resource reuse set to improve the spectral efficiency of the reassigned user device.

Yet another aspect provides for a computer readable medium having stored thereon computer executable instructions for distributing resources to one or more user devices associated with a resource reuse set according to an equal grade of service protocol and for managing resource reuse sets in a wireless network. The computer readable medium can additionally comprise instructions for evaluating spectral efficiency for at least one user device in the wireless network instructions for identifying a user device having a lowest spectral efficiency relative to all other user devices instructions for identifying an resource set with a highest overall throughput relative to other resource sets in the wireless network and instructions for reassigning the user device with lowest spectral efficiency to the resource set with highest overall throughput to improve spectral efficiency of the user device.

Still another aspect relates to a microprocessor that executes instructions for optimizing throughput in a wireless communication environment the instructions comprising assessing throughput for one or more user devices in communicating in at least a portion of a wireless network evaluating sector throughput for one or more orthogonal resource sets in the portion of the wireless network identifying a user device with relatively low throughput compared to other user devices and reassigning the user device from a first orthogonal resource set to an second orthogonal resource of higher throughput than the first orthogonal resource set.

According to another aspect a mobile device can comprise a component that receives an orthogonal resource set assignment and a component that establishes control over resources allocated by the orthogonal resource set assignment. The received assignment can be a reassignment to a higher throughput orthogonal resource set as set forth with regard to various embodiments described herein. The mobile device can be for example a cellular phone a smart phone a laptop a PDA a handheld communication device a handheld computing device etc.

To the accomplishment of the foregoing and related ends the one or more embodiments comprises the features hereinafter fully described and particularly pointed out in the claims. The following description and the annexed drawings set forth in detail certain illustrative aspects of the one or more embodiments. These aspects are indicative however of but a few of the various ways in which the principles of various embodiments may be employed and the described embodiments are intended to include all such aspects and their equivalents.

Various embodiments are now described with reference to the drawings wherein like reference numerals are used to refer to like elements throughout. In the following description for purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of one or more embodiments. It may be evident however that such embodiment s may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known structures and devices are shown in block diagram form in order to facilitate describing one or more embodiments.

As used in this application the terms component system and the like are intended to refer to a computer related entity either hardware a combination of hardware and software software or software in execution. For example a component may be but is not limited to being a process running on a processor a processor an object an executable a thread of execution a program and or a computer. One or more components may reside within a process and or thread of execution and a component may be localized on one computer and or distributed between two or more computers. Also these components can execute from various computer readable media having various data structures stored thereon. The components may communicate by way of local and or remote processes such as in accordance with a signal having one or more data packets e.g. data from one component interacting with another component in a local system distributed system and or across a network such as the Internet with other systems by way of the signal .

Furthermore various embodiments are described herein in connection with a subscriber station. A subscriber station can also be called a system a subscriber unit mobile station mobile remote station access point base station remote terminal access terminal user terminal user agent or user equipment. A subscriber station may be a cellular telephone a cordless telephone a Session Initiation Protocol SIP phone a wireless local loop WLL station a personal digital assistant PDA a handheld device having wireless connection capability or other processing device connected to a wireless modem.

Moreover various aspects or features described herein may be implemented as a method apparatus or article of manufacture using standard programming and or engineering techniques. The term article of manufacture as used herein is intended to encompass a computer program accessible from any computer readable device carrier or media. For example computer readable media can include but are not limited to magnetic storage devices e.g. hard disk floppy disk magnetic strips . . . optical disks e.g. compact disk CD digital versatile disk DVD . . . smart cards and flash memory devices e.g. card stick key drive . . . .

Referring now to the drawings illustrates a diagram that facilitates understanding of restrictive reuse of orthogonal resources such as frequencies bandwidth time slots carriers etc. and resource allocation with regard thereto. An aspect of resource reuse management is to intelligently deploy for example frequency for reuse by selected users based the users channel qualities. With regard to CDMA systems an active set can be defined for each user for handoff purposes. Sectors in the active set of a user usually contribute interference to the user s reception on the forward link FL while sector transmissions are interfered with by the user s transmission on a reverse link RL . By avoiding interference from various sectors in a user s active set reduced interference on both FL and RL can be achieved. Simulations and analysis have shown that the frequency reuse assignment algorithm based on a user s active set yields a 3.5 dB signal to interference and noise ratio SINR improvement with 25 bandwidth partial loading.

Schedulers in wireless networks can be modified according to various embodiments described herein to take advantage of the SINR improvement through orthogonal resource set reuse. When dealing with voice transmission traffic voice capacity is often limited by the SINR of the worst users in a network. Because a voice user will occupy some narrow portion of available bandwidth for a relatively long duration a capacity improvement can be achieved by assigning a static frequency reuse set to the user to improve the user SINR throughout the duration of a call. However in the case of data traffic conventional static reuse algorithms are not flexible enough to accommodate bursty data traffic e.g. traffic that is intermittent etc. and or traffic of varying fairness requirements. When a user transmits receives bursty traffic conventional systems require a tradeoff to be made among frequency sets that have different SINR available bandwidth and offered load e.g. from other users on a given reuse set . A scheduler can be further complicated if fairness criteria such as equal grade of service EGoS or proportional fairness need to be enforced for users of different reuse sets.

Diagram illustrates a simplified scenario in which communication bandwidth is divided into seven frequencies Uthrough U which can be assigned to various sectors over which the sectors can transmit and receive information. In the following exemplary resource reuse algorithm each sector is assigned a value of 0 1 or 2. The overall bandwidth available in a network is divided into 7 frequency sets with universal reuse reuse and reuse. Each reuse resource set can then be labeled with a 3 bit binary mask where a 1 at the iposition indicates that it is used by sectors of value i. For example 110 indicates a frequency reuse set that is used by sectors of values 0 and 1 but not sectors of value 2. The labels of frequency sets U U U U U U U are given by 111 110 101 011 100 010 001. However it will be appreciated that other labeling conventions are possible. For instance the value of the three bit mask can be employed to label the frequency set e.g. wherein 111 denotes frequency set 001 denotes frequency set etc. . With frequency planning users can avoid dominant interferers by using a or reuse frequency set.

In third generation networks the fairness among data users can be enforced by the scheduler. In a network where the forward link transmissions to users are time multiplexed the user with the highest scheduling metric is typically scheduled for transmission over the scheduling time slot. The scheduling metric is usually computed based not only on a fairness metric but also on channel desirability to take advantage of the multi user diversity MUD . For example let denote the throughput of user i over a specified window and let and denote the instant and average spectral efficiency of user I respectively. The fairness metric Fis given by 

Additionally wireless network can provide communication service to user devices in conjunction with a variety of multiple access techniques a combination thereof or any other suitable wireless communication protocol as will be appreciated by one skilled in the art. For example these techniques can be employed in conjunction with a code division multiple access CDMA system a frequency division multiple access FDMA system a time division multiple access TDMA system an orthogonal frequency division multiple access OFDMA system an interleaved IFDMA system a localized FDMA LFDMA system a spatial division multiple access SDMA system a quasi orthogonal multiple access system and so on. IFDMA is also called distributed FDMA and LFDMA is also called narrowband FDMA or classical FDMA. An OFDMA system utilizes orthogonal frequency division multiplexing OFDM . OFDM IFDMA and LFDMA effectively partition the overall system bandwidth into multiple K orthogonal frequency subbands. These subbands are also called tones subcarriers bins and so on. Each subband is associated with a respective subcarrier that can be modulated with data. OFDM transmits modulation symbols in the frequency domain on all or a subset of the K subbands. IFDMA transmits modulation symbols in the time domain on subbands that are uniformly distributed across the K subbands. LFDMA transmits modulation symbols in the time domain and typically on adjacent subbands.

For instance when a user device is assigned a reuse or reuse set such user device can experience a level of interference that is significantly lower than is experienced under an assignment to a universal reuse set. When employing an EGoS fairness criterion it can be desirable to equalize the SINR among all users devices by assigning weaker user devices to or reuse sets. User device throughput performance can also depend on bandwidth allocation to each user device within a reuse set. Accordingly one or more EGoS schedulers can be employed by restrictive reuse component to ensure fairness within a reuse set while restrictive reuse component can employ a set management algorithm to ensure fairness between reuse sets.

For the remainder of this document various embodiments of the restricted reuse component where the orthogonal resource sets are frequency sets will be explained for ease of understanding. However it is to be understood that resource sets are not limited to comprising only frequencies but rather can comprise frequency sets time slot sets frequency and time slot sets code sets orthogonal space division multiple access SDMA dimensions and carrier sets OFDMA subcarrier sets IFDMA subcarrier sets LFDMA subcarrier sets and or any other suitable resources.

EGoS component can assess user device throughput to determine an appropriate reuse set to which a given user device can be assigned in order to improve throughput for the user device which in turn improves overall efficiency of wireless network . For example let denote the throughput of user device i over a specified window and let and denote the instant and average spectral efficiency of user device I respectively. The fairness metric Fcan be given by 

Once a fairness metric has been evaluated for user devices restrictive reuse component can proceed to allocate user devices to appropriate frequency reuse sets in order to facilitate improving throughput. For example restrictive reuse component can determine a channel desirability metric for each user device in order to evaluate a scheduling metric to assist in reuse set assignment. The channel desirability metric is given by 

Restrictive reuse component comprises an EGoS component that enforces EGoS fairness constraints during frequency reuse set assignment. EGoS component further comprises one or more EGoS schedulers each of which is responsible for a single frequency reuse set and determines a fairness metric for user devices assigned thereto. EGoS component in conjunction with EGoS schedulers can determine an aggregated reuse set throughput approximation for fairness among user devices by evaluating a product of the harmonic mean of user device spectral efficiency and bandwidth of a given reuse set. A separate EGoS scheduler can be implemented over each reuse set and equal grade of service among users of the same reuse set can be achieved through the EGoS algorithm as described by 1 3 and 4 where is replaced by described below for reuse set m. Equal grade of service among different reuse sets can be achieved through the reuse set management algorithm as described herein.

For example given N active users and M non forbidden e.g. available reuse sets in a sector let denote the spectral efficiency of user n over reuse set m. Let Sdenote the set of users assigned to reuse set m where set denotes a 1 1 reuse set and let Bdenote the bandwidth of reuse set m. EGoS sector throughput can be approximated by 

Reuse set memberships can then be allocated to user devices by restrictive reuse component to maximize sector throughput under the constraint that a substantially similar user device throughput is to be achieved over all reuse sets. In this manner system can facilitate optimizing user device throughput in wireless network in order to provide a more robust communication experience for users of user devices while mitigating transmission costs and taxation of system resources when providing frequency allocation to such user devices .

According to an aspect restrictive reuse component in conjunction with one or more components comprised there by can employ a reuse set management algorithm to optimize user through put. For example restrictive reuse component can compute for n 1 . . . N and m 1 . . . M where n is the number of active user devices and m is the number of available reuse sets in a sector of wireless network . Restrictive reuse component can then initialize frequency reuse set Swith the set 1 . . . N and initialize other S s with empty sets. Restrictive reuse component in conjunction with assignment component can move the weakest M 1 connections e.g. connections with the smallest spectral efficiency from reuse set Sto the other M 1 reuse sets such that each reuse set has only one connection e.g. user device . Estimated user device throughput can be computed by Restrictive reuse component using the equation 

A series of assumptions can then be made to improve user device throughput. For example let mdenote the index of the reuse set with the lowest user device throughput . Let ndenote the index of the weakest user device in reuse set m. Assignment component can reassign user nto a suitable reuse set such that after the reassignment by assignment component the throughput of user device nexhibits a highest level of throughput improvement with regard to other user devices . User devices in reuse set mwill also exhibit higher throughput due to improved average channel quality and one less user device n to compete for the resources in frequency reuse set m.

In determining an appropriate reassignment for user device n restrictive reuse component can identify a reuse set min which user device ncan achieve a maximum throughput. If restrictive reuse component determines that mis the optimal reuse set then no reassignment need be made by assignment component . If mis determined not to be optimal then assignment component can reassign user device nto reuse set mto improve throughput. restrictive reuse component can then perform further iterations of the algorithm e.g. computing estimated user device throughput over each reuse set etc. until throughput for all user devices over all reuse sets is optimized.

Additionally user device throughputs in all reuse sets can be equalized by iteratively reassigning user devices from a low throughput reuse sets to high throughput reuse sets. Restrictive reuse component and can further improve device throughput by swapping user devices between reuse sets if the restrictive reuse component determines that throughput for both reuse sets with be improved rather than reassigning one user device from a low throughput reuse set to a high throughput reuse set in each iteration.

System can additionally comprise memory that is operatively coupled to restrictive reuse component and that stores information related to user device assignments reuse set availability user device throughput etc and any other suitable information related to improving communication signal throughput for one or more user devices. A processor can be operatively connected to restrictive reuse component and or memory to facilitate analysis of information related to user device throughput reuse set assignment and the like. It is to be appreciated that processor can be a processor dedicated to analyzing and or generating information received by restrictive reuse component a processor that controls one or more components of system and or a processor that both analyzes and generates information received by restrictive reuse component and controls one or more components of system .

Memory can additionally store protocols associated with generating user device assignments and or reassignments etc. such that system can employ stored protocols and or algorithms to achieve user device throughput optimization as described herein. It will be appreciated that the data store e.g. memories components described herein can be either volatile memory or nonvolatile memory or can include both volatile and nonvolatile memory. By way of illustration and not limitation nonvolatile memory can include read only memory ROM programmable ROM PROM electrically programmable ROM EPROM electrically erasable ROM EEPROM or flash memory. Volatile memory can include random access memory RAM which acts as external cache memory. By way of illustration and not limitation RAM is available in many forms such as synchronous RAM SRAM dynamic RAM DRAM synchronous DRAM SDRAM double data rate SDRAM DDR SDRAM enhanced SDRAM ESDRAM Synchlink DRAM SLDRAM and direct Rambus RAM DRRAM . The memory of the subject systems and methods is intended to comprise without being limited to these and any other suitable types of memory.

System can additionally comprises a memory and a processor as detailed above with regard to . Moreover an AI component can be operatively associated with assignment component and can make inferences regarding reassignment of user devices frequency reuse set availability throughput optimization etc. As used herein the term to infer or inference refers generally to the process of reasoning about or inferring states of the system environment and or user from a set of observations as captured via events and or data. Inference can be employed to identify a specific context or action or can generate a probability distribution over states for example. The inference can be probabilistic that is the computation of a probability distribution over states of interest based on a consideration of data and events. Inference can also refer to techniques employed for composing higher level events from a set of events and or data. Such inference results in the construction of new events or actions from a set of observed events and or stored event data whether or not the events are correlated in close temporal proximity and whether the events and data come from one or several event and data sources.

According to an example AI component can infer an appropriate frequency reuse set to which a user device can be assigned to improve throughput of the user device based at least in part on for instance reuse set availability information throughput associated with reuse sets and the like. According to this example it can be determined that a first reuse set has a low throughput as compared to one or more other reuse sets in a sector of wireless network . AI component in conjunction with processor and or memory can determine that reassignment of a given user device to a reuse set that exhibits better throughput can benefit all user devices . AI component can infer that a reassignment of the low throughput user device to a high throughput reuse set will provide better resource availability to the user device being reassigned as well as passively improving throughput for other user devices assigned to the low throughput reuse set because there will be one fewer device to compete for resources therein after reassignment. In such a case AI component can facilitate user device reassignment in the most efficient manner possible to mitigate network communication costs while improving user device communication throughput.

According to a related example AI component can determine that two user devices in two separate reuse sets are exhibiting poor throughput relative to other user devices. In this case AI component can infer that a swapping such user devices between reuse sets is most efficient. AI component can facilitate such a swap based on optimization inferences that doing so will improve throughput in both reuse sets. It will be appreciated that the foregoing examples are illustrative in nature and are not intended to limit the scope of inferences that can be made by the AI component or the manner in which the AI component makes such inferences.

Referring to methodologies relating to generating supplemental system resource assignments are illustrated. For example methodologies can relate to frequency reuse set management in an OFDM environment an OFDMA environment a CDMA environment a TDMA environment or any other suitable wireless environment. While for purposes of simplicity of explanation the methodologies are shown and described as a series of acts it is to be understood and appreciated that the methodologies are not limited by the order of acts as some acts may in accordance with one or more embodiments occur in different orders and or concurrently with other acts from that shown and described herein. For example those skilled in the art will understand and appreciate that a methodology could alternatively be represented as a series of interrelated states or events such as in a state diagram. Moreover not all illustrated acts may be required to implement a methodology in accordance with one or more embodiments.

At EGoS schedulers can be employed to ensure fairness constraints are adhered to such that all user devices in a given reuse set are provided substantially equal grades of service. At a restrictive reuse set management algorithm can be employed as detailed below with regard to . In this manner an EGoS algorithm can be employed to ensure optimization of user device throughput between users within a reuse set while a restrictive reuse set management algorithm can be utilized to facilitate ensuring throughput is optimized between reuse sets themselves.

Estimated user throughput over each reuse set can be determined at according to equation 8 assuming an independent EGoS scheduler is implemented over each set to ensure intra set fairness among user devices. Several assumptions can be made to facilitate estimation of user throughput over each reuse set at . For instance mcan denote the index of the reuse set with lowest user throughput . Additionally ncan denote the index of the weakest user e.g. the user device with lowest spectral efficiency in reuse set m. At a reuse set min which user ncan achieve the highest throughput can be identified. At user ncan be reassigned from reuse set Sto reuse set S. In the event that the original set mis the best reuse set for user device n then no reassignment need take place. Method can then revert to for further iterations of user device assessment and reassignment in order to facilitate continuously updating user device assignments in a dynamically changing wireless networking environment. Additionally user throughputs in all reuse sets are thus equalized by iteratively reassigning users from low throughput reuse sets to high throughput reuse sets.

At user device throughput over each reuse set can be estimated according to equation 8 where an independent EGoS scheduler is implemented over each set to ensure intra set fairness among user devices. For instance mcan denote the index of the reuse set with lowest user device throughput . Additionally ncan denote the index of the weakest user e.g. the user device with lowest spectral efficiency in reuse set m. At a reuse set min which user device n can achieve the highest throughput can be identified. Acts through can be reiterated for at least a second reuse set S such that Sis provides a best fit for the weakest user device of S while Sprovides a best fit for the weakest device of S. At user devices nfor reuse sets Sand Scan be exchanged between reassigned from reuse sets Sand S. Method can then revert to for further iterations of user device assessment and reassignment in order to facilitate continuously updating user device assignments in a dynamically changing wireless networking environment.

It will be appreciated that the restrictive reuse set management algorithms described with regard to can be based on long term channel quality measurements. Although short term fading can cause large variation in user device spectral efficiency over time the difference in a user s spectral efficiencies between two reuse sets can be a much slower random process when compared with short term fading. Additionally restrictive reuse set membership updating intervals can be set to an active set updating interval as in conventional CDMA systems in order to facilitate achieving the desired throughput optimization described herein.

Referring now to on a downlink at access point a transmit TX data processor receives formats codes interleaves and modulates or symbol maps traffic data and provides modulation symbols data symbols . An OFDM modulator receives and processes the data symbols and pilot symbols and provides a stream of OFDM symbols. An OFDM modulator multiplexes data and pilot symbols on the proper subbands provides a signal value of zero for each unused subband and obtains a set of N transmit symbols for the N subbands for each OFDM symbol period. Each transmit symbol may be a data symbol a pilot symbol or a signal value of zero. The pilot symbols may be sent continuously in each OFDM symbol period. Alternatively the pilot symbols may be time division multiplexed TDM frequency division multiplexed FDM or code division multiplexed CDM . OFDM modulator can transform each set of N transmit symbols to the time domain using an N point IFFT to obtain a transformed symbol that contains N time domain chips. OFDM modulator typically repeats a portion of each transformed symbol to obtain a corresponding OFDM symbol. The repeated portion is known as a cyclic prefix and is used to combat delay spread in the wireless channel.

A transmitter unit TMTR receives and converts the stream of OFDM symbols into one or more analog signals and further conditions e.g. amplifies filters and frequency upconverts the analog signals to generate a downlink signal suitable for transmission over the wireless channel. The downlink signal is then transmitted through an antenna to the terminals. At terminal an antenna receives the downlink signal and provides a received signal to a receiver unit RCVR . Receiver unit conditions e.g. filters amplifies and frequency downconverts the received signal and digitizes the conditioned signal to obtain samples. An OFDM demodulator removes the cyclic prefix appended to each OFDM symbol transforms each received transformed symbol to the frequency domain using an N point FFT obtains N received symbols for the N subbands for each OFDM symbol period and provides received pilot symbols to a processor for channel estimation. OFDM demodulator further receives a frequency response estimate for the downlink from processor performs data demodulation on the received data symbols to obtain data symbol estimates which are estimates of the transmitted data symbols and provides the data symbol estimates to an RX data processor which demodulates i.e. symbol demaps deinterleaves and decodes the data symbol estimates to recover the transmitted traffic data. The processing by OFDM demodulator and RX data processor is complementary to the processing by OFDM modulator and TX data processor respectively at access point .

On the uplink a TX data processor processes traffic data and provides data symbols. An OFDM modulator receives and multiplexes the data symbols with pilot symbols performs OFDM modulation and provides a stream of OFDM symbols. The pilot symbols may be transmitted on subbands that have been assigned to terminal for pilot transmission where the number of pilot subbands for the uplink may be the same or different from the number of pilot subbands for the downlink. A transmitter unit then receives and processes the stream of OFDM symbols to generate an uplink signal which is transmitted by the antenna to the access point .

At access point the uplink signal from terminal is received by the antenna and processed by a receiver unit to obtain samples. An OFDM demodulator then processes the samples and provides received pilot symbols and data symbol estimates for the uplink. An RX data processor processes the data symbol estimates to recover the traffic data transmitted by terminal . A processor performs channel estimation for each active terminal transmitting on the uplink. Multiple terminals may transmit pilot concurrently on the uplink on their respective assigned sets of pilot subbands where the pilot subband sets may be interlaced.

Processors and direct e.g. control coordinate manage etc. operation at access point and terminal respectively. Respective processors and can be associated with memory units not shown that store program codes and data. Processors and can also perform computations to derive frequency and impulse response estimates for the uplink and downlink respectively.

For a multiple access OFDM system e.g. an orthogonal frequency division multiple access OFDMA system multiple terminals may transmit concurrently on the uplink. For such a system the pilot subbands may be shared among different terminals. The channel estimation techniques may be used in cases where the pilot subbands for each terminal span the entire operating band possibly except for the band edges . Such a pilot subband structure would be desirable to obtain frequency diversity for each terminal. The techniques described herein may be implemented by various means. For example these techniques may be implemented in hardware software or a combination thereof. For a hardware implementation the processing units used for channel estimation may be implemented within one or more application specific integrated circuits ASICs digital signal processors DSPs digital signal processing devices DSPDs programmable logic devices PLDs field programmable gate arrays FPGAs processors controllers micro controllers microprocessors other electronic units designed to perform the functions described herein or a combination thereof. With software implementation can be through modules e.g. procedures functions and so on that perform the functions described herein. The software codes may be stored in memory unit and executed by the processors and .

What has been described above includes examples of one or more embodiments. It is of course not possible to describe every conceivable combination of components or methodologies for purposes of describing the aforementioned embodiments but one of ordinary skill in the art may recognize that many further combinations and permutations of various embodiments are possible. Accordingly the described embodiments are intended to embrace all such alterations modifications and variations that fall within the spirit and scope of the appended claims. Furthermore to the extent that the term includes is used in either the detailed description or the claims such term is intended to be inclusive in a manner similar to the term comprising as comprising is interpreted when employed as a transitional word in a claim.

