---

title: Method and system for authentication in a computer network
abstract: Method and system for authentication in a computer network is provided. A first message from a client to a server is transmitted, where the first message includes erroneous user information. In response to the first message, a second message is transmitted from the server to the client, where the second message includes an error message and a nonce. The client transmits a third message to the server in response to the second message, where the third message includes non-erroneous user information and the nonce. The server then provides authentication in response to the client's third message.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09088561&OS=09088561&RS=09088561
owner: CA, Inc.
number: 09088561
owner_city: New York
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050228
---
This application is a Continuation of U.S. Ser. No. 10 849 317 filed May 19 2004 now abandoned which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety herein.

The present disclosure relates generally security and more particularly to a method and system for authentication in a computer network.

Web services are automated resources that can be accessed by the Internet and provide a way for computers to communicate with one another. Web services use Extensible Markup Language XML to transmit data. XML is a human readable language that is used for tagging the data that is used by web services.

A computer system using web services can use a Universal Discovery Description and Integration UDDI protocol. Computer system s as referred to herein may include s individual computers servers computing resources and or networks etc. UDDI is a web based globally distributed directory that exposes information about service providers service implementations and service metadata. UDDI is similar to a phone book s yellow pages because it allows service providers such as businesses to advertise the services that they offer and allows service consumers to discover services that meet their needs.

The UDDI standard is fundamental to the newly emerging network of web services. Security efforts can be undertaken to prevent intruders from being able to access critical data that is exposed by UDDI. One way to attempt to provide security occurs at the network layer and utilizes a single username and a password combination from a user in order to gain access to critical data. However the UDDI standard does not specify how the publication of data into a UDDI repository is to be done in a secure manner. This leaves a major security hole in the UDDI standard.

However such authentication mechanisms can be susceptible to attack and allow unauthorized users to take advantage of system vulnerabilities. For example an unauthorized user such as a hacker would potentially need only one username and one password to gain access to critical data. Password sniffers can easily allow unauthorized users to collect these usernames and passwords thereby compromising system security.

Accordingly it would be beneficial to provide a reliable and effective authentication mechanism to ensure that the UDDI protocol can be used securely.

A method of authentication in a computer network includes transmitting a first message from a client to a server the first message comprising at least one of erroneous and incomplete user information transmitting a second message from the server to the client the second message comprising an error message and a nonce transmitting a third message from the client to the server the third message comprising non erroneous and complete user information and the nonce and providing authentication in response to the third message.

A system for authentication in a computer network comprises a system for transmitting a first message from a client to a server the first message comprising at least one of erroneous and incomplete user information a system for transmitting a second message from the server to the client in response to the first message the second message comprising an error message and a nonce a system for transmitting a third message from the client to the server in response to the second message the third message comprising non erroneous and complete user information and the nonce and a system for transmitting authentication information from the server to the client in response to the third message.

A computer readable storage medium including computer executable code for authentication in a computer network comprises code for transmitting a first message from a client to a server the first message comprising at least one of erroneous and incomplete user information code for transmitting a second message from the server to the client in response to the first message the second message comprising an error message and a nonce code for transmitting a third message from the client to the server in response to the second message the third message comprising non erroneous and complete user information and the nonce and code for providing authentication in response to the third message.

The present disclosure provides tools in the form of methodologies apparatuses and systems for authentication in a computer network. The tools may be embodied in one or more computer programs stored on a computer readable medium or program storage device and or transmitted via a computer network or other transmission medium including a wireless transmission system.

The following exemplary embodiments are set forth to aid in an understanding of the subject matter of the present disclosure but are not intended and should not be construed to limit in any way the claims which follow thereafter. Therefore while specific terminology is employed for the sake of clarity in describing some exemplary embodiments the present disclosure is not intended to be limited to the specific terminology so selected and it is to be understood that each specific element includes all technical equivalents which operate in a similar manner.

The computer system can include a central processing unit CPU program and data storage devices a printer interface a display unit a LAN local area network data transmission controller a LAN interface a network controller an internal bus and one or more input devices for example a keyboard mouse etc. . As shown the system may be connected to a database via a link .

The specific embodiments described herein are illustrative and many variations can be introduced on these embodiments without departing from the spirit of the disclosure or from the scope of the appended claims. Elements and or features of different illustrative embodiments may be combined with each other and or substituted for each other within the scope of this disclosure and appended claims.

According to an embodiment of the present disclosure a challenge response authentication mechanism is utilized where a user can prove their identity before accessing a computer network such as for example a UDDI repository. are a schematic diagram and a flow chart illustrating the challenge response authentication mechanism according to an embodiment of the present disclosure.

According to this embodiment a user of client sends a request to server for an authentication token . In order to utilize the challenge response techniques of the present disclosure the request sent by the user is incomplete or erroneous. For example the request can contain an incomplete incorrect or missing password username etc. Step S . The request can be in the form of a first call to the get authToken API. In response to this incomplete incorrect or missing information server returns an error message or challenge asking client for further verification information and containing a nonce Step S . A nonce is random data e.g. random numbers indicia etc. generated by nonce generator . Nonce generator is capable of generating unique data for each request received by server . Upon receiving the error message or challenge from server client responds by encrypting nonce with password and sending authentication information including username and encrypted nonce response Step S . The authentication information may be sent to server securely. For example the username and or encrypted nonce may be securely sent from client to server in order to prevent tampering by an unauthorized user. For example the client may sign the random challenge the nonce using a Public Key Infrastructure PKI private key and include the signed challenge in a credential field of a second call to get authToken API with correct username. Upon receiving the authentication information from client server transmits an authentication token that contains authentication information to client Step S .

According to embodiments of the present disclosure the system an method utilize standard UDDI API calls adding the security of a challenge response protocol to provide a useful level of additional security over that provided by the UDDI standard alone. The system and method according to the present embodiments are compatible with any protocol being used in a computer system. For example if a client that does not support the protocol being used sends an initial request to server e.g. missing a username or password then server will send back an error message including a nonce. The client can respond to the error message in a normal manner by sending a request that includes the missing information e.g. the missing username or password and completely ignore this nonce included in the error message. The present system and method are thus backward compatible.

Numerous additional modifications and variations of the present disclosure are possible in view of the above teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the present disclosure may be practiced other than as specifically described herein.

