---

title: Automatic quality of service class management
abstract: To enhance quality of service management in support of application sessions running on top of bearer services, according to the present invention it is suggested to, firstly, execute a bearer service analysis in support of automatic quality of service class management. Heretofore, a bearer service carrying packet switched service traffic in support of an application session is analyzed for identification of different types of services by the application session. Related analysis information derived at an analysis unit  is then forwarded to a quality of service management unit , which is adapted to automatic quality of service class management. In particular, the quality of service management unit  determines and manages a quality of service class according to the identified quality of service class as forwarded by the bearer service analysis unit 
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07764623&OS=07764623&RS=07764623
owner: Telefonaktiebolaget L M Ericsson (PUBL)
number: 07764623
owner_city: Stockholm
owner_country: SE
publication_date: 20050201
---
The present invention relates to automatic quality of service class management and in particular to automatic quality of service class management methods and networking nodes operated in support of an application running on top of a bearer service.

In XP 002325835 there is described a 3GPP technical specification of group services and system aspects in particular an end to end quality of service concept and architecture. Also there are described IP level mechanisms necessary in providing end to end quality of service involving GPRS networks including possible interaction between the IP level and the GPRS level as well as the application level and the IP level.

Also in XP 002325836 there is described an operation of a charging gateway and a related PDP context information with respect to session management parameters. Here a quality of service profile information element includes quality of service negotiated between the mobile station and a serving data support node at PDP context activation or a new quality of service QoS negotiated in the PDP context modification procedure.

Further in XP 002325837 there is described a 3GPP technical specification of architectural enhancements for end to end quality of service operation. In particular there is described a concept of an admission administrative domain wherein the admission administrative domain defines a set of bearer devices and gateway whose resources and routes are managed.

Recently the variety of application sessions to be operated on top of a wireless bearer has significantly increased. Typical examples are video clips SMS short message services MMS multi media message services ring tone downloads WAP services wireless WEB services point to point multimedia services etc.

According to the different type of application sessions usually different types of bearer services will be initiated either in a core network or a wireless access network. Further different application services require different quality of service classes for the underlying bearer services specifying maximum bit rate delivery order maximum service data unit size service data unit format information service data unit error ratio bit error ratio delivery of erroneous service data units transfer delay guaranteed bit rate traffic handling priority allocation retention priority source statistics descriptor signaling indication to name just some of bearer service attributes specified according to quality of service classes.

However with existing solutions for identifying quality of service class for a specific application session in view of available bearer services a problem is that the application session running in the end terminal needs to request via an application programming interface from the bearer service a certain quality of service class. This requires that the application session as such needs to be updated regarding functionality for quality of service class specification.

Further the conventional technology requires that the application session is aware of available quality of service class definitions on the bearer service level which quality of service class definitions may differ and vary according to different standardizations.

In view of the above the object of the present invention is to enhance quality of service management in support of application sessions running on top of bearer services.

According to the present invention this object is achieved firstly by a method of bearer service analysis in support of automatic quality of service class management. According to this method a bearer service carrying packet switched service traffic in support of an application session is analyzed for identification of at least one type of service used for the application session. Then the result of bearer service analysis is forwarded to a networking unit adapted to automatic quality of service class management according to the identified at least one least one type of service.

Also according to the present invention the analysis of bearer services is achieved by applying a filtering approach in particular with respect to characteristics of protocols used for exchange of packet switched service traffic. Preferably such characteristics may identify address ranges port number ranges and or protocol types.

According to the present invention an analysis of bearer service may be based on reuse of information determined for flexible bearer service charges. A preferred embodiment of the present invention is particularly efficient in that only information already derived for charging of networking functionality may be reused for automatic quality of service charging.

An important advantage of the present invention is that through the analysis of the bearer service carrying the packet switched traffic in support of an application session it is possible to avoid involvement of the application session itself in the determination of type of service and related necessary quality of service classes.

In other words the application session itself may just initiate necessary traffic via bearer service in view of application requirements without being aware firstly of related quality of service class requirements and secondly available bearer services at all. It is through forwarding of the result of the bearer analysis to the networking unit which handles quality of service class that management of the quality of service class is done in an automatic manner according to bearer service traffic rated in view of the application sessions.

Further preferred embodiments of the present invention relate to the method of bearer service analysis.

A further preferred embodiment of the present invention with respect to bearer service analysis relies on identification of characteristics of actual service traffic. Such characteristics may preferably relate to e.g. average length of a service message and or timing lapsing between two service messages as characteristics identifying quality of service class requirements.

A further preferred embodiment of the present invention regarding analysis of bearer service requests a highest quality of service class at the beginning of bearer service delivery which is of particular advantage in that during wrap up of a bearer service delivery situation an application session remains inoperative due to lack of sufficient bearer service capacity which is strictly avoided.

Further to the aspect of bearer analysis the object outlined above is achieved by a method of automatic quality of service class management in support of an application session running on top of a bearer service carrying packet switched traffic. Here it is suggested that an indication of at least one type of service used by an application session is achieved at a networking node managing the quality of service class. Then a quality of service class is determined according to at least one type of service used by the application session and then a quality of service class is requested for the bearer service according to the determined quality of service class.

Still further for management of quality of service classes it is suggested to keep track of quality of service classes requested according to type of service and or to notify a flexible bearer charging unit adapted to change of bearer service delivery on the change of quality of service class. The first is beneficial in that a repeated requesting of quality of service classes not supported by the bearer network may be avoided. The latter is beneficial in that always appropriate charging will be achieved also in view of a change of quality of service class during ongoing bearer service delivery.

In other words according to the present invention the setting of the quality of service class is done by a method of automatic quality service class management operated in a network and not by an application running at a user equipment. Therefore the inventive approach allows for automatic selection of quality of service classes without involvement of user equipment and related application sessions running thereat to improve portability and network independency of application functionality at the user and equipment.

Further preferred embodiments of the present invention are related to automatic quality of service management within the network providing the services.

Here according to a preferred embodiment it is suggested to determine a quality of service class from the at least one type of service ab initio for start of an application session.

Alternatively according to a second preferred embodiment of this aspect one could consider an ongoing application session and related bearer services. Assuming that bearer service level of the network is adapted to select a quality of service on its own according to the present invention it is suggested to compare such a bearer level initiating quality of service class with a quality of service class determined according to a type of service. Should such comparison indicate a deviation between the two different values for the quality of service class it is then suggested to request a quality of service class change of the bearer service initiated by the networking node managing the quality of service class.

Here it should be noted that generally according to the present invention the bearer service analysis and the quality of service class may either be operated in different networking nodes operating on a stand alone basis or alternatively be combined to a single networking node handling both aspects of bearer service handling and quality of service class management which would typically be a gateway networking node.

Preferably for the management of the quality of service class according to the present invention it is suggested to reference a mapping table establishing a relation between at least one type of service and a related quality of service class. Optionally such a pre storage of quality of service class relating information may also be a quality of service class setting range defining an allowable range of quality of service class with respect to a single application a class of applications etc. This allows to consider a throughput of application traffic for the bearer service network as a whole to avoid a bottleneck due to assignment of a too high quality of service class for a single application session.

Yet another preferred embodiment of quality of service class management according to the present invention is related to involvement of an application user during quality of service class management here as option and as specific part of end user satisfaction enhancement.

According to another preferred embodiment of the present invention there is provided a computer program product directly loadable into the internal memory of a networking node adapted to bearer service analysis in support of automatic quality of service class management comprising software code portions for performing the inventive bearer service analysis process when the product is run on a processor of a networking node adapted to bearer service analysis.

Also according to another preferred embodiment of the present invention there is provided a computer program product directly loadable into the internal memory of a networking node adapted to automatic quality of service class management in support of an application session running on top of a bearer service carrying packet switched traffic comprising software code portions for performing the inventive quality of service class management process when the product is run on a processor of the networking node adapted to automatic quality of service class management.

Therefore the present invention is also provided to achieve an implementation of the inventive method steps on computer or processor systems. In conclusion such implementation leads to the provision of computer program products for use with a computer system or more specifically a processor comprised in e.g. an apparatus for automatic quality of service class management.

This programs defining the functions of the present invention can be delivered to a computer processor in many forms including but not limited to information permanently stored on non writable storage media e.g. read only memory devices such as ROM or CD ROM discs readable by processors or computer I O attachments information stored on writable storage media i.e. floppy discs and hard drives or information convey to a computer processor through communication media such as network and or Internet and or telephone networks via modems or other interface devices. It should be understood that such media when carrying processor readable instructions implementing the inventive concept represent alternate embodiments of the present invention.

Thus according to the present invention it is an important advantage that a user of an application does need to configure a quality of service class for an application session he is initiating. Also application sessions running on a user equipment do not need to be updated for setting of quality of service classes and further the user equipment does not need to be involved and to be provided with information about quality of service class definition which is used in the network running the bearer services.

In the following the best mode of the present invention as well as preferred embodiments thereof will be described with reference to the drawing. Insofar as different aspects concepts and features of the present invention are described either on the level of function or structure it should be noted that any such functionality according to the present invention may be realized either in software hardware and or a combination thereof.

As will be outlined in more detail in the following the present invention relates to the aspects of bearer service analysis and on the basis thereof to quality of service class management in support of application sessions running on top of a bearer service. Heretofore a first networking node is related to the aspect of bearer service analysis and a second networking node is related to the aspect of quality of service class management. Either both networking nodes are operated independently as stand alone networking nodes or integrated into one networking unit operated for delivery of bearer services.

As shown in the networking node adapted to bearer service analysis comprises a bearer service analysis unit adapted to analyze a bearer service carrying packet switched service traffic in support an application session for identification of at least one type of service used via the application session and an interface unit adapted to forward a result of bearer service analysis to a networking unit adapted to automatic quality of service class management according to the identified at least one type of service. Here it should be noted that according to the present invention the different structure of the units of the networking node may be implemented using commercially available other components and processors through application of special purpose hardware or through development of appropriate computer program products.

As shown in operatively the bearer service analysis unit executes a step S to analyze a bearer service carrying packet switched traffic for identification of a type of service. The basis thereof the interface unit executes a step S to forward the bearer service analysis result to a quality of service class management unit to be explained in more detail in the following.

In the step S the bearer service analysis unit may analyze the bearer service by filtering characteristics of protocols used for exchange of packet switched service traffic which e.g. can be related to addresses of data packets port number of data packets and or protocol types. Here typical examples of distinguishing between different contents and service types e.g. implemented in a gateway GGSM are the identification of different services based on the following filtering criteria 

As alternative to the above or in combination therewith the step of analyzing a bearer service carrying packet switched service S may comprise a reuse of information determined for flexible bearer service charging.

Here this approach of the present invention relates to concepts of flexible bearer charging where three different types of possible charging are applied in a packet switched bearer network 

From the above it becomes clear that in view of the different prizing models all these prizing models imply the derivation of information that also serves to identify the type of service which may then be forwarded to a networking node handling management of quality of service class as will be explained in more detail in the following.

Further to the above operatively the bearer service analysis unit may also analyze the bearer service in a step S in view of identifying characteristics of the packet switched service traffic. This implies that the bearer service analysis unit identifies e.g. the average length of a service message and or timing lapsing between two service messages etc. which may then form the basis for identifying the type of service. Typically the length of a service message may be related to the amount of data transferred between the different application end points and timing lapsing between two service messages may be used to characterize burstiness of application related traffic.

In the following further aspects of the present invention being related to quality of service class management will be illustrated with respect to .

As shown in the networking node adapted to automatic quality of service class management at least comprises an interface unit a quality of service class assignment unit and a quality of service class controlling unit . Optionally the networking node adapted to automatic quality of service class management may also comprise a quality of service class comparison unit a quality of service class evaluation unit and a quality of service class memory unit .

As shown in in a step S the interface unit shown in evaluates the receipt of an indication of at least one type of service used by an application session. This receipt is in correlation to the forwarding of a related indication of type of service by the networking node adapted to bearer service analysis as outlined above with respect to . Further should clarification of a type of service be received in the step S the further operation of the networking node will be delayed until indication of such a receipt.

As shown in operatively the quality of service class assignment unit will execute a step S to assign a quality of service class according to at least the type of services by the application session.

As shown in operatively the quality of service class controlling unit will execute a step S for requesting a quality of service class determined in step S from the bearer service level.

While above quality of service classes have been referred to in general a typical example of such quality of service classes could be 

It should be noted that one typical field of application of the quality of service classes listed above is mobile communication e.g. according to UMTS. Further it is important to keep in mind that a quality of service class is an end to end application characteristic between two communicating applications which means that quality of service classes needs to be negotiated and then mapped to bearer service attributes. One example of the mapping of a quality of service class determined on a quality of service class management level onto attributes on the bearer service level like maximum bit rate delivery order maximum service data unit SDU size service data unit SDU format information service data unit SDU error ratio residual bit error ratio delivery of erroneous service data units transfer delay guaranteed bit rate traffic handling priority allocation retention priority source statistics descriptor signaling indication etc. could be as follows 

In the following further steps of quality of service class determination according to the present invention will be explained. Here it is to be noted that these steps are to be optional and not mandatory during execution of the quality of service class management according to the present invention.

As shown in a first such optional step S relates to the initiation of the overall quality of service class management process and is executed by the quality of service class controlling unit . Here according to the present invention a quality of service class controlling unit assigns the highest quality of service class at the very beginning of quality of service class management to ensure appropriate initiation of bearer services in support of related application sessions.

A further optional aspect of quality of service class management according to the present invention is related to interaction between the higher networking levels handling quality of service classes and the bearer service level. While existing communication networks have installed mechanisms that allow for quality of service class determination of the bearer service level these quality of service classes are as has been explained above usually derived through interaction with the application sessions. However according to the present invention there is proposed to have an interaction between the bearer service level and the upper networking levels identifying a quality of service class in view of the analyzed type of service. Here in a step S the quality of service class comparison unit will compare the quality of service class derived from the type of service with the quality of service class determined on the bearer level. Should any deviation occur then the quality of service class controlling unit will execute the step S to request a quality of service class change at the bearer service level. Otherwise the quality of service class controlling unit will run idle so that no request for quality of service class change will be forwarded to the bearer service level.

Further the determination of a quality of service class according to the type of quality service in step S may be determined by referencing a mapping table establishing a relation between the at least one type of service and a quality of service i.e. a related data base. The same data base or a different data base may also be used for storing an allowable range of quality of service classes on the bearer level which will also be referred to as quality of service class setting range in the following.

As shown in the storage of a quality of service class setting range forms the prerequisite of the execution of a step S preceding the submission of a request to a quality of service class change request to the bearer service level. In this step S operatively executed by the quality of service class controlling unit it is determined whether a quality of service class determined on the upper networking layer according to the type of service is allowable in view of the predetermined quality of service class setting range. If this is not the case the procedure shown in will branch back to step S to await indication of a new type of service for subsequent determination of the quality of service class. Otherwise the request for the quality of service class change is allowable and will be forwarded to the bearer service level according to step S.

As shown in optionally the quality of service class controlling unit will execute a step S to forward the determined quality of service class quality of service class change to a flexible charging unit which determines charges for delivered bearer services. This allows to always accurately determine charges irrespective of changes in quality of service charges in real time accuracy.

As shown in optionally the quality of service class controlling unit will store determined quality of service classes in the quality of service class memory unit . This is particularly beneficial when a request for a quality of service class change has been rejected e.g. as lying outside a predetermined quality of service class setting range. Then a reiterated resource consuming request of a same quality of service charge may be avoided for sake of networking resources. For the same reason in the quality of service class memory unit also a notification of rejection of a request for quality of service class forwarded to the quality of service class management unit from the level of the bearer services may be stored therein.

Yet another option for the execution of the present invention would be to involve end equipment e.g. a user terminal during settlement of a quality of service class. Here optionally a request for change of quality of service class may be forwarded to an end terminal using the bearer service and running an application for which the request for change of quality service is initiated. Then the request for change of quality of service class forwarded from the quality of service class management unit to the end terminal may be compared with the quality of service class setting range which may be pre stored at the end terminal for approval of the requested change of quality of service class. Alternatively or in combination the approval of the request for change of quality of service class may be achieved at the end terminal by prompting an end terminal user accordingly. Then either after approval of the change of quality of service class the quality of service management unit will be notified accordingly or otherwise a notification of rejection of the request of change of quality of service class will be returned from the end terminal to the quality of service class management unit.

In the following an application of the inventive quality of service management concepts outlined so far with respect to will be explained with respect to an application scenario shown in .

As shown in one application scenario relates to the interaction between an application terminal and a remote terminal . The application terminal contains a unit running the application a connection termination unit and a bearer service managing unit . Similarly the remote terminal server contains an application unit a connection termination unit and a bearer transport unit .

As shown in the application terminal and the remote terminal server are therefore embodied to allow for an end to end flow of application data. One typical scenario would be the interaction between a wireline communication network wherein the remote terminal server is operated in a wireless application terminal e.g. in the form of a mobile telephone a PDA a laptop etc.

As shown in heretofore the remote terminal server is connected on a bearer transport level to a router . A router contains a routing device which receives transport data from the remote terminal server and forwards it to a bearer transport channel . The bearer transport unit is linking the router with a gateway provided for coupling the remote terminal server domain network with the application terminal wireless network domain.

As shown in for the related application scenario the bearer transport channel is connected to a routing device of the gateway . The routing device is interacting with a flexible charging unit determining charges for bearer service. Further the routing device is interworking with the quality of service management unit incorporated into the gateway . The quality of service management unit interrogates a mapping table and a quality of service setting range from a data base operated in combination with the gateway . Further the routing device is interacting with a bearer service manager operated in the gateway for exchange of data between the gateway and the application terminal in the application terminal networking domain. The bearer service analysis unit according to the present invention is as one example shown as incorporated in the routing device of the present invention for analysis of bearer service characteristics. Here it should be noted that the bearer service analysis unit may also be operated separately from the routing device or as stand alone unit outside the gateway as outlined above.

As shown in the bearer service managing unit is cooperating with a bearer service managing unit of a switching node radio access unit operated in the application terminal networking domain. The bearer service managing unit of the switching node radio access node is cooperating with a bearer service managing unit for exchange of data on the bearer service level.

From the above it becomes clear that according to the present invention it is suggested to incorporate the bearer service analysis unit and any quality of service management unit into the quality of service framework e.g. in the gateway . The end to end quality of service architecture according to the present invention is designed to meet a wide range of application quality of service requirements and to provide efficient network utilization in particular via the radio interface.

Further the application layer relies on quality of service functionalities in different parts of the end to end path. The services executed between the quality of service management unit and the bearer service analysis unit reflect the characteristics parameters of higher layer application functionalities. The present invention uses control plane functions such as admission control and negotiation in order to distribute access to the shared set of resources in a fair and efficient manner between application end points. It ensures rejection of new service requests in periods of congestion in order not to excessively degrade the quality of service characteristics of existing bearer services in view of ongoing applications.

As shown in according to the application scenarios shown in the termination in the remote terminal server is an IP termination interacting with an L2 transport channel . At the router the routing device is an IP routing device supporting DiffServ functions . The IP routing device cooperates with a L2 transport channel for exchange of application data with a gateway which in the application scenario shown in is a gateway GPRS support node GGSN.

As shown in the gateway GPRS support node GGSN comprises the routing device being adapted to the IP protocol. The IP routing device has an IPBS manager executing the functionality of the quality of service management unit shown previously with respect to further the bearer analysis unit which in addition to the bearer analysis functionality also has a flexible charging functionality. The IP routing device also comprises a DiffServ function unit in support of related IP functionality.

As shown in the IP routing device interacts with a GPRS CDMA managing unit at instantiation of the bearer service management unit shown in . The GPRS CDMA management unit establishes a PDB context with a related GPRS CDMA managing unit of the switching node radio access which according to the application example shown in is a serving GPRS support node SGSN. The GPRS CDMA managing unit of the supporting GPRS support node SGSN establishes a PDB context with a GPRS CDMA managing unit of the application terminal via a UTRAN BSS networking unit . Here data exchange between the supporting GPRS support node SGSN and the gateway GPRS support node is executed via GnP and further the data exchange between the supporting GPRS support node SGSN and the UTRAN BSS networking node is achieved via IuPS or Gp and further the data exchange between the UTRAN BSS networking node and the GPRS CDMA managing unit of the application terminal is achieved via Uu Um. As shown in the IP termination unit of the application terminal also comprises an IP managing unit for handling of quality of service management related issues at the application terminal side.

Therefore the application scenario shown in relates to wireless IP networks and to QoS development towards fixed IP networks for set up of a 3GPP QoS architecture. For the application scenario shown in here again application entities require a determination of quality of service enabled bearer services between them. Therefore for the application session it must be decided what media streams will be used e.g. voice and video and what performance requirements these media streams put on the quality of service enabled bearer services. These requirements are then consecutively fulfilled and mapped onto quality of service parameters of the available bearer services.

Also as shown in quality of service management according to the present invention is executed across different quality of service enabled networking domains interworking with each other via a gateway node . The gateway GPRS supporting node GGSN shown as an example in provides interworking functionality between the WCDMA GPRS quality of service mechanisms and the IP QoS mechanisms in an automized manner without involvement of the end applications. As outlined previously interworking at the gateway GPRS supporting node GGSN includes classification mapping marking remarking and filtering for appropriate bearer service delivery. In addition end to end application signaling may include information on successful establishment of local access bearer at each side.

For the application scenario shown in the ideas underlying the present invention have been implemented by using information available at the gateway GPRS support node GGSN for selection of a quality of service class in automized manner.

As shown in the application terminal is not adapted to request a quality of service class from the IPBS managing unit . Further a charging unit provided in the gateway GPRS supporting node and a bearer service analysis unit inform the IPBS managers of the gateway GPRS supporting node GGSN about an identified bearer service characteristic and related type of service. According to the present invention it is then suggested that the IPBS manager of the gateway GPRS support node GGSN interacts with the GPRS CDMA managing unit to request from the WCDMA GPRS BS managing unit a quality of service change. Alternatively the IPBS managing unit interacts with the IPBS managing unit of the application terminal for confirmation of a quality of service of change request.

Here according to the present invention it is suggested to use the flexible bearer charging which is available in the gateway GPRS support node . The reason for this is that already the flexible bearer charging function examines the bearer service and performs a packet identification and service classification. Packet inspection means that the IP address the UDP TCP port and the high layer protocols which are used in the bearer connections are evaluated in the analysis flexible charging unit shown in . This information is then used to identify the bearer service which is performed via the respective bearer which information is used for charging the user dependent on the requested bearer service.

According to the present invention it is suggested to use this information which is already derived for the purpose of flexible bearer charging to select a quality of service class in the IPBS manager . A gateway GPRS support node GGSN requests from the supporting GPRS support node SGSN a change of quality of service class in dependency of the used bearer service.

A possible scenario would be that a user connects his application terminal e.g. a notebook via GPRS to the Internet. By default the lowest quality of service class or the highest quality of service class could be used at the beginning. Then the user would start to download a file and a packet inspection mechanism in the gateway GPRS support node would identify the protocol TCP and ftp as used protocols. In this case the quality of service class would be maintained on a low level. After the download the user would then start e.g. a session initiated protocol SIP telephone session. Here the packet inspection mechanism in the analysis flexible charging unit would identify UDP and SIP as used protocols and would request from the supporting GPRS support node SGSN to assign a higher quality of service class. The charging would be adapted accordingly.

In more detail for the application scenario shown in it is suggested to reuse information of flexible bearer charging. The flexible bearer charging would filter certain parameters like protocol type etc. of the IP connection and use a mapping table to determine a certain quality of service class. Then the flexible bearer charging executed in the analysis flexible charging unit would trigger a request from the IPBS manager to the GPRS CDMA managing unit to adapt the quality of service class accordingly. This could imply a comparison of quality of service classes and a related amendment if they differed.

As alternative the analysis flexible charging unit could as well be enhanced in a way that besides protocol properties like IP addresses port numbers protocol types also traffic characteristics like average message length duration between two messages etc. are taken into account for selecting a certain quality of service class. This implies that at the beginning the highest quality of service class would be chosen to allow for reliable measurement. A mapping table maintained at the quality of service class memory shown in would allow to determine which quality of service class corresponds to which measured traffic characteristics.

Then the analysis flexible charging unit would initiate request from the IPBS manager to compare the determined quality of service class with the quality of service class operated at the bearer service level and to manage appropriate amendment thereof should they differ.

Besides the usage of the flexible bearer charging and the usage of flexible characteristics a further aspect relates to the operation of the IPBS managing unit in the gateway GPRS support node .

Here the IPBS managing unit in the gateway GPRS support node could keep track of end to end quality service classes of ongoing application connections. As outlined above the flexible bearer charging unit of the traffic characteristic evaluation could request from the IPBS managing unit information about the quality of service class of an ongoing IP connection and further eventually request a change of a quality of service class.

As outlined above according to the present invention a user does not need to configure a quality of service class on the application level. Further the applications running at a user end equipment do not need to be updated for setting of quality of service classes. According to the present invention the communication system automatically selects a correct quality of service class and an application does not need to have knowledge about a quality of service class definition which may be used in a communication network.

