---

title: Operational state transition and event logging system for an RF transmitter
abstract: The operational state transitions and events of an RF transmitter having a plurality of operational states are monitored and recorded. A plurality of ports are provided that each receive an indication of an occurrence of an event that can cause a transition from one state to another of the plurality of states. A transition status memory stores transition status data representing the status of each associated state. A micro-controller is programmed so that it determines, for each state, from the indications whether a state transition has occurred and, if so, it causes an appropriate change in the associated transition state data stored in the memory.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07391821&OS=07391821&RS=07391821
owner: Harris Corporation
number: 07391821
owner_city: Melbourne
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050308
---
The present invention is directed to RF transmitters and more particularly to monitoring and recording operational state transitions and events thereof.

RF transmitters include AM FM and TV transmitters. Such transmitters typically include a group of RF amplifiers and power supplies with a plurality of components. Such a transmitter has different operational modes. Some systems have a very sophisticated turn on and turn off process or sequence. The sequence may include a dozen or more steps or stages and the operation will be switched from one state to another during the process. The timing between the various states of operation may be very critical otherwise it may cause damage to the system. A typical IOT Inductive Output Tube transmitter for example may include a plurality of states such as four main states and each main state may have several sub states such as fourteen sub states. These sub states operate the on off or standby processes as the system advances from one state to another in precise timing. The processes may be interrupted by an external event such as a command or one of many possible faults.

It is desirable that all state transition and mode switching be recorded along with the time of happening for system operation diagnosing and monitoring. All commands or faulty events that happen during the operation to cause system state change should be recorded with the time of occurrence. The recording or logging could record operator activities on the system operation such as issuing a command to turn on or off the system or the subsystem or to raise or lower the power or to switch exciters.

The present invention provides for monitoring and recording operational state transitions and events of an RF transmitter having a plurality of operational states. The apparatus includes a plurality of ports that each receive an indication of an occurrence of an event that can cause a transition from one state to another. A transition status memory stores transmission status data representing the status of each associated state. A microcontroller is programmed to respond and it determines for each state as to whether a state transition has occurred and if so it causes an appropriate change in the associated transition state data stored in the memory.

In accordance with another aspect of the present invention the events that may cause a transition may be external events or internal events. Such external events may be due to commands from front panel button pressing or from a remote serial communications bus or from another controller. Also the events may be the result of critical faults that could change the system operational state.

Still further in accordance with another aspect of the invention the indications of an occurrence of an event may represent internal or external events.

Still further in accordance with another aspect of the invention the stored status data includes data representing the current and previous status of each associated state.

Still further in accordance with the present invention the plurality of states may include main states as well as sub states wherein each main state has a plurality of sub states for example.

Reference is now made to the drawings and the showings are for purposes of illustrating a preferred embodiment of the invention only and not for purposes of limiting same.

As illustrated in there is provided a plurality of ports including digital input ports for receiving fault inputs digital ports for receiving other external event inputs and analog input ports for receiving other external event inputs. The inputs for the digital input ports may be received from monitored events by way of interlocks or by way of comparators or they may take the form of discreet faults. Also the event inputs to the digital input ports may be received from remote commands or system commands or from interconnections with subsystems. The inputs to the analog input ports may be received as for example voltages V Vwhich may be representative of power voltage current temperature and the like. These signals are indications from various comparators interlocks command etc. and may provide indications of the occurrence of an event that can cause a transition from one state to another within a plurality of states of operation of the transmitter. The digital input ports and and the analog input ports all provide corresponding digital data to the system controller SC which may include a suitably programmed micro computer. The system controller is connected by a suitable control network with other subsystem controllers such as subsystem controllers SC SC through SC N. This is all connected by means of a control network CN.

The system controller SC is provided with a memory that may take a form of a flash memory or an EEPROM which may serve as the operation event state log. A real time clock RTC is provided and is used for recording the time of occurrence of the various events being recorded.

A log is a record of the faults and may be displayed as with an LCD display . Access may be with a PC . Suitable output ports provide various outputs including those for analog control or a debug output or a status meter output and the like. Additional memory may be stored by a suitable RAM memory . The data in the log may be displayed and may also be provided to an output printer if desired. The data stored may appear in a printout or a video display in a manner so as to present data such as that illustrated in Table I presented below 

The information presented in Table I is for illustration purposes only and may be helpful in understanding the description of the invention as presented hereinbelow.

The operation of the system is designed and organized as a state machine also called Finite State Machine FSM . The main operation modes such as turning on turning off and any mode switching transition are defined as individual main states. Each step or stage between the transitions of the main states or the operational modes is defined as sub state refer to Appendix A. Thus at any given time for any given operational condition the system is operated in one of the predetermined main states and one of the sub states. Any transition between any two main states or any sub states of a main state will be recorded with the time in the log refer to Appendix A and B. The state the event fault and commands are predefined as follows 

Both main state and sub state are defined by a unique numerical identifier which is used as an index number ranged from 0 to a pre defined value. And there is a one to one correspondent relationship between the state and the index number.

All events such as commands from front panel button pressing or commands from a remote serial communication bus or a command from another controller are defined as a unique numerical identifier which are used as an index number refer to the Appendix C.

All critical faults which could change the system operational state are organized as a group of unique events as well. And every fault has a unique identifier numerically represented by an index number refer to the Appendix D.

Since at any given time at any given condition the system s operational state will be uniquely defined and predetermined by system designer using these numerical identifiers to present the main states sub states events and faults to organize a logging system the system operator or user can determine the system s operation condition and system performance for any given time. The logging system uses this information to organize the format for each logging entry each entry is a record in the log and it has the correspondent fields of the main state sub state event and time of the transition. Each record is indexed by the sequential order as it happens with the elapse time.

The log is embedded into the system or any sub system which requires such a log system for system maintenance or diagnostics. The log could be stored either in RAM Random Access Memory or EPROM Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory such as flash memory. The log could be viewed or monitored via some kind of serial links such as RS232 RS484 Ethernet or CAN. In the design the log is viewed by connecting the controller serial port to a serial port of a PC by using Hyper Terminal. The log could be uploaded to any PC via a serial link for remote monitoring.

The above discussion relative to the log illustrated in Table I is just an example of the type of data that is stored in the log and which can be displayed or presented as a printout for example. It should be noted that the log illustrates transition status data representing both the current as well as the previous status of each state. The manner in which a computer functions and the various states and events including external events and critical faults is presented in the appendices that are presented below in Appendix A Appendix B Appendix C and in Appendix D.

Attention is now specifically directed to which illustrates a flow diagram for a state transition monitor procedure and which is programmed in the system controller. This procedure commences with step and advances to step to determine whether or not a system state change has taken place. If not it returns to have this determination made again. If a state change has taken place the procedure advances to step during which a determination is made as to whether any event is happening. If so the procedure advances to step during which the procedure solves the state function equation described in section 3 of Appendix A and based on the results thereof it takes immediate response or action for the event generates a state machine output . Thereafter a change is made in the system state. If an event is not happening at step the procedure advances to step during which a determination is made as to whether a fault is happening. If this type of event is happening the procedure advances to step which is similar to that of step described above.

If no fault is happening during the determination at step the procedure advances to step . This step is similar to step or described above. After step or step or step has taken place the procedure will advance to step . This a recording process and during this step a recording takes place of the system state transition and the time that the transition happened. Also the system records the event and the time along with the system state if an event happened. Also any fault is recorded along with the fault time. Thereafter the procedure returns to the determination step .

Although the invention has been described with respect to a preferred embodiment it is to be appreciated that various modifications may be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims.

