---

title: Fiber modified with particulate through a coupling agent
abstract: An article is provided that includes a polymeric fiber that has an excess number of surface active reactive moieties relative to the number of surface reactive moieties found on the fiber in a native state. A particle is bonded covalently to the fiber through an intermediate coupling agent. Multiple particles can be covalently bonded to the fiber, the multiple particles can be bonded uniformly or asymmetrically around the fiber diameter. A process for modifying a fiber includes creating surface activated reactive moieties thereon. The activated fiber is then exposed to a liquid solution containing a coupling agent to form a covalent bond. The coupling agent is also reacted with a particle in a liquid solution to form a covalent bond between the coupling agent and the particle. The coupling agent is covalently bonded to either a particle and then bonded to the fiber, or vice versa.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08575045&OS=08575045&RS=08575045
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 08575045
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050523
---
This application claims priority of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 578 472 filed Jun. 10 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference.

The invention described herein may be manufactured used and licensed by or for the United States Government.

The present invention relates in general to a fiber having a modified surface and in particular to a fiber surface modified with particulate in order to enhance fiber physical properties.

The barrier characteristics of a material are profoundly affected by the surface properties of the material. While synthetic fibers allow considerable control as to polymeric chain composition the ability to modify surface properties of a synthetic fiber is somewhat limited. While organic or silicone based agents can be applied to a synthetic fiber surface in order to modify the hydrophobicity of the surface such coatings are temporary and such are unsuitable for high performance applications. Polymeric fibers woven to form fabrics unwoven mats and chopped fibers have numerous applications including clothing resin composites ballistic resistant structures protective housings and skins and medical implants. With the ability to modify surface properties of synthetic polymeric fibers a variety of performance characteristics of a resulting article containing such fibers could be tailored to end user specifications.

Previous attempts to modify synthetic polymer fiber surfaces through particulate adhesion have typically involved plasma or corona discharge of the fiber surface followed by exposure to colloidal particulate such as colloidal silica with reliance on ionic and van der Waals interactions to adhere the colloidal particulate to the fiber surface. Alternatively particulate is applied through direct plasma spraying onto the surface of a synthetic polymeric fiber. Still another variation is placing the synthetic fiber in a solution containing grafting polymer initiator and a graftable polymer followed by exposure to an energy source to induce graft polymerization. These techniques have met with limited acceptance owing to irregular particulate application to the fiber surface process complexity and the propensity of adhered particles to exfoliate.

In the case of natural fibers cupro ammonium rayon acetate and polyester fibers ceramic particulate is chemically bonded to these fibers through a silane coupling agent as detailed in JP 06 116862. However the ability to covalently bond a coupling agent to a synthetic fiber is limited to a covalent bonding between the coupling agent and the ceramic particle followed by coupling to an existing reactive group within the fiber. As such this process is limited only to fibers having an existing number of surface reactive groups sufficient to achieve the desired modification.

Thus there exists a need for a synthetic fiber having an activated surface that covalently bonds to a surface modifying particulate through a coupling agent and a process for producing the same.

An article is provided that includes a polymeric fiber that has an excess number of surface active reactive moieties relative to the number of surface reactive moieties found on the polymeric fiber in a native state. A particle is bonded covalently to the polymeric fiber through an intermediate coupling agent. The coupling agent being at least bi functional and forming a covalent bond with one of the surface activated reactive moieties and a second covalent bond with the particle. Additional substances are optionally bonded to the particle. In instances when multiple particles are covalently bonded to the polymeric fiber the multiple particles are bonded uniformly or asymmetrically about a polymer fiber diameter.

A process for modifying a fiber includes activating the polymeric fiber to create numerous surface activated reactive moieties thereon. The polymer fiber having an activated surface is then exposed to a liquid solution containing a coupling agent. The polymeric fiber is then allowed to react with the coupling agent to form a covalent bond. The coupling agent is also exposed to multiple particles in a liquid solution under conditions facilitating formation of a covalent bond between the coupling agent and at least one of the multiple particles. The coupling agent is covalently bonded to either a particle and then bonded to the fiber or vice versa. Through the use of liquid phase combination of polymeric fiber coupling agent and particles considerable control is exerted over the fiber modification process. Fiber activation in the presence of a reactive gaseous atmosphere is particularly well suited to form the surface activated reactive moieties.

The present invention has utility as a fiber and process for producing the same with tunable surface properties through covalent bonding of particulate thereto. Representative manifestations of the present invention include increasing the strength of ballistic fibers strength improvements in fiber containing resin composites creation of catalytically active garments and spectroscopically identifiable articles. Through covalently bonding surface modifying particulate to a polymeric fiber the fiber is further modified through bonds created between the particle and other substances remote from the fiber.

An inventive process includes activating the polymer fiber surface to create reactive moieties reactive with a coupling agent so as to form a covalent bond. A coupling agent is also covalently bonded to a surface modifying particle. The fiber particle activation occurring through conventional techniques such as plasma discharge actinic irradiation X ray radiation and the like. The activated fiber surface is then exposed to wet chemistry solutions of coupling agent in succession with particulate or coupling agent already covalently bonded to the particulate. Following reaction to covalently adhere the particulate to the fiber surface fibers are optionally processed to further modify the particulate or otherwise processed as are conventional fibers to form articles or components thereof. While the subsequent description pertains to the surface modification of a synthetic polymeric fiber it is appreciated that the present invention is equally well suited to the treatment of fabrics unwoven mats as well as fiber aggregates containing such a fiber.

A fibrous article made according to the present invention includes a polymeric fiber amenable to activation so as to create reactive moieties on the fiber surface. Preferably the polymeric fiber is synthetic. Synthetic polymeric fibers operative herein illustratively include aromatic polyamides commercially available under the trade name KEVLAR alkyl polyamides such as nylons aralkyl polyamides polyolefins such as polyethylene and polypropylene polyesters such as polyethylene terephthalate PET block copolymers having blocks such as styrene butadiene ethylene or vinyl chloride styrene butadiene copolymers mixed olefin copolymers polycarbonates polystyrene fluoropolymers such as polyvinylidene fluoride PVDF polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE polyperfluoroethylene propylene FEP polyvinyls such as polyvinyl chloride polyurethanes such as polyurethane polyester polysiloxanes polycarbonate polydimethyl siloxane copolymers poly p phenylenebenzobisoxazole PBO polyimides and related materials such as polyetherimides and carbon fibers. In the majority of situations where an article benefits from the present invention a synthetic polymeric fiber lacks sufficient reactive surface moieties to afford desired particle coating coverage and as such surface activation of that synthetic polymeric fiber is preferred. Natural fibers amenable to surface activation and coupling of particulate according to the present invention illustratively include silk cellulose wool cotton linen hemp ramie and jute. While it is appreciated that the nature of the surface activated reactive moiety capable of covalent bonding to a coupling agent depends on whether the linkage formed to the coupling agent is through an electrophilic or nucleophilic reaction mechanism. Suitable surface reactive moieties include heteroatom sites of nitrogen sulfur and oxygen present as a neutral group ion or radical an ylide an aromatic radical a vinyl an azide an alkenyl a halide or a silyl. It is further appreciated that several types of surface reactive moieties so formed on a single fiber are capable of reacting with coupling agent brought into contact with the fiber surface. It is also accepted that sites of unsaturation also provide sites of modification through both radical and nucleophilic mechanisms.

A particle covalently bonded to the synthetic polymeric fiber surface is dictated in large part by the desired attribute associated with the resulting inventive article. Particle loading on a fiber approaches a monolayer in a highly activated fiber surface having more than 3 of the total surface sites being chemically active with the size of the particle the number of bonding moieties on a particle and the length of the coupling agent being some of the factors relevant to the percentage of surface active sites needed to approach monolayer coverage. Particles operative herein typically have a size ranging from 2 to 1000 nanometers linear dimension along the long axis of the particle. Preferably the maximal linear dimension of particles used herein is between 4 and 100 nanometers. Particle shapes illustratively include spherical oblate prolate cylindrical conical and combinations thereof. It is also appreciated that a particle optionally has a passivating ligand coating the particle. The exposed terminus of the passivating ligand optionally includes a reactive moiety capable of forming a covalent bond with the inventive coupling agent. Such a ligand passivated particle is intended to fall within the definition of a particle operative in the present invention. Particles operative herein illustratively include colloidal silica silica alumina silica magnesia magnesium silicate magnetic cobalt containing alloys magnetic niobium containing alloys metal oxides sulfides carbides nitrides arsenides phosphides such as TiO ZnO WO SnO CaTiO FeO MoO NbO TiZrO SiC SrTiO CdS CdSeTe CdSe GaP InP GaAs BaTiO KNbO TaO BiO NiO CuO SiO MoS InPb RuO CeO Ti OH TiN silicon nanolatex epoxidized rubber polystyrene nanospheres and barium strontium titanate Ba Sr TiO.

As the number of active surface sites on the polymer fiber is inadequate in a native state to adequately coat the fiber with particulate the polymer fiber surface is activated. Surface activation is achieved through a variety of methods to create dangling bonds or incorporate reactive moieties into the fiber surface. These moieties illustratively include oxygen radicals hydroxyl amine azide vinylics acetylenics isocyanates silyls and halogens. A variety of techniques are conventional to the art for surface activation. A brief description of some of these conventional techniques follows.

Electron bombardment involves the direction of a beam or cloud of electrons onto a plastic surface to interact with the surface. The free electrons in the cloud or beam act to knock existing electrons out of their orbital positions in the polymer molecules creating locations on the surface where other chemicals may bond. The electron beam may also cross link or scission polymer chains creating additional locations for chemical bonding. This process is carried out in a vacuum air oxygen ammonia chlorine gas nitrogen argon nitrous oxide helium carbon dioxide water vapor F Br CF CH or methane.

Flame treatment involves the brief application of a flame or heat to the polymer surface to oxidize a thin surface layer of the material creating highly active surface molecules. It is appreciated that many polymers have difficulty withstanding the addition of heat without deforming or changing in clarity or physical structure. If excessive heat is applied the polymer fiber may soften or warp. Excess heat may also cause accelerated aging by the introduction of heat history to the material. Consequently when the added heat is kept below a level that prevents these problems the polymer frequently will not obtain sufficiently increased surface energy to adequately promote bonding. Preferably flame or heat treatment increases the surface energy in polyolefins and other polymers enough to promote bonding to a coupling agent while limiting surface temperature increase to below a level that will deform or significantly damage the material.

A preferred method of treating a polymer surface to create active surface sites is corona or plasma treatment. As used herein the term plasma is defined to include a partially ionized gas composed of ions electrons and neutral species. A plasma operative herein is produced by strong electric arcs or electromagnetic fields. An electric arc plasma may be produced by a pair of electrodes spaced some suitable distance facing each other. The electrodes are then given a high voltage charge AC or DC which causes electricity to arc across the gap between the electrodes. The distance between the electrodes primarily depends upon the voltage used. This high energy electric arc produces a plasma in the region immediately around the electric arc. An atmosphere of air oxygen ammonia chlorine gas nitrogen argon nitrous oxide helium carbon dioxide water vapor F Br CF CH or methane gas is appreciated to facilitate the creation of active sites. The nature of a coupling agent bonding moiety and the groups found within the polymer fiber being important factors in determining the nature of the plasma atmosphere.

When a polymer surface is exposed to a high energy plasma produced by a high voltage electric arc the plasma interacts with the surface molecules increasing their energy through a variety of mechanisms depending on the specific polymer involved. In some cases surface hydrogen molecules are removed leaving behind active bonding sites the identity of which are determined by the choice of plasma. Also cross linking or scission can occur in the surface molecules as in electron bombardment. This will change the surface energy of the material making it easier for a coating to adhere. Oxides may also form on the surface as in flame treatment which are easier to bond to than the actual base polymer. These are just a few of the possible chemical mechanisms which are caused by plasma treatment that increase surface energy. The great benefits of using electric arc plasmas are the relatively low temperature and usage without damage to the surface of polymers and other relatively delicate materials.

With surface activation to increase the number of reactive surface sites the polymer fiber surface is reacted with an inventive coupling agent having the formula X R Y I where X is independently in each occurrence a moiety reactive with an activated polymeric fiber surface

In the inventive embodiment where the particulate is colloidal silica it is preferred that the coupling agent be an alkoxy silane where silane is reactive with the silica particulate and a polymer fiber surface reactive moiety is also provided. Preferred coupling agents for oxide rich particulate illustratively include 3 aminopropyltrimethoxysilane 3 aminopropyltriethoxysilane 3 glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane 3 glycidoxypropyltriethoxysilane 3 glycidoxypropyl bis trimethylsiloxy methylsilane 3 glycidoxypropyl methyldiethoxysilane 3 glycidoxypropyl dimethylethoxysilane 3 glycidoxypropyl methyldimethoxysilane methacryloxymethyltriethoxysilane methacryloxymethyltrimethoxysilane methacryloxypropyldimethylethoxysilane methacryloxypropyldimethylmethoxysilane methacryloxypropylmethyldimethoxysilane methacryloxypropyltriethoxysilane methoxymethyltrimethylsilane 3 methoxypropyltrimethoxysilane 3 methacryloxypropyldimethylchlorosilane methacryloxypropylmethyldichlorosilane methacryloxypropyltrichlorosilane 3 isocyanatopropyldimethylchlorosilane 3 isocyanatopropyltriethoxysilane and bis 3 triethoxysilylpropyl tetrasulfide. A coupling agent well suited for coupling an activated polymer fiber surface and particulate having on both fiber surface and particulate reactive moieties each independently selected from amine thiol alcohol phenol azide acetylene diene dienophile isocyanate carboxylic acid halide illustratively include N N diglycidyl aniline N N diglycidyl 4 glycidyl oxyaniline 3 4 epoxycyclohexylmethyl 3 4 epoxycyclohexanecarboxylate diglycidyl 1 2 cyclohexane dicarboxylate 2 3 epoxypropyl benzene exo 2 3 epoxynorbornane poly bisphenol A co epichlorohydrin glycidyl end capped glycidyl butyrate glycidyl neodecanoate glycidyl 4 methoxy phenyl ether poly phenylglycidyl ether co formaldehyde cresyl glycidyl ether diglycidyl ether of 1 4 butanediol diglycidyl ether of cyclohexane dimethanol trimethylol ethane triglycidyl ether trimethylol propane triglycidyl ether diglycidyl ether of dibromoneopentyl glycol polyglycol diepoxide dimer acid diglycidyl ester 1 2 epoxy 9 decene N 2 3 epoxypropyl phthalimide and the reaction products thereof with aminated acetophenone or its derivatives such as aminated benzyldimethylketal aminated benzophenone or its derivatives such as aminated Michler s ketone aminated benzoin or its derivatives such as aminated benzoin ethylether.

In instances where the coupling agent has X and Y groups that are both reactive towards the polymer fiber surface it is appreciated that an intermediate R linear backbone of less than eight carbon atoms provides sufficient steric hindrance so as to disfavor both coupling agent reactive moieties X and Y simultaneously covalently bonding to a polymeric fiber surface at the expense of the ability of the coupling agent to bond with particulate. In instances where an activated polymeric fiber surface has a high surface density of moieties reactive with a coupling agent a coupling agent having two or three moieties reactive with polymeric fiber surface reactive sites is operative to enhance the rigidity of a particle covalently bonded thereto. Likewise a multivalent Y moiety serves to covalently bond a particle to a polymeric fiber through multiple sites of attachment. It is appreciated that a coupling agent having multiple X and or multiple Y moieties are all identical moieties or are each independently a different moiety.

The present invention is further detailed with respect to that details exemplary steps according to the present invention as a flowchart shown generally at . The polymeric fiber surface is activated to create active surface sites reactive with the X moiety of an inventive coupling agent I . Electron bombardment flame treatment heat treatment and gas phase plasma treatment are all operative herein to impart chemical functionality into a polymeric fiber and thereby activating the same. While activation treatments can occur in vacuum or a variety of atmospheres preferably the gaseous atmosphere for the activation is a source of reactants with the polymeric fiber surface to create chemical functionality. An ammonia atmosphere is a particularly preferred atmosphere to functionalize the polymeric fiber surface with reactive primary amine groups. The activated fiber surface is then exposed to a liquid solution containing the coupling agent I at step . The polymeric fiber either in the form of a thread a fabric a mat or slurry of fibers after exposure to the liquid solution of coupling agent I is allowed to dry so as to evaporate coupling agent solvent. The polymer fiber coated with the coupling agent is then exposed to conditions sufficient to allow reaction between polymeric fiber surface and an X moiety of coupling agent I . Typical conditions for reaction to create a covalent bond between the X moiety of the coupling agent I and the activated polymeric fiber surface illustratively include heating between 25 and 120 Celsius through radiant convection microwave or infrared heating. Thereafter the polymeric fiber bonded to the coupling agent I is exposed to a liquid particulate solution . After the polymeric fiber in the form of a thread fabric web or particle slurry has been exposed to the particulate it is dried to evaporate the particulate solution solvent. The particulate in contact with the coupling agent bonded polymeric fiber surface are then allowed to react to form a covalent bond therebetween . While it is appreciated that the reaction conditions for the formation of a covalent bond between the Y moiety of the coupling agent I and a particle are dependent on the nature of the reactive moieties involved typically the reaction conditions are those detailed above with respect to step . Optionally the polymer fiber having particulate covalently bonded thereto through the coupling agent I is exposed to an additional reactant having at least one moiety Y as defined with respect to the coupling agent I at step so as to add further covalent bonds to the particulate. The reagent containing moiety Y covalently bonds to the particulate with the remainder of the reagent modifying the surface characteristics of the particulate coated fiber with respect to hydrophobicity charge density and reactivity. The reagent bonded to the particulate at step occurs through providing reaction conditions sufficient for a reaction to occur between the Y moiety of the reagent and the particulate occurring at step . Typically reaction occurs under conditions such as those detailed above with respect to step . It is appreciated that the reagent in addition to containing a moiety Y preferably contains an additional moiety to which a variety of other substances can be bonded. These particulate bonding substances illustratively include a resin matrix another type of particle relative to the particle covalently bonded to the polymeric fiber a second polymeric fiber a dye molecule and an electrical connector. Subsequent processing and handling of the fiber then continues in a manner consistent with a conventional polymeric fiber.

Regardless of the specifics of UV irradiation thereafter the polymeric fiber now covalently bonded through the photosensitizer moiety to the coupling agent is then exposed to a liquid particulate solution . The particulate is allowed to react with the Y moiety of the coupling agent I to form a covalent bond there between . The conditions for reaction between a particle and a Y moiety of an inventive coupling agent I while depending on the nature of the covalent bond to be formed typically includes those conditions described with respect to step of .

In instances where the polymeric fiber is part of a fabric requiring exposure on each side of the fabric to initiate coupling agent bonding to the fiber it is appreciated that steps can be repeated on the second side of the fabric to covalently bond the same or a different particulate on opposing sides of the fabric. Following covalent bonding of particulate to the polymeric fiber via the coupling agent the fiber is handled and processed in a conventional manner.

The following examples are provided for the purpose of illustrating various embodiments of the invention and are not meant to limit the present invention in any fashion.

Style 706 scoured KM 2 woven para phenylene polyamide KEVLAR fabric is obtained which has been treated with plasma in order to deposit amine functional groups on the surface of the fiber. A 54 inch wide roll style 706 scoured KM 2 woven KEVLAR fabric is placed in a continuous plasma reactor discharge device such as a 4th State Inc. Plasma Science PS 1010. Typically the fabric is plasma treated using reactive oxygen ammonia and non reactive helium argon gaseous discharges to both clean and chemically activate the surface of the KEVLAR . Typical process parameters for such treatments are a pressure of 500 mTorr of gas operated at an approximate power output of 350 Watts and residence times within the plasma of 1 to several minutes. The swatch is removed and analyzed. Standard KEVLAR contains about 0.6 nitrogen at the fiber surface via x ray photoelectron spectroscopy XPS . The treated fabrics contain 4.63 Sample 1 4.07 Sample 2 9.79 Sample 3 nitrogen.

The fibers treated in Example 1 are functionalized with silane coupling agent in this example prior to treatment with the colloidal silica. Colloidal silica is obtained from Aldrich Chemical as a dispersion in water 34 wt wt . A solution of 437.4 mL methanol 0.791 and 3.6 mL 3 glycidoxypropyltrimethoxy silane GPS 1.070 is prepared and stirred to homogenize the solution net concentration 1.1 wt wt 8.8 mg mL GPS . Then a swatch of KEVLAR is dipped into the solution for 60 seconds after which the swatch is removed and allowed to air dry for 60 seconds. Then the swatch is placed into a polypropylene beaker and placed into an oven at 70 C. for 90 minutes. The samples are removed from the oven and then allowed to cool to room temperature.

While the samples are drying in the oven a solution of colloidal silica is prepared. To a polypropylene beaker is added 260 mL of a 90 10 ethanol water solution prepared with acetic acid to provide a pH level of 4.5. Then 7.9 mL 1.230 34 wt wt silica of the colloidal silica is added net concentration 12.3 mg mL silica . The swatches of KEVLAR are placed in the bottom of small polypropylene beakers and 50 mL of the colloidal silica solution is poured over the swatch. Then a second beaker is placed over the KEVLAR and solution and the succeeding swatch is placed into that beaker followed by an additional 50 mL of colloidal silica solution. The nested beakers therefore maintain the KEVLAR in contact with the solution while keeping it compressed to minimize the required solution. The swatches are incubated in the oven at 70 C. for 5 minutes after which the swatches are removed and allowed to air dry. Then the swatches are placed back in the oven for 60 minutes to continue the condensation of the colloidal silica upon the GPS treated fibers. Then the swatches are removed and are evaluated by a variety of methods.

Modification of the KEVLAR fibers is also observed if the colloidal silica solution is used only as a room temperature dip treatment analogous and subsequent to the GPS treatment. Samples prepared for the stab testing of Example 8 are prepared by dipping swatches into the colloidal silica solution for 60 seconds followed by drying in air and then curing in the oven at 70 C. for 60 minutes.

The procedure of Examples 1 3 is repeated with the substitution of a meta phenylene polyamide NOMEX for the para phenylene KEVLAR in place of KEVLAR with like results being obtained.

Another procedure to functionalize the fibers with particulate that has been treated with epoxy functional silane coupling agent GPS is the addition to a 500 mL 3 neck flask of 330 mL 90 10 ethanol water solution acidified to a pH of 4.5 using acetic acid. Then 10.0 mL of LUDOX TMA is added to the solution providing a net concentration of 12.3 mg mL in colloidal silica. Then 0.80 mL of GPS is added to the solution over a span of 4 minutes. Net concentration of the GPS is therefore 2.5 mg mL and ca. 0.205 g GPS per gram of colloidal silica. The flask is placed in an oil bath which equilibrated to a temperature of 67 C. The solution is stirred at temperature for 1 hour at which point the solution is transferred to a polypropylene beaker and cooled to room temperature. Then swatches of KEVLAR are soaked in the silica GPS solution for 1 minute followed by 1 minute of air drying. The swatches are then heated in an oven at 70 C. for 1.5 hour.

To gauge the success of fiber modification the hydrophilicity of the plasma treated fibers of Example 1 are compared with the silane treated swatches from Examples 2 and 5. The contact angles of water with the fiber mats Example 1 are listed below.

The results correlate well with the observed levels of amine from the XPS data. Recall that the observed nitrogen content of the three samples progressed from 3 1 2 which is the same ordering observed for the contact angle data progressing from most hydrophilic to least . Water droplets on swatches of Sample 3 are wicked into the weave of the fabric too rapidly to obtain a contact angle. The other samples did not appear to be wetted effectively by the water. In contrast all of the silica modified swatches from Examples 2 and 5 exhibited good wetting characteristics with water being wicked into the weave of the fabric. The less hydrophilic samples were from Example 5. While the water droplets were absorbed by the weave they could be observed on the surface of the fabric while they were absorbed. The samples described in Example 2 wetted immediately as soon as the water droplet came into contact with the surface of the fabric. The increase in hydrophilicity is attributable to the colloidal silica attached to the fiber surface.

Roving friction is measured using a custom pullout fixture. This pullout fixture is basically a rectangular aluminum picture frame that allows a spring loaded adjustable lateral tension force to be applied to a woven fabric while a single roving is pulled in tension. Typically the woven fabric is cut to allow extra roving material at the bottom of the sample which keeps the cross roving contact area and frictional measurement constant during the test. The roving pullout fixture is mounted in an Instron model 4505 electro mechanical testing system equipped with an 89 kN load cell. The crosshead rate during testing is set to 1.27 mm min. The lateral cross tension of the pullout fixture is adjusted to a force of approximately 445 N. Tensile strength measurements of the warp and fill rovings are also completed using the Instron machine at a crosshead rate of 1.27 mm min and a gauge length of approximately 25.4 mm. The load strength as a function of displacement is shown in for an untreated swatch of KEVLAR solid line that is compared with swatches treated by the procedures of Example 2 dotted line and Example 5 dashed line .

To test the resistance of the modified fiber to a stabbing assault 5 5 swatches of plasma treated KEVLAR are treated according to Example 3. The swatches are dried for 1.5 hours at 70 C. and are then sandwiched together and placed into a plastic sample bag. Stab resistance is qualitatively probed using a foam block and an ice pick. For traditional KEVLAR a 4 ply thickness is easily penetrated with minimal force from a thin penetrator like an ice pick. The 4 ply thickness of the treated swatches is much more resistant to penetration from the ice pick.

To test the ballistic resistance of the modified fiber 15 15 swatches of plasma treated KEVLAR are treated according to Example 3. The swatches are dried for 1.5 hours at 70 C. and are then stacked together and stapled to a wooden picture frame. The stacked and stapled swatches of modified fiber are then impacted with steel Fragment Simulator Projectiles FSPs which weigh 1.1 g and have a diameter of 5.59 mm 0.220 inches using a helium charged gas gun. The FSPs are fired at the stacked KEVLAR fabric at a fixed impact velocity of either 800 or 1200 feet per second fps . A total of 9 FSP shots are fired into the stacked KEVLAR fiber target and the number of partial or complete penetrations is recorded as a function of number of layers of KEVLAR fabric in the target stack aerial density . The KEVLAR fiber fabric prepared by Example 3 always outperformed the untreated KEVLAR control as the percent of FSPs penetrated for Example 3 was always lower at a fixed number of fabric layers.

To 40 mL screw top vials is added GPS 2.36 g 10 mmol and the appropriate amino phenone. The 4 aminoacetophenone 1.35 g 10 mmol is added to one vial and formed a light yellow solution in the GPS. 4 aminobenzophenone 1.97 10 mmol formed a darker orange solution with a significant amount of insoluble crystals. The contents of both vials became homogeneous after the vials are placed into an oil bath at 160 C. The solutions are stirred for 4 hours with magnetic stirring after which the vials are removed from the baths and the stir bars are removed. Analysis with thin layer chromatography indicated some residual starting material as well as some peaks for reaction products. The starting materials eluted on the plates more rapidly than the reaction products. The phenone compound could be observed on the TLC plate using illumination with 254 nm light. Unreacted GPS is detected by staining the TLC plate with KMnO.

The viscous oils obtained from the reaction are diluted with CHCland loaded onto short columns of dry silica gel. The silica is then eluted with several portions of CHCl. A rapidly eluted band of color is observed for both samples. After the impurity is isolated and discarded 250 mL of solvent the remaining material is eluted with a mixture of 9 1 CHCl MeOH ca. 400 mL . The second isolated fraction is reduced in volume and transferred to a tared vial which was then dried in a vacuum oven ca. 60 C. ca. 4 psi . Some entrapped solvent remained but both samples formed viscous oils after drying.

Solutions are prepared containing ca. 4.25 mg mL of the photoactive silane coupling compound PSCC . Both the acetophenone PSCC and the benzophenone PSCC are prepared at similar concentrations in THF. A series of samples is prepared by soaking a piece of nylon 6 6 fabric in the PSCC solution for 1 minute. The fabric is then air dried for 3 minutes. The samples are then exposed to UV irradiation for a specified time interval. The individual samples are irradiated for 1 minute 2 minutes or 4 minutes per side with each sample requiring two exposures to allow reaction of the PSCC on both sides of the fabric.

Following irradiation each sample is dip coated for 1 minute in a solution containing 1 wt colloidal silica in 90 10 EtOH HO pH 4.5 w acetic acid . After air drying for 3 minutes the nylon fabric samples are dried in an oven at 70 C. for 1.5 hours.

The nylon fabric samples prepared by Example 11 are folded into quarters and placed onto a thick foam mat. A sample of standard nylon is also folded in the same manner. Then an ice pick is used to penetrate the standard nylon near the center of the sample. In a similar fashion the samples treated nylon are also challenged. The samples treated in Example 11 show increased resistance to penetration by the ice pick.

The procedure of Example 11 is repeated with polypropylene fabric in place of nylon 6 6 and colloidal titania in place of silica. The resulting swatch upon exposure to UV light for 30 minutes catalyzed the degradation of an aerosol of dioxin coated onto the swatch.

Patent documents and publications mentioned in the specification are indicative of the levels of those skilled in the art to which the invention pertains. These documents and publications are incorporated herein by reference to the same extent as if each individual document or publication was specifically and individually incorporated herein by reference.

The foregoing description is illustrative of particular embodiments of the invention but is not meant to be a limitation upon the practice thereof. The following claims including all equivalents thereof are intended to define the scope of the invention.

