---

title: Antisense antiviral compound and method for treating influenza viral infection
abstract: The invention provides antisense antiviral compounds and methods of their use and production in inhibition of growth of viruses of the Orthomyxoviridae family and in the treatment of a viral infection. The compounds are particularly useful in the treatment of influenza virus infection in a mammal. The antisense antiviral compounds are substantially uncharged morpholino oligonucleotides having 1) a nuclease resistant backbone, 2) 12-40 nucleotide bases, and 3) a targeting sequence of at least 12 bases in length that hybridizes to a target region selected from the following: a) the 5′ or 3′ terminal 25 bases of the negative sense viral RNA segment of Influenzavirus A, Influenzavirus B and Influenzavirus C; b) the terminal 25 bases of the 3′ terminus of the positive sense cRNA and; and c) the 50 bases surrounding the AUG start codon of an influenza viral mRNA.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08357664&OS=08357664&RS=08357664
owner: M.I.T.
number: 08357664
owner_city: Cambridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051025
---
This application claims priority to U.S. provisional patent application No. 60 622 077 filed Oct. 26 2004 which is incorporated herein in its entirety by reference.

This invention was made with government support under grant number R01 AI056267 awarded by the National Institutes of Health. The government has certain rights in this invention.

The invention relates to antisense oligonucleotide compounds for use in treating an influenza virus infection and antiviral treatment methods employing the compounds.

Influenza viruses have been a major cause of human mortality and morbidity throughout recorded history. Influenza A virus infection causes millions of cases of severe illness and as many as 500 000 deaths each year worldwide. Epidemics vary widely in severity but occur at regular intervals and always cause significant mortality and morbidity most frequently in the elderly population. Although vaccines against matched influenza strains can prevent illness in 60 80 of healthy adults the rate of protection is much lower in high risk groups. Furthermore vaccination does not provide protection against unexpected strains such as the H5 and H7 avian influenza outbreaks in Hong Kong in 1997 and Europe and Southeast Asia in 2003 and 2004. Current anti influenza drugs are limited in their capacity to provide protection and therapeutic effect Cox and Subbarao 1999 Cox and Subbarao 2000 .

Influenza A is a segmented RNA virus of negative polarity. Genome segments are replicated by a complex of 4 proteins the 3 polymerase polypeptides PA PB1 and PB2 and NP Nucleoprotein . The 5 and 3 terminal sequence regions of all 8 genome segments are highly conserved within a genotype Strauss and Strauss 2002 .

Influenza A viruses can be subtyped according to the antigenic and genetic nature of their surface glycoproteins 15 hemagglutinin HA and 9 neuraminidase NA subtypes have been identified to date. Viruses bearing all known HA and NA subtypes have been isolated from avian hosts but only viruses of the H1N1 1918 H2N2 1957 58 and H3N2 1968 subtypes have been associated with widespread epidemics in humans Strauss and Strauss 2002 .

Since 1997 when H5N1 influenza virus was transmitted to humans and killed 6 of 18 infected persons there have been multiple transmissions of avian influenza viruses to mammals. Either the whole virus is transmitted directly or gene segments from the avian influenza virus are acquired by mammalian strains. Widespread infections of poultry with H5N1 viruses in Asia have caused increasing concern that this subtype may achieve human to human spread and establish interspecies transmission. The species which different types of influenza viruses are able to infect are determined by different forms of the virus glycoproteins HA NA . This provides a considerable species barrier between birds and humans which is not easily overcome. Pigs however provide a mixing pot able to be infected by both types of virus and thereby allowing the passage of avian viruses to humans. When an individual pig cell is co infected with both avian and human influenza viruses recombinant forms can emerge that carry an avian HA genotype but readily infect humans. Avian HA can infect pigs but not humans. In pigs during genome segment packaging it is possible to create a virus with several Avian segments and Human HA and or NA segments Cox and Subbarao 2000 .

Influenza viruses infect humans and animals e.g. pigs birds horses and may cause acute respiratory disease. There have been numerous attempts to produce vaccines effective against influenza virus. None however have been completely successful particularly on a long term basis. This may be due at least in part to the segmented characteristic of the influenza virus genome which makes it possible through re assortment of the segments for numerous forms to exist. For example it has been suggested that there could be an interchange of RNA segments between animal and human influenza viruses which would result in the introduction of new antigenic subtypes into both populations. Thus a long term vaccination approach has failed due to the emergence of new subtypes antigenic shift . In addition the surface proteins of the virus hemagglutinin and neuraminidase constantly undergo minor antigenic changes antigenic drift . This high degree of variation explains why specific immunity developed against a particular influenza virus does not establish protection against new variants. Hence alternative antiviral strategies are needed. Although influenza B and C viruses cause less clinical disease than the A types new antiviral drugs should also be helpful in curbing infections caused by these agents.

Influenza viruses that occur naturally among birds are called avian influenza bird flu . The birds carry the viruses in their intestines but do not generally get sick from the infection. However migratory birds can carry the bird flu to infect domestic chickens ducks and turkeys causing illness and even death. Avian flu does not easily infect humans but when human exposure is more frequent such as contact with domestic birds human infections occur. A dangerous bird flu H5N1 was first identified in terns in South Africa in 1961 and was identified as a potentially deadly form of flu. Outbreaks of H5N1 occurred in eight Asian countries in late 2003 and 2004. At that time more than 100 million birds in these countries either died or were killed in order to control the outbreak. Beginning in June of 2004 new deadly outbreaks of H5N1 were reported in Asia which is currently ongoing. Human infections of H5N1 have been observed in Thailand Vietnam and Cambodia with a death rate of about 50 percent. These infections have mostly occurred from human contact with infected poultry but a few cases of human to human spread of H5N1 have occurred.

Currently there is no vaccine to protect humans against H5N1 but research efforts are underway. There are four currently approved influenza medications amantadine rimantadine oseltamivir and zanamivir. Unfortunately the H5N1 virus is resistant to both amantadine and rimantidine. The remaining oseltamivir and zanamivir may show some efficacy to H5N1 but need to be evaluated more extensively.

In view of the severity of the diseases caused by influenza viruses there is an immediate need for new therapies to treat influenza infection. Given the lack of effective prevention or therapies it is therefore an object of the present invention to provide therapeutic compounds and methods for treating a host infected with an influenza virus.

The invention includes in one aspect an anti viral compound effective in inhibiting replication within a host cell of an RNA virus having a single stranded negative sense genome and selected from the Orthomyxoviridae family including the Influenzavirus A Influenzavirus B and Influenzavirus C genera. The compound targets viral RNA sequences within a region selected from the following 1 the 5 or 3 terminal 25 bases of the negative sense viral RNA segments 2 the terminal 25 bases of the 3 terminus of the positive sense cRNA and 3 50 bases surrounding the AUG start codons of influenza viral mRNAs.

The antiviral compound consists of an oligonucleotide analog characterized by a a nuclease resistant backbone b 12 40 nucleotide bases and c a targeting sequence of at least 12 bases in length that hybridizes to a target region selected from the following i the 5 or 3 terminal 25 bases of a negative sense viral RNA segment of Influenzavirus A Influenzavirus B and Influenzavirus C ii the terminal 30 bases of the 3 terminus of a positive sense cRNA of Influenzavirus A Influenzavirus B and Influenzavirus C and iii the 50 bases surrounding the AUG start codon of an influenza viral mRNA.

The oligonucleotide analog also has a the capability of being actively taken up by mammalian host cells and b the ability to form a heteroduplex structure with the viral target region wherein said heteroduplex structure is i composed of the positive or negative sense strand of the virus and the oligonucleotide compound and ii characterized by a Tm of dissociation of at least 45 C.

The invention includes in another aspect an antiviral compound that inhibits in a mammalian host cell replication of an infecting influenza virus having a single stranded segmented negative sense genome and selected from the Orthomyxoviridae family. The compound is administered to the infected host cells as an oligonucleotide analog characterized by the elements described above on pp. 5 6. The compound may be administered to a mammalian subject infected with the influenza virus or at risk of infection with the influenza virus.

The compound may be composed of morpholino subunits linked by uncharged phosphorus containing intersubunit linkages joining a morpholino nitrogen of one subunit to a 5 exocyclic carbon of an adjacent subunit. In one embodiment the intersubunit linkages are phosphorodiamidate linkages such as those having the structure 

The compound may be a covalent conjugate of an oligonucleotide analog moiety capable of forming such a heteroduplex structure with the positive or negative sense strand of the virus and an arginine rich polypeptide effective to enhance the uptake of the compound into host cells. Exemplary polypeptides have one of the sequences identified as SEQ ID NOs 25 30.

where said heteroduplex complex has a Tm of dissociation of at least 45 C. and disruption of a stem loop secondary structure.

An exemplary oligonucleotide analog is composed of morpholino subunits linked by uncharged phosphorus containing intersubunit linkages joining a morpholino nitrogen of one subunit to a 5 exocyclic carbon of an adjacent subunit. The compound may have phosphorodiamidate linkages such as in the structure

In still another aspect the invention includes an oligonucleotide analog compound for use in inhibiting replication in mammalian host cells of an influenza virus having a single stranded segmented negative sense RNA genome and selected from the Orthomyxoviridae family. The compound is characterized by the elements described above on pp. 5 6.

An exemplary oligonucleotide analog is composed of morpholino subunits linked by uncharged phosphorus containing intersubunit linkages joining a morpholino nitrogen of one subunit to a 5 exocyclic carbon of an adjacent subunit. The compound may have phosphorodiamidate linkages such as in the structure

For treatment of Influenza A virus as given below the targeting sequence hybridizes to a region associated with one of the group of sequences identified as SEQ ID NOs 1 9. Preferred targeting sequences are those complementary to either the minus strand target of SEQ ID NO 4 or the positive strand target of SEQ ID NO 3. Exemplary antisense phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomers PMOs that target these two regions are listed as SEQ ID NOs 12 and 13 respectively.

 Alkyl refers to a fully saturated monovalent radical containing carbon and hydrogen which may be branched linear or cyclic cycloalkyl . Examples of alkyl groups are methyl ethyl n butyl t butyl n heptyl isopropyl cyclopropyl cyclopentyl ethylcyclopentyl and cyclohexyl. Generally preferred are alkyl groups having one to six carbon atoms referred to as lower alkyl and exemplified by methyl ethyl n butyl i butyl t butyl isoamyl n pentyl and isopentyl. In one embodiment lower alkyl refers to Cto Calkyl.

 Alkenyl refers to an unsaturated monovalent radical containing carbon and hydrogen which may be branched linear or cyclic. The alkenyl group may be monounsaturated or polyunsaturated. Generally preferred are alkenyl groups having one to six carbon atoms referred to as lower alkenyl .

 Aryl refers to a substituted or unsubstituted monovalent aromatic radical generally having a single ring e.g. benzene or two condensed rings e.g. naphthyl . This term includes heteroaryl groups which are aromatic ring groups having one or more nitrogen oxygen or sulfur atoms in the ring such as furyl pyrrole pyridyl and indole. By substituted is meant that one or more ring hydrogens in the aryl group is replaced with a halide such as fluorine chlorine or bromine with a lower alkyl group containing one or two carbon atoms nitro amino methylamino dimethylamino methoxy halomethoxy halomethyl or haloethyl. Preferred substituents include halogen methyl ethyl and methoxy. Generally preferred are aryl groups having a single ring.

 Aralkyl refers to an alkyl preferably lower C C more preferably C C alkyl substituent which is further substituted with an aryl group examples are benzyl CHCH and phenethyl CHCHCH .

 Heterocycle refers to a non aromatic ring preferably a 5 to 7 membered ring whose ring atoms are selected from the group consisting of carbon nitrogen oxygen and sulfur. Preferably the ring atoms include 3 to 6 carbon atoms. Such heterocycles include for example pyrrolidine piperidine piperazine and morpholine.

The term substituted with respect to an alkyl alkenyl alkynyl aryl aralkyl or alkaryl group refers to replacement of a hydrogen atom with a heteroatom containing substituent such as for example halogen hydroxy alkoxy thiol alkylthio amino alkylamino imino oxo keto nitro cyano or various acids or esters such as carboxylic sulfonic or phosphonic.

The terms oligonucleotide analog refers to an oligonucleotide having i a modified backbone structure e.g. a backbone other than the standard phosphodiester linkage found in natural oligo and polynucleotides and ii optionally modified sugar moieties e.g. morpholino moieties rather than ribose or deoxyribose moieties. The analog supports bases capable of hydrogen bonding by Watson Crick base pairing to standard polynucleotide bases where the analog backbone presents the bases in a manner to permit such hydrogen bonding in a sequence specific fashion between the oligonucleotide analog molecule and bases in a standard polynucleotide e.g. single stranded RNA or single stranded DNA . Preferred analogs are those having a substantially uncharged phosphorus containing backbone.

A substantially uncharged phosphorus containing backbone in an oligonucleotide analog is one in which a majority of the subunit linkages e.g. between 60 100 are uncharged at physiological pH and contain a single phosphorous atom. The analog contains between 8 and 40 subunits typically about 8 25 subunits and preferably about 12 to 25 subunits. The analog may have exact sequence complementarity to the target sequence or near complementarity as defined below.

A subunit of an oligonucleotide analog refers to one nucleotide or nucleotide analog unit of the analog. The term may refer to the nucleotide unit with or without the attached intersubunit linkage although when referring to a charged subunit the charge typically resides within the intersubunit linkage e.g. a phosphate or phosphorothioate linkage .

A morpholino oligonucleotide analog is an oligonucleotide analog composed of morpholino subunit structures of the form shown in where i the structures are linked together by phosphorus containing linkages one to three atoms long joining the morpholino nitrogen of one subunit to the 5 exocyclic carbon of an adjacent subunit and ii Pand Pare purine or pyrimidine base pairing moieties effective to bind by base specific hydrogen bonding to a base in a polynucleotide. The purine or pyrimidine base pairing moiety is typically adenine cytosine guanine uracil or thymine. The synthesis structures and binding characteristics of morpholino oligomers are detailed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 698 685 5 217 866 5 142 047 5 034 506 5 166 315 5 521 063 and 5 506 337 all of which are incorporated herein by reference.

The subunit and linkage shown in are used for six atom repeating unit backbones as shown in where the six atoms include a morpholino nitrogen the connected phosphorus atom the atom usually oxygen linking the phosphorus atom to the 5 exocyclic carbon the 5 exocyclic carbon and two carbon atoms of the next morpholino ring . In these structures the atom Ylinking the 5 exocyclic morpholino carbon to the phosphorus group may be sulfur nitrogen carbon or preferably oxygen. The X moiety pendant from the phosphorus is any stable group which does not interfere with base specific hydrogen bonding. Preferred X groups include fluoro alkyl alkoxy thioalkoxy and alkyl amino including cyclic amines all of which can be variously substituted as long as base specific bonding is not disrupted. Alkyl alkoxy and thioalkoxy preferably include 1 6 carbon atoms. Alkyl amino preferably refers to lower alkyl Cto C substitution and cyclic amines are preferably 5 to 7 membered nitrogen heterocycles optionally containing 1 2 additional heteroatoms selected from oxygen nitrogen and sulfur. Z is sulfur or oxygen and is preferably oxygen.

A preferred morpholino oligomer is a phosphorodiamidate linked morpholino oligomer referred to herein as a PMO. Such oligomers are composed of morpholino subunit structures such as shown in where X NH NHR or NR where R is lower alkyl preferably methyl Y O and Z O and Pand Pare purine or pyrimidine base pairing moieties effective to bind by base specific hydrogen bonding to a base in a polynucleotide. Also preferred are structures having an alternate phosphorodiamidate linkage where in X lower alkoxy such as methoxy or ethoxy Y NH or NR where R is lower alkyl and Z O.

The term substituted particularly with respect to an alkyl alkoxy thioalkoxy or alkylamino group refers to replacement of a hydrogen atom on carbon with a heteroatom containing substituent such as for example halogen hydroxy alkoxy thiol alkylthio amino alkylamino imino oxo keto nitro cyano or various acids or esters such as carboxylic sulfonic or phosphonic. It may also refer to replacement of a hydrogen atom on a heteroatom such as an amine hydrogen with an alkyl carbonyl or other carbon containing group.

As used herein the term target relative to the viral genomic RNA refers to a viral genomic RNA and specifically to a region associated with stem loop secondary structure within the 5 terminal end 40 bases of the positive sense RNA strand of a single stranded RNA ssRNA virus described herein.

The term target sequence refers to a portion of the target RNA against which the oligonucleotide analog is directed that is the sequence to which the oligonucleotide analog will hybridize by Watson Crick base pairing of a complementary sequence. As will be seen the target sequence may be a contiguous region of the viral positive strand RNA or may be composed of complementary fragments of both the 5 and 3 sequences involved in secondary structure.

The term targeting sequence is the sequence in the oligonucleotide analog that is complementary meaning in addition substantially complementary to the target sequence in the RNA genome. The entire sequence or only a portion of the analog compound may be complementary to the target sequence. For example in an analog having 20 bases only 12 14 may be targeting sequences. Typically the targeting sequence is formed of contiguous bases in the analog but may alternatively be formed of non contiguous sequences that when placed together e.g. from opposite ends of the analog constitute sequence that spans the target sequence. As will be seen the target and targeting sequences are selected such that binding of the analog is to a region within 1 the 5 or 3 terminal 25 bases of the negative sense viral RNA 2 the terminal 25 bases of the 3 terminus of the positive sense mRNA and or 3 50 bases surrounding the AUG start codons of viral mRNA.

Target and targeting sequences are described as complementary to one another when hybridization occurs in an antiparallel configuration. A targeting sequence may have near or substantial complementarity to the target sequence and still function for the purpose of the present invention that is it may still be complementary. Preferably the oligonucleotide analog compounds employed in the present invention have at most one mismatch with the target sequence out of 10 nucleotides and preferably at most one mismatch out of 20. Alternatively the antisense oligomers employed have at least 90 sequence homology and preferably at least 95 sequence homology with the exemplary targeting sequences as designated herein.

An oligonucleotide analog specifically hybridizes to a target polynucleotide if the oligomer hybridizes to the target under physiological conditions with a Tm substantially greater than 45 C. preferably at least 50 C. and typically 60 C. 80 C. or higher. Such hybridization preferably corresponds to stringent hybridization conditions. At a given ionic strength and pH the Tm is the temperature at which 50 of a target sequence hybridizes to a complementary polynucleotide. Again such hybridization may occur with near or substantial complementary of the antisense oligomer to the target sequence as well as with exact complementarity.

A nuclease resistant oligomeric molecule oligomer refers to one whose backbone is substantially resistant to nuclease cleavage in non hybridized or hybridized form by common extracellular and intracellular nucleases in the body that is the oligomer shows little or no nuclease cleavage under normal nuclease conditions in the body to which the oligomer is exposed.

A heteroduplex refers to a duplex between an oligonculeotide analog and the complementary portion of a target RNA. A nuclease resistant heteroduplex refers to a heteroduplex formed by the binding of an antisense oligomer to its complementary target such that the heteroduplex is substantially resistant to in vivo degradation by intracellular and extracellular nucleases such as RNAseH which are capable of cutting double stranded RNA RNA or RNA DNA complexes.

A base specific intracellular binding event involving a target RNA refers to the specific binding of an oligonucleotide analog to a target RNA sequence inside a cell. The base specificity of such binding is sequence specific. For example a single stranded polynucleotide can specifically bind to a single stranded polynucleotide that is complementary in sequence.

An effective amount of an antisense oligomer targeted against an infecting influenza virus is an amount effective to reduce the rate of replication of the infecting virus and or viral load and or symptoms associated with the viral infection.

As used herein the term body fluid encompasses a variety of sample types obtained from a subject including urine saliva plasma blood spinal fluid or other sample of biological origin such as skin cells or dermal debris and may refer to cells or cell fragments suspended therein or the liquid medium and its solutes.

The term relative amount is used where a comparison is made between a test measurement and a control measurement. The relative amount of a reagent forming a complex in a reaction is the amount reacting with a test specimen compared with the amount reacting with a control specimen. The control specimen may be run separately in the same assay or it may be part of the same sample for example normal tissue surrounding a malignant area in a tissue section .

 Treatment of an individual or a cell is any type of intervention provided as a means to alter the natural course of the individual or cell. Treatment includes but is not limited to administration of e.g. a pharmaceutical composition and may be performed either prophylactically or subsequent to the initiation of a pathologic event or contact with an etiologic agent. The related term improved therapeutic outcome relative to a patient diagnosed as infected with a particular virus refers to a slowing or diminution in the growth of virus or viral load or detectable symptoms associated with infection by that particular virus.

An agent is actively taken up by mammalian cells when the agent can enter the cell by a mechanism other than passive diffusion across the cell membrane. The agent may be transported for example by active transport referring to transport of agents across a mammalian cell membrane by e.g. an ATP dependent transport mechanism or by facilitated transport referring to transport of antisense agents across the cell membrane by a transport mechanism that requires binding of the agent to a transport protein which then facilitates passage of the bound agent across the membrane. For both active and facilitated transport the oligonucleotide analog preferably has a substantially uncharged backbone as defined below. Alternatively the antisense compound may be formulated in a complexed form such as an agent having an anionic backbone complexed with cationic lipids or liposomes which can be taken into cells by an endocytotic mechanism. The analog may also be conjugated e.g. at its 5 or 3 end to an arginine rich peptide such as a portion of the HIV TAT protein polyarginine or to combinations of arginine and other amino acids including the non natural amino acids 6 aminohexanoic acid Ahx and beta alanine Ala . Exemplary arginine rich delivery peptides are listed as SEQ ID NOs 25 30. These exemplary arginine rich delivery peptides facilitate transport into the target host cell as described Moulton Nelson et al. 2004 Nelson Stein et al. 2005 .

Rules for the selection of targeting sequences capable of inhibiting replication of the influenza viral genome are discussed below.

The present invention is based on the discovery that effective inhibition of single stranded segmented negative sense RNA viruses can be achieved by exposing cells infected with influenza virus to antisense oligonucleotide analog compounds i that target 1 the 5 or 3 terminal 25 bases of the negative sense viral RNA 2 the terminal 25 bases of the 3 terminus of the positive sense mRNA and or 3 50 bases surrounding the AUG start codons of viral mRNA and ii having physical and pharmacokinetic features which allow effective interaction between the antisense compound and the virus within host cells. In one aspect the oligomers can be used in treating a mammalian subject infected with influenza virus.

The invention targets RNA viruses having genomes that are i single stranded ii segmented and iii negative polarity. The targeted viruses also synthesize two different versions of a genomic complement of the negative sense virion RNA vRNA with positive polarity 1 cRNA that is used as a template for replication of negative sense virion RNA and 2 a complementary positive sense RNA mRNA that is used for translation of viral proteins. is a schematic that shows these different RNA species and the target location of antisense PMO described in the present invention. In particular targeted viral families include members of the Orthomyxoviridae family including the Influenzavirus A Influenzavirus B and Influenzavirus C genera. Various physical morphological and biological characteristics of members of the Orthomyxoviridae family can be found for example in Textbook of Human Virology R. Belshe ed. 2Edition Mosby 1991 at the Universal Virus Database of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov ICTVdb index.htm and in human virology textbooks see for example Strauss and Strauss 2002 . Some of the key biological characteristics of the Orthomxyoviridae family of viruses are described below.

Influenza A influenza B and influenza C viruses are the only members of the Influenzavirus A Influenzavirus B and Influenzavirus C genera respectively. These viruses are membrane enclosed viruses whose genomes are segmented negative sense i.e. minus strands of RNA RNA . The ten influenza virus genes are present on eight segments of the single stranded RNA of strains A and B and on seven segments of strain C. The segments vary in size from 890 to 2341 nucleotides in length and each is a template for synthesis of different mRNAs. The influenza virus virion contains virus specific RNA polymerases necessary for mRNA synthesis from these templates and in the absence of such specific polymerases the minus strand of influenza virus RNA is not infectious. Initiation of transcription of the mRNAs occurs when the influenza virus mRNA polymerase takes 12 to 15 nucleotides from the 5 end of a cellular mRNA or mRNA precursor and uses the borrowed oligonucleotide as a primer. This process has been termed cap snatching because it places a 5 cap structure on the viral mRNA. Generally the mRNAs made through this process encode only one protein. The M gene and NS gene viral RNA segments also code for spliced mRNAs which results in production of two different proteins for each of these two segments.

Replication of influenza viral RNA occurs in the nucleus and involves the synthesis of three different species of RNA. A schematic of this process is shown in . After infection of a na ve cell the minus strand virion RNA vRNA is transported to the nucleus where RNA destined for translation mRNA is synthesized using 5 terminal 10 13 nucleotide primers cleaved by viral encoded enzymes from capped cellular pre mRNA molecules i.e. cap snatching . Synthesis of each mRNA continues to near the end of the genome segment where an oligo U stretch is encountered and a poly A tail is added. The dedicated viral mRNAs are transported to the cytoplasm for translation and after sufficient viral proteins are transported back into the nucleus synthesis of vRNA destined for nascent virions is initiated. An exact antigenomic copy of vRNA is synthesized termed cRNA which is a perfect complement of the genomic vRNA and serves as a template for production of new vRNA. The different RNAs synthesized during influenza virus replication are shown schematically in .

GenBank references for exemplary viral nucleic acid target sequences representing influenza A genomic segments are listed in Table 1 below. The nucleotide sequence numbers in Table 1 are derived from the Genbank reference for the positive strand RNA. It will be appreciated that these sequences are only illustrative of other sequences in the Orthomyxoviridae family as may be available from available gene sequence databases of literature or patent resources. The sequences below identified as SEQ ID NOs 1 9 are also listed in the Sequence Listing at the end of the specification.

The target sequences in Table 1 represent 1 the 5 or 3 terminal 25 bases of the negative sense viral RNA SEQ ID NOs 4 9 2 the terminal 25 bases of the 3 terminus of the positive sense mRNA SEQ ID NOs 4 9 and 3 50 bases surrounding the AUG start codons of the indicated influenza virus genes SEQ ID NOs 1 3 . The sequences shown are the positive strand i.e. antigenomic or mRNA sequence in the 5 to 3 orientation. It will be obvious that when the target is the minus strand vRNA the targeted sequence is the complement of the sequence listed in Table 1.

Table 1 lists the targets for three different influenza A viral genes PB2 PB1 and nucleoprotein NP encoded by genomic segments 1 2 and 5 respectively. The PB1 PB2 and NP proteins are components of the viral RNA polymerase and PB2 also functions as the cap snatching enzyme. The target sequences for the AUG start codons of the three genes are represented as SEQ ID NOs 1 3. The 3 terminal sequences of the three genomic segments are represented by SEQ ID NOs 4 6 and 8 and can be targeted on both the positive strand and the negative strand of those segments. The 5 terminal sequences SEQ ID NOs 5 7 and 9 can be successfully targeted on the minus strand.

Targeting sequences are designed to hybridize to a region of the target sequence as listed in Table 1. Selected targeting sequences can be made shorter e.g. 12 bases or longer e.g. 40 bases and include a small number of mismatches as long as the sequence is sufficiently complementary to disrupt the stem structure s upon hybridization with the target and forms with the virus positive strand a heteroduplex having a Tm of 45 C. or greater.

More generally the degree of complementarity between the target and targeting sequence is sufficient to form a stable duplex. The region of complementarity of the antisense oligomers with the target RNA sequence may be as short as 8 11 bases but is preferably 12 15 bases or more e.g. 12 20 bases or 12 25 bases. An antisense oligomer of about 14 15 bases is generally long enough to have a unique complementary sequence in the viral genome. In addition a minimum length of complementary bases may be required to achieve the requisite binding Tm as discussed below.

Oligomers as long as 40 bases may be suitable where at least the minimum number of bases e.g. 8 11 preferably 12 15 bases are complementary to the target sequence. In general however facilitated or active uptake in cells is optimized at oligomer lengths less than about 30 preferably less than 25 and more preferably 20 or fewer bases. For PMO oligomers described further below an optimum balance of binding stability and uptake generally occurs at lengths of 14 22 bases.

The oligomer may be 100 complementary to the viral nucleic acid target sequence or it may include mismatches e.g. to accommodate variants as long as a heteroduplex formed between the oligomer and viral nucleic acid target sequence is sufficiently stable to withstand the action of cellular nucleases and other modes of degradation which may occur in vivo. Oligomer backbones which are less susceptible to cleavage by nucleases are discussed below. Mismatches if present are less destabilizing toward the end regions of the hybrid duplex than in the middle. The number of mismatches allowed will depend on the length of the oligomer the percentage of G C base pairs in the duplex and the position of the mismatch es in the duplex according to well understood principles of duplex stability. Although such an antisense oligomer is not necessarily 100 complementary to the viral nucleic acid target sequence it is effective to stably and specifically bind to the target sequence such that a biological activity of the nucleic acid target e.g. expression of viral protein s is modulated.

The stability of the duplex formed between the oligomer and the target sequence is a function of the binding Tm and the susceptibility of the duplex to cellular enzymatic cleavage. The Tm of an antisense compound with respect to complementary sequence RNA may be measured by conventional methods such as those described by Hames et al. Nucleic Acid Hybridization IRL Press 1985 pp. 107 108 or as described in Miyada C. G. and Wallace R. B. 1987 Oligonucleotide hybridization techniques . Vol. 154 pp. 94 107. Each antisense oligomer should have a binding Tm with respect to a complementary sequence RNA of greater than body temperature and preferably greater than 50 C. Tm s in the range 60 80 C. or greater are preferred. According to well known principles the Tm of an oligomer compound with respect to a complementary based RNA hybrid can be increased by increasing the ratio of C G paired bases in the duplex and or by increasing the length in base pairs of the heteroduplex. At the same time for purposes of optimizing cellular uptake it may be advantageous to limit the size of the oligomer. For this reason compounds that show high Tm 50 C. or greater at a length of 20 bases or less are generally preferred over those requiring greater than 20 bases for high Tm values.

Table 2 below shows exemplary targeting sequences in a 5 to 3 orientation that are complementary to influenza A virus. The sequences listed provide a collection of targeting sequences from which targeting sequences may be selected according to the general class rules discussed above. SEQ ID NOs 10 12 15 17 20 23 and 24 are antisense to the positive strand mRNA or cRNA of the virus whereas SEQ ID NOs 13 14 16 18 19 21 and 22 are antisense to the minus strand vRNA . Thus for example in selecting a target against the 3 terminus of the minus strand of the NP encoding segment segment 5 of influenza A SEQ ID NOs 13 or 16 or a portion of either sequence effective to block the function of the 3 terminus of the minus strand can be selected.

As detailed above the antisense oligonucleotide analog compound the term antisense indicates that the compound is targeted against either the virus positive sense strand RNA or negative sense or minus strand has a base sequence targeting a region that includes one or more of the following 1 the 5 or 3 terminal 30 bases of the negative sense viral RNA 2 the terminal 30 bases of the 3 terminus of the positive sense mRNA and or 3 50 bases surrounding the AUG start codons of viral mRNA. In addition the oligomer is able to effectively target infecting viruses when administered to a host cell e.g. in an infected mammalian subject. This requirement is met when the oligomer compound a has the ability to be actively taken up by mammalian cells and b once taken up form a duplex with the target RNA with a Tm greater than about 45 C.

As will be described below the ability to be taken up by cells requires that the oligomer backbone be substantially uncharged and preferably that the oligomer structure is recognized as a substrate for active or facilitated transport across the cell membrane. The ability of the oligomer to form a stable duplex with the target RNA will also depend on the oligomer backbone as well as factors noted above the length and degree of complementarity of the antisense oligomer with respect to the target the ratio of G C to A T base matches and the positions of any mismatched bases. The ability of the antisense oligomer to resist cellular nucleases promotes survival and ultimate delivery of the agent to the cell cytoplasm.

Below are disclosed methods for testing any given substantially uncharged backbone for its ability to meet these requirements.

The antisense compound may be taken up by host cells by facilitated or active transport across the host cell membrane if administered in free non complexed form or by an endocytotic mechanism if administered in complexed form.

In the case where the agent is administered in free form the antisense compound should be substantially uncharged meaning that a majority of its intersubunit linkages are uncharged at physiological pH. Experiments carried out in support of the invention indicate that a small number of net charges e.g. 1 2 for a 15 to 20 mer oligomer can in fact enhance cellular uptake of certain oligomers with substantially uncharged backbones. The charges may be carried on the oligomer itself e.g. in the backbone linkages or may be terminal charged group appendages. Preferably the number of charged linkages is no more than one charged linkage per four uncharged linkages. More preferably the number is no more than one charged linkage per ten or no more than one per twenty uncharged linkages. In one embodiment the oligomer is fully uncharged.

An oligomer may also contain both negatively and positively charged backbone linkages as long as opposing charges are present in approximately equal number. Preferably the oligomer does not include runs of more than 3 5 consecutive subunits of either charge. For example the oligomer may have a given number of anionic linkages e.g. phosphorothioate or N3 P5 phosphoramidate linkages and a comparable number of cationic linkages such as N N diethylenediamine phosphoramidates Dagle Littig et al. 2000 . The net charge is preferably neutral or at most 1 2 net charges per oligomer.

In addition to being substantially or fully uncharged the antisense agent is preferably a substrate for a membrane transporter system i.e. a membrane protein or proteins capable of facilitating transport or actively transporting the oligomer across the cell membrane. This feature may be determined by one of a number of tests for oligomer interaction or cell uptake as follows.

A first test assesses binding at cell surface receptors by examining the ability of an oligomer compound to displace or be displaced by a selected charged oligomer e.g. a phosphorothioate oligomer on a cell surface. The cells are incubated with a given quantity of test oligomer which is typically fluorescently labeled at a final oligomer concentration of between about 10 300 nM. Shortly thereafter e.g. 10 30 minutes before significant internalization of the test oligomer can occur the displacing compound is added in incrementally increasing concentrations. If the test compound is able to bind to a cell surface receptor the displacing compound will be observed to displace the test compound. If the displacing compound is shown to produce 50 displacement at a concentration of 10 the test compound concentration or less the test compound is considered to bind at the same recognition site for the cell transport system as the displacing compound.

A second test measures cell transport by examining the ability of the test compound to transport a labeled reporter e.g. a fluorescence reporter into cells. The cells are incubated in the presence of labeled test compound added at a final concentration between about 10 300 nM. After incubation for 30 120 minutes the cells are examined e.g. by microscopy for intracellular label. The presence of significant intracellular label is evidence that the test compound is transported by facilitated or active transport.

The antisense compound may also be administered in complexed form where the complexing agent is typically a polymer e.g. a cationic lipid polypeptide or non biological cationic polymer having an opposite charge to any net charge on the antisense compound. Methods of forming complexes including bilayer complexes between anionic oligonucleotides and cationic lipid or other polymer components are well known. For example the liposomal composition Lipofectin Felgner Gadek et al. 1987 containing the cationic lipid DOTMA N 1 2 3 dioleyloxy propyl N N N trimethylammonium chloride and the neutral phospholipid DOPE dioleyl phosphatidyl ethanolamine is widely used. After administration the complex is taken up by cells through an endocytotic mechanism typically involving particle encapsulation in endosomal bodies.

The antisense compound may also be administered in conjugated form with an arginine rich peptide linked covalently to the 5 or 3 end of the antisense oligomer. The peptide is typically 8 16 amino acids and consists of a mixture of arginine and other amino acids including phenyalanine and cysteine. The use of arginine rich peptide PMO conjugates can be used to enhance cellular uptake of the antisense oligomer See e.g. Moulton Nelson et al. 2004 Nelson Stein et al. 2005 . Exemplary arginine rich peptides for use in practicing the invention are listed as SEQ ID NOs 25 30. Non natural amino acids can be used in combination with naturally occuring amino acids as shown in the Sequence listing table for SEQ ID NOs 26 30. In these examples 6 aminohexanoic acid Ahx and or beta alanine Ala are used.

In some instances liposomes may be employed to facilitate uptake of the antisense oligonucleotide into cells. See e.g. Williams S. A. Leukemia 10 12 1980 1989 1996 Lappalainen et al. Antiviral Res. 23 119 1994 Uhlmann et al. antisense oligonucleotides a new therapeutic principle Chemical Reviews Volume 90 No. 4 pages 544 584 1990 Gregoriadis G. Chapter 14 Liposomes Drug Carriers in Biology and Medicine pp. 287 341 Academic Press 1979 . Hydrogels may also be used as vehicles for antisense oligomer administration for example as described in WO 93 01286. Alternatively the oligonucleotides may be administered in microspheres or microparticles. See e.g. Wu and Wu 1987 . Alternatively the use of gas filled microbubbles complexed with the antisense oligomers can enhance delivery to target tissues as described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 245 747.

Alternatively and according to another aspect of the invention the requisite properties of oligomers with any given backbone can be confirmed by a simple in vivo test in which a labeled compound is administered to an animal and a body fluid sample taken from the animal several hours after the oligomer is administered assayed for the presence of heteroduplex with target RNA. This method is detailed in subsection D below.

Two general mechanisms have been proposed to account for inhibition of expression by antisense oligonucleotides. See e.g. Agrawal Mayrand et al. 1990 Bonham Brown et al. 1995 Boudvillain Guerin et al. 1997 . In the first a heteroduplex formed between the oligonucleotide and the viral RNA acts as a substrate for RNaseH leading to cleavage of the viral RNA. Oligonucleotides belonging or proposed to belong to this class include phosphorothioates phosphotriesters and phosphodiesters unmodified natural oligonucleotides . Such compounds expose the viral RNA in an oligomer RNA duplex structure to hydrolysis by RNaseH and therefore loss of function.

A second class of oligonucleotide analogs termed steric blockers or alternatively RNaseH inactive or RNaseH resistant have not been observed to act as a substrate for RNaseH and are believed to act by sterically blocking target RNA nucleocytoplasmic transport splicing or translation. This class includes methylphosphonates Toulme Tinevez et al. 1996 morpholino oligonucleotides peptide nucleic acids PNA s certain 2 O allyl or 2 O alkyl modified oligonucleotides Bonham Brown et al. 1995 and N3 P5 phosphoramidates Ding Grayaznov et al. 1996 Gee Robbins et al. 1998 .

A test oligomer can be assayed for its RNaseH resistance by forming an RNA oligomer duplex with the test compound then incubating the duplex with RNaseH under a standard assay conditions as described in Stein et al. After exposure to RNaseH the presence or absence of intact duplex can be monitored by gel electrophoresis or mass spectrometry.

In accordance with another aspect of the invention there is provided a simple rapid test for confirming that a given antisense oligomer type provides the required characteristics noted above namely high Tm ability to be actively taken up by the host cells and substantial resistance to RNaseH. This method is based on the discovery that a properly designed antisense compound will form a stable heteroduplex with the complementary portion of the viral RNA target when administered to a mammalian subject and the heteroduplex subsequently appears in the urine or other body fluid . Details of this method are also given in co owned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 736 920 entitled Non Invasive Method for Detecting Target RNA Non Invasive Method the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference.

Briefly a test oligomer containing a backbone to be evaluated having a base sequence targeted against a known RNA is injected into a mammalian subject. The antisense oligomer may be directed against any intracellular RNA including a host RNA or the RNA of an infecting virus. Several hours typically 8 72 after administration the urine is assayed for the presence of the antisense RNA heteroduplex. If heteroduplex is detected the backbone is suitable for use in the antisense oligomers of the present invention.

The test oligomer may be labeled e.g. by a fluorescent or a radioactive tag to facilitate subsequent analyses if it is appropriate for the mammalian subject. The assay can be in any suitable solid phase or fluid format. Generally a solid phase assay involves first binding the heteroduplex analyte to a solid phase support e.g. particles or a polymer or test strip substrate and detecting the presence amount of heteroduplex bound. In a fluid phase assay the analyte sample is typically pretreated to remove interfering sample components. If the oligomer is labeled the presence of the heteroduplex is confirmed by detecting the label tags. For non labeled compounds the heteroduplex may be detected by immunoassay if in solid phase format or by mass spectroscopy or other known methods if in solution or suspension format.

When the antisense oligomer is complementary to a virus specific region of the viral genome such as those regions of influenza RNA as described above the method can be used to detect the presence of a given influenza virus or reduction in the amount of virus during a treatment method.

Examples of nonionic linkages that may be used in oligonucleotide analogs are shown in . In these figures B represents a purine or pyrimidine base pairing moiety effective to bind by base specific hydrogen bonding to a base in a polynucleotide preferably selected from adenine cytosine guanine and uracil. Suitable backbone structures include carbonate 3A R O and carbamate 2A R NH linkages Mertes and Coats 1969 Gait Jones et al. 1974 alkyl phosphonate and phosphotriester linkages 2B R alkyl or O alkyl Lesnikowski Jaworska et al. 1990 amide linkages 2C Blommers Pieles et al. 1994 sulfone and sulfonamide linkages 2D R R CH and a thioformacetyl linkage 2E Cross Rice et al. 1997 . The latter is reported to have enhanced duplex and triplex stability with respect to phosphorothioate antisense compounds Cross Rice et al. 1997 . Also reported are the 3 methylene N methylhydroxyamino compounds of structure 2F. is an example of a cationic linkage group.

Peptide nucleic acids PNAs are analogs of DNA in which the backbone is structurally homomorphous with a deoxyribose backbone consisting of N 2 aminoethyl glycine units to which pyrimidine or purine bases are attached. PNAs containing natural pyrimidine and purine bases hybridize to complementary oligonucleotides obeying Watson Crick base pairing rules and mimic DNA in terms of base pair recognition Egholm Buchardt et al. 1993 . The backbone of PNAs is formed by peptide bonds rather than phosphodiester bonds making them well suited for antisense applications. The backbone is uncharged resulting in PNA DNA or PNA RNA duplexes which exhibit greater than normal thermal stability. PNAs are not recognized by nucleases or proteases.

A preferred oligomer structure employs morpholino based subunits bearing base pairing moieties joined by uncharged linkages as described above. Especially preferred is a substantially uncharged phosphorodiamidate linked morpholino oligomer such as illustrated in and . Morpholino oligonucleotides including antisense oligomers are detailed for example in co owned U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 698 685 5 217 866 5 142 047 5 034 506 5 166 315 5 185 444 5 521 063 and 5 506 337 all of which are expressly incorporated by reference herein.

Important properties of the morpholino based subunits include the ability to be linked in a oligomeric form by stable uncharged backbone linkages the ability to support a nucleotide base e.g. adenine cytosine guanine or uracil such that the polymer formed can hybridize with a complementary base target nucleic acid including target RNA with high Tm even with oligomers as short as 10 14 bases the ability of the oligomer to be actively transported into mammalian cells and the ability of the oligomer RNA heteroduplex to resist RNAse degradation.

Exemplary backbone structures for antisense oligonucleotides of the invention include the morpholino subunit types shown in each linked by an uncharged phosphorus containing subunit linkage. shows a phosphorus containing linkage which forms the five atom repeating unit backbone where the morpholino rings are linked by a 1 atom phosphoamide linkage. shows a linkage which produces a 6 atom repeating unit backbone. In this structure the atom Y linking the 5 morpholino carbon to the phosphorus group may be sulfur nitrogen carbon or preferably oxygen. The X moiety pendant from the phosphorus may be fluorine an alkyl or substituted alkyl an alkoxy or substituted alkoxy a thioalkoxy or substituted thioalkoxy or unsubstituted monosubstituted or disubstituted nitrogen including cyclic structures such as morpholines or piperidines. Alkyl alkoxy and thioalkoxy preferably include 1 6 carbon atoms. The Z moieties are sulfur or oxygen and are preferably oxygen.

The linkages shown in are designed for 7 atom unit length backbones. In Structure 1C the X moiety is as in Structure 1B and the Y moiety may be methylene sulfur or preferably oxygen. In Structure 1D the X and Y moieties are as in Structure 1B. Particularly preferred morpholino oligonucleotides include those composed of morpholino subunit structures of the form shown in where X NHor N CH Y O and Z O.

As noted above the substantially uncharged oligomer may advantageously include a limited number of charged linkages e.g. up to about 1 per every 5 uncharged linkages more preferably up to about 1 per every 10 uncharged linkages. Therefore a small number of charged linkages e.g. charged phosphoramidate or phosphorothioate may also be incorporated into the oligomers.

The antisense compounds can be prepared by stepwise solid phase synthesis employing methods detailed in the references cited above. In some cases it may be desirable to add additional chemical moieties to the antisense compound e.g. to enhance pharmacokinetics or to facilitate capture or detection of the compound. Such a moiety may be covalently attached typically to a terminus of the oligomer according to standard synthetic methods. For example addition of a polyethyleneglycol moiety or other hydrophilic polymer e.g. one having 10 100 monomeric subunits may be useful in enhancing solubility. One or more charged groups e.g. anionic charged groups such as an organic acid may enhance cell uptake. A reporter moiety such as fluorescein or a radiolabeled group may be attached for purposes of detection. Alternatively the reporter label attached to the oligomer may be a ligand such as an antigen or biotin capable of binding a labeled antibody or streptavidin. In selecting a moiety for attachment or modification of an antisense oligomer it is generally of course desirable to select chemical compounds of groups that are biocompatible and likely to be tolerated by a subject without undesirable side effects.

The antisense compounds detailed above are useful in inhibiting replication of single stranded negative sense segmented RNA viruses of the Orthomyxoviridae family. In one embodiment such inhibition is effective in treating infection of a host animal by these viruses. Accordingly the method comprises in one embodiment contacting a cell infected with the virus with a antisense agent effective to inhibit the replication of the specific virus. In this embodiment the antisense agent is administered to a mammalian subject e.g. human or domestic animal infected with a given virus in a suitable pharmaceutical carrier. It is contemplated that the antisense oligonucleotide arrests the growth of the RNA virus in the host. The RNA virus may be decreased in number or eliminated with little or no detrimental effect on the normal growth or development of the host.

In the present invention as described in the Examples Phosphorodiamidate Morpholino Oligomers PMOs designed to hybridize to various gene segments of influenza A virus were evaluated for their ability to inhibit influenza virus production in Vero cell culture. The PMOs were conjugated to a short arginine rich peptide to facilitate entry into cells in culture. Vero cells were incubated with PMO compounds inoculated with influenza virus and viral titer determined by hemagglutinin assay and or plaque assay. The compounds targeting the AUG translation start sites of polymerase component PB1 and nuclear capsid protein NP the 5 and 3 ends of vRNA NP segment and the 3 end of cRNA NP segment were very effective reducing the titer of influenza virus by 1 to 3 orders of magnitude compared to controls in a dose dependent and sequence specific manner over a period of 2 days. Combinations of some of the PMOs exhibited a synergistic antiviral effect as described in Example 3. These data indicate that several of the PMOs tested in this study are potential influenza A therapeutics.

The effective anti influenza A PMO compounds were observed not to alter the titer of influenza B virus grown in Vero cells due to the lack of homology between the influenza A virus specific PMOs and the corresponding influenza B virus targets. However the PMO described herein SEQ ID NOs 10 24 will target most if not all influenza A virus strains because of the high degree of homology between strains at the respective targets SEQ ID NOs 1 9 . An example of the sequence conservation at two preferred targets is shown in . In this case the sequence conservation between multiple isolates of H5N1 e.g. bird flu and H1N1 was determined for the targets of the PB1 AUG and NP 3 trm PMOs SEQ ID NOs 12 and 13 respectively . shows a very high level of conservation at these target sites.

The specific virus causing the infection can be determined by methods known in the art e.g. serological or cultural methods or by methods employing the antisense oligomers of the present invention.

Serological identification employs a viral sample or culture isolated from a biological specimen e.g. stool urine cerebrospinal fluid blood etc. of the subject. Immunoassay for the detection of virus is generally carried out by methods routinely employed by those of skill in the art e.g. ELISA or Western blot. In addition monoclonal antibodies specific to particular viral strains or species are often commercially available.

Culture methods may be used to isolate and identify particular types of virus by employing techniques including but not limited to comparing characteristics such as rates of growth and morphology under various culture conditions.

Another method for identifying the viral infective agent in an infected subject employs one or more antisense oligomers targeting broad families and or genera of viruses. Sequences targeting any characteristic viral RNA can be used. The desired target sequences are preferably i common to broad virus families genera and ii not found in humans. Characteristic nucleic acid sequences for a large number of infectious viruses are available in public databases and may serve as the basis for the design of specific oligomers.

For each plurality of oligomers the following steps are carried out a the oligomer s are administered to the subject b at a selected time after said administering a body fluid sample is obtained from the subject and c the sample is assayed for the presence of a nuclease resistant heteroduplex comprising the antisense oligomer and a complementary portion of the viral genome. Steps a c are carried for at least one such oligomer or as many as is necessary to identify the virus or family of viruses. Oligomers can be administered and assayed sequentially or more conveniently concurrently. The virus is identified based on the presence or absence of a heteroduplex comprising the antisense oligomer and a complementary portion of the viral genome of the given known virus or family of viruses.

Preferably a first group of oligomers targeting broad families is utilized first followed by selected oligomers complementary to specific genera and or species and or strains within the broad family genus thereby identified. This second group of oligomers includes targeting sequences directed to specific genera and or species and or strains within a broad family genus. Several different second oligomer collections i.e. one for each broad virus family genus tested in the first stage are generally provided. Sequences are selected which are i specific for the individual genus species strains being tested and ii not found in humans.

Effective delivery of the antisense oligomer to the target nucleic acid is an important aspect of treatment. In accordance with the invention routes of antisense oligomer delivery include but are not limited to various systemic routes including oral and parenteral routes e.g. intravenous subcutaneous intraperitoneal and intramuscular as well as inhalation transdermal and topical delivery. The appropriate route may be determined by one of skill in the art as appropriate to the condition of the subject under treatment. For example an appropriate route for delivery of an antisense oligomer in the treatment of a viral infection of the skin is topical delivery while delivery of a antisense oligomer for the treatment of a viral respiratory infection is by inhalation. The oligomer may also be delivered directly to the site of viral infection or to the bloodstream.

The antisense oligomer may be administered in any convenient vehicle which is physiologically acceptable. Such a composition may include any of a variety of standard pharmaceutically acceptable carriers employed by those of ordinary skill in the art. Examples include but are not limited to saline phosphate buffered saline PBS water aqueous ethanol emulsions such as oil water emulsions or triglyceride emulsions tablets and capsules. The choice of suitable physiologically acceptable carrier will vary dependent upon the chosen mode of administration.

In some instances liposomes may be employed to facilitate uptake of the antisense oligonucleotide into cells. See e.g. Williams S. A. Leukemia 10 12 1980 1989 1996 Lappalainen et al. Antiviral Res. 23 119 1994 Uhlmann et al. antisense oligonucleotides a new therapeutic principle Chemical Reviews Volume 90 No. 4 pages 544 584 1990 Gregoriadis G. Chapter 14 Liposomes Drug Carriers in Biology and Medicine pp. 287 341 Academic Press 1979 . Hydrogels may also be used as vehicles for antisense oligomer administration for example as described in WO 93 01286. Alternatively the oligonucleotides may be administered in microspheres or microparticles. See e.g. Wu G. Y. and Wu C. H. J. Biol. Chem. 262 4429 4432 1987 . Alternatively the use of gas filled microbubbles complexed with the antisense oligomers can enhance delivery to target tissues as described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 245 747.

Sustained release compositions may also be used. These may include semipermeable polymeric matrices in the form of shaped articles such as films or microcapsules.

In one aspect of the method the subject is a human subject e.g. a patient diagnosed as having a localized or systemic viral infection. The condition of a patient may also dictate prophylactic administration of an antisense oligomer of the invention e.g. in the case of a patient who 1 is immunocompromised 2 is a burn victim 3 has an indwelling catheter or 4 is about to undergo or has recently undergone surgery. In one preferred embodiment the oligomer is a phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomer contained in a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier and is delivered orally. In another preferred embodiment the oligomer is a phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomer contained in a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier and is delivered intravenously i.v. .

In another application of the method the subject is a livestock animal e.g. a chicken turkey pig cow or goat etc and the treatment is either prophylactic or therapeutic. The invention also includes a livestock and poultry food composition containing a food grain supplemented with a subtherapeutic amount of an antiviral antisense compound of the type described above. Also contemplated is in a method of feeding livestock and poultry with a food grain supplemented with subtherapeutic levels of an antiviral an improvement in which the food grain is supplemented with a subtherapeutic amount of an antiviral oligonucleotide composition as described above.

The antisense compound is generally administered in an amount and manner effective to result in a peak blood concentration of at least 200 400 nM antisense oligomer. Typically one or more doses of antisense oligomer are administered generally at regular intervals for a period of about one to two weeks. Preferred doses for oral administration are from about 1 100 mg oligomer per 70 kg. In some cases doses of greater than 100 mg oligomer patient may be necessary. For i.v. administration preferred doses are from about 0.5 mg to 100 mg oligomer per 70 kg. The antisense oligomer may be administered at regular intervals for a short time period e.g. daily for two weeks or less. However in some cases the oligomer is administered intermittently over a longer period of time. Administration may be followed by or concurrent with administration of an antibiotic or other therapeutic treatment. The treatment regimen may be adjusted dose frequency route etc. as indicated based on the results of immunoassays other biochemical tests and physiological examination of the subject under treatment.

An effective in vivo treatment regimen using the antisense oligonucleotides of the invention may vary according to the duration dose frequency and route of administration as well as the condition of the subject under treatment i.e. prophylactic administration versus administration in response to localized or systemic infection . Accordingly such in vivo therapy will often require monitoring by tests appropriate to the particular type of viral infection under treatment and corresponding adjustments in the dose or treatment regimen in order to achieve an optimal therapeutic outcome. Treatment may be monitored e.g. by general indicators of infection such as complete blood count CBC nucleic acid detection methods immunodiagnostic tests viral culture or detection of heteroduplex.

The efficacy of an in vivo administered antisense oligomer of the invention in inhibiting or eliminating the growth of one or more types of RNA virus may be determined from biological samples tissue blood urine etc. taken from a subject prior to during and subsequent to administration of the antisense oligomer. Assays of such samples include 1 monitoring the presence or absence of heteroduplex formation with target and non target sequences using procedures known to those skilled in the art e.g. an electrophoretic gel mobility assay 2 monitoring the amount of viral protein production as determined by standard techniques such as ELISA or Western blotting or 3 measuring the effect on viral titer e.g. by the method of Spearman Karber. See for example Pari G. S. et al. Antimicrob. Agents and Chemotherapy 39 5 1157 1161 1995 Anderson K. P. et al. Antimicrob. Agents and Chemotherapy 40 9 2004 2011 1996 Cottral G. E. ed in Manual of Standard Methods for Veterinary Microbiology pp. 60 93 1978 .

A preferred method of monitoring the efficacy of the antisense oligomer treatment is by detection of the antisense RNA heteroduplex. At selected time s after antisense oligomer administration a body fluid is collected for detecting the presence and or measuring the level of heteroduplex species in the sample. Typically the body fluid sample is collected 3 24 hours after administration preferably about 6 24 hours after administering. As indicated above the body fluid sample may be urine saliva plasma blood spinal fluid or other liquid sample of biological origin and may include cells or cell fragments suspended therein or the liquid medium and its solutes. The amount of sample collected is typically in the 0.1 to 10 ml range preferably about 1 ml or less.

The sample may be treated to remove unwanted components and or to treat the heteroduplex species in the sample to remove unwanted ssRNA overhang regions e.g. by treatment with RNase. It is of course particularly important to remove overhang where heteroduplex detection relies on size separation e.g. electrophoresis of mass spectroscopy.

A variety of methods are available for removing unwanted components from the sample. For example since the heteroduplex has a net negative charge electrophoretic or ion exchange techniques can be used to separate the heteroduplex from neutral or positively charged material. The sample may also be contacted with a solid support having a surface bound antibody or other agent specifically able to bind the heteroduplex. After washing the support to remove unbound material the heteroduplex can be released in substantially purified form for further analysis e.g. by electrophoresis mass spectroscopy or immunoassay.

Standard recombinant DNA techniques were employed in all constructions as described in Ausubel F M et al. in CPMB John Wiley and Sons Inc. Media Pa. 1992 and Sambrook J. et al. in MC A LM Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Cold Spring Harbor N.Y. Vol. 2 1989 .

All peptides were custom synthesized by Global Peptide Services Ft. Collins Colo. or at AVI BioPharma Corvallis Oreg. and purified to 90 purity see Example 2 below . PMOs were synthesized at AVI BioPharma in accordance with known methods as described for example in Summerton and Weller 1997 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 185 444. The structure of the PMO is as shown in .

PMO oligomers were conjugated at the 5 end with an arginine rich peptide RFRC 5 PMO SEQ ID NO 25 to enhance cellular uptake as described U.S. Patent Application 60 466 703 and Moulton Nelson et al. 2004 Nelson Stein et al. 2005 .

Phosphorodiamidate Morpholino Oligomers PMOs designed to hybridize to various gene segments of influenza A virus were evaluated for their ability to inhibit influenza virus production in Vero cell culture. The PMOs were conjugated to a short arginine rich peptide RFRC to facilitate entry into cells in culture. Vero cells were incubated with PMO compounds inoculated with influenza A virus strain PR8 H1N1 and viral titer determined by hemagglutinin assay HA and or plaque assay CFU . The PMO compounds targeting the AUG translation start sites of polymerase component PB1 and nuclear capsid protein NP SEQ ID NOs 10 and 11 the 5 and 3 ends of the NP gene SEQ ID NOs 13 and 14 encoded by the viral RNA i.e. vRNA and the 3 end of the NP gene SEQ ID NO 15 encoded by the complementary RNA cRNA were very effective in reducing the titer of influenza virus by 1 to 3 orders of magnitude compared to controls in a dose dependent and sequence specific manner over a period of 2 days.

PMOs that target the AUG start codons of three influenza virus genes NP AUG PB2 AUG and PB1 AUG SEQ ID NOs 0 12 respectively were assayed for their ability to inhibit influenza A virus replication in a dose response assay using the hemagglutinin assay and the plaque forming assay. The results are shown in . For all three PMOs the concentration that effectively resulted in a 50 reduction in viral replication EC50 was found to be less than 1 M. A three log reduction in viral replication using the plaque assay was observed for two of the PMOs NP AUG and PB1 AUG at 10 M. Identical assays were performed using the termini targeted PMO NP 3 NP 5 NP 3 and NP 5 SEQ ID NOs 13 14 15 and 24 respectively . All four PMOs demonstrated significant reduction in viral titer as shown in .

Quantitative RTPCR was used to determine the effect of one of the termini targeted PMO NP 3 SEQ ID NO 13 on the transcription of the NP vRNA segment into mRNA and cRNA species i.e. see . The mRNA transcription product is positive sense RNA whereas the cRNA is a negative sense RNA. The NP 3 PMO was incubated with Vero cells for 6 hours followed by influenza A virus infection at an MOI of 0.05. Three hours post infection RNA was isolated and RNA species specific reverse transcription RT was performed followed by quantitative PCR on the reaction product. shows that the NP 3 PMO SEQ ID NO 13 that targets the 3 end of the vRNA strongly suppressed the transcription of NP mRNA and cRNA.

Combinations of some of the PMOs exhibited a synergistic antiviral effect. shows the synergistic effect of various combinations of PMO that target the NP vRNA termini and the NP AUG region. PMO treatment and influenza A virus infection were as described in Example 1. The plaque assay was used to measure virus replication. Three termini targeted PMO NP 3 NP 5 NP 3 SEQ ID NOs 13 15 and the NP AUG PMO SEQ ID NO 10 were mixed in various combinations as shown in . One combination NP 3 with NP 5 did not produce antiviral activity as this pair of PMO are predicted to hybridize to each other. All the other PMO combinations demonstrated significant inhibition of influenza A viral replication.

