---

title: Hydroxyalkyl starch derivatives
abstract: The present invention relates to a method of producing a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative comprising reacting hydroxyalkyl starch of formula (I) at its reducing end which is not oxidized prior to said reaction, with a compound of formula (II) R′NH—R″ (II) wherein R-Rand Rare independently hydrogen or a linear or branched hydroxyalkyl group, and wherein either R′ or R″ or R′ and R″ comprise at least one functional group X capable of being reacted with at least one other compound prior to or after the reaction of (I) and (II), as well as to the hydroxyalkyl starch derivative as such, obtainable by said method, and to a pharmaceutical composition comprising said hydroxyalkyl starch derivative.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07815893&OS=07815893&RS=07815893
owner: Fresenius Kabi Deutschland GmbH
number: 07815893
owner_city: Bad Homburg v.d.H.
owner_country: DE
publication_date: 20050311
---
This application is a continuation in part and claims benefit under 35 U.S.C. 120 of International Application No. PCT EP03 08859 having an International Filing Date of Aug. 8 2003 which published in English as International Publication Number WO 2004 024777 and which claims the benefit of priority of European Patent Application No. 02020425.1 having a filing date of Sep. 11 2002 and U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 409 781 having a filing date of Sep. 11 2002.

The present invention relates to hydroxyalkyl starch derivates particularly hydroxyalkyl starch derivatives obtainable by a process in which hydroxyalkyl starch is reacted with a primary or secondary amino group of a linker compound. According to an especially preferred embodiment the present invention relates to hydroxyalkyl starch derivatives obtainable by a process according to which hydroxyalkyl starch is reacted with a primary or secondary amino group of a linker compound and the resulting reaction product is reacted with a polypeptide preferably with a glycoprotein and especially preferably with erythropoietin via at least one other reactive group of the linker compound. A hydroxyalkyl starch which is especially preferred is hydroxyethyl starch. According to the present invention the hydroxyalkyl starch and preferably the hydroxylethyl starch is reacted with the linker compound at its reducing end which is not oxidized prior to said reaction.

Hydroxyethyl starch HES is a derivative of naturally occurring amylopectin and is degraded by alpha amylase in the body. HES is a substituted derivative of the carbohydrate polymer amylopectin which is present in corn starch at a concentration of up to 95 by weight. HES exhibits advantageous biological properties and is used as a blood volume replacement agent and in hemodilution therapy in the clinics Sommermeyer et al. 1987 Krankenhauspharmazie 8 8 271 278 and Weidler et al. 1991 Arzneim. Forschung Drug Res. 41 494 498 .

Amylopectin consists of glucose moieties wherein in the main chain alpha 1 4 glycosidic bonds are present and at the branching sites alpha 1 6 glycosidic bonds are found. The physical chemical properties of this molecule are mainly determined by the type of glycosidic bonds. Due to the nicked alpha 1 4 glycosidic bond helical structures with about six glucose monomers per turn are produced. The physico chemical as well as the biochemical properties of the polymer can be modified via substitution. The introduction of a hydroxyethyl group can be achieved via alkaline hydroxyethylation. By adapting the reaction conditions it is possible to exploit the different reactivity of the respective hydroxy group in the unsubstituted glucose monomer with respect to a hydroxyethylation. Owing to this fact the skilled person is able to influence the substitution pattern to a limited extent.

DE 26 16 086 discloses the conjugation of hemoglobin to hydroxyethyl starch wherein in a first step a cross linking agent e.g. bromocyane is bound to hydroxyethyl starch and subsequently hemoglobin is linked to the intermediate product.

One important field in which HES is used is the stabilisation of polypeptides which are applied e.g. to the circulatory system in order to obtain a particular physiological effect. One specific example of these polypeptides is erythropoietin an acid glycoprotein of approximately 34 000 kD which is essential in regulating the level of red blood cells in the circulation.

A well known problem with the application of polypeptides and enzymes is that these proteins often exhibit an unsatisfactory stability. Especially erythropoietin has a relatively short plasma half live Spivak and Hogans 1989 Blood 73 90 McMahon et al. 1990 Blood 76 1718 . This means that therapeutic plasma levels are rapidly lost and repeated intravenous administrations must be carried out. Furthermore in certain circumstances an immune response against the peptides is observed.

It is generally accepted that the stability of polypeptides can be improved and the immune response against these polypeptides is reduced when the polypeptides are coupled to polymeric molecules. WO 94 28024 discloses that physiologically active polypeptides modified with polyethyleneglycol PEG exhibit reduced immunogenicity and antigenicity and circulate in the bloodstream considerably longer than unconjugated proteins i.e. have a longer clearance rate. However PEG drug conjugates exhibit several disadvantages e.g. they do not exhibit a natural structure which can be recognized by elements of in vivo degradation pathways. Therefore apart from PEG conjugates other conjugates and protein polymerates have been produced. A plurality of methods for the cross linking of different proteins and macromolecules such as polymerase have been described in the literature see e.g. Wong Chemistry of protein conjugation and cross liking 1993 CRCS Inc. .

The HES drug conjugates disclosed in the art suffer from the disadvantage that HES is not conjugated site specifically to the drug. Consequently the conjugation results in a very heterogenous product having many components that may be inactive due to the destruction of the 3 dimensional structure during the conjugation step. Therefore there is a need for further improved HES polypeptides conjugates with improved stability and or bioactivity.

One method of producing these conjugates uses as starting material an oxidized form of HES which is reacted with a crosslinking compound wherein the resulting product is reacted with a polypeptide or further modified and subsequently reacted with a polypeptide. It is a major disadvantage of this method that in a first step the original HES has to be selectively oxidized generally at its reducing end by oxidizing the terminal aldehyde group and or hemiacetale group to a lactone thus rendering the overall process more difficult and expensive.

WO 02 08079 A2 discloses compounds comprising a conjugate of an active agent and a hydroxyalkyl starch wherein active agent and hydroxyalykl starch are either linked directly or via a linker compound. As far as the direct linkage is concerned the reaction of active agent and hydroxyalkyl starch is carried out in an aqueous medium which comprises at least 10 wt. of water. No examples are given which are directed to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative which is produced by reacting hydroxyalkyl starch at its reducing end with a crosslinking compound comprising the structure unit NH in an aqueous medium. All examples are directed to hydroxyalkyl starch which is oxidized prior to a further reaction the specific teaching of WO 02 08079 A2 thus having the aformentioned disadvantages.

Therefore it is an object of the present invention to provide a method of producing a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative which allows for reacting hydroxyalkyl starch at its reducing end with a suitable compound wherein the reducing end of the starch is not oxidized prior to the reaction.

It is a further object of the present invention to provide a method of producing a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative which allows for reacting hydroxyalkyl starch at its reducing end with a suitable compound wherein the reducing end of the starch is not oxidized prior to the reaction said method being further characterized in that the reaction product of the reaction of hydroxyalkyl starch at its reducing end with a suitable compound is further reacted with at least one further compound.

It is a still further object of the present invention to provide a method as described above wherein the at least one further compound is a polypeptide preferably a protein more preferably erythropoietin.

It is yet another object of the present invention to provide a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative which is obtainable by a method as described above which comprises reacting hydroxyalkyl starch at its reducing end with a suitable compound wherein the reducing end of the starch is not oxidized prior to the reaction.

Therefore the present invention relates to a method of producing a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative comprising reacting hydroxyalkyl starch HAS of formula I 

In the context of the present invention the term hydroxyalkyl starch HAS refers to a starch derivative which has been substituted by at least one hydroxyalkyl group. Therefore the term hydroxyalkyl starch as used in the present invention is not limited to compounds where the terminal carbohydrate moiety comprises hydroxyalkyl groups R R and or Ras depicted for the sake of brevity in formula I but also refers to compounds in which at least one hydroxy group present anywhere either in the terminal carbohydrate moiety and or in the remaining part of the starch molecule HAS is substituted by a hydroxyalkyl group R R or R.

In this context the alkyl group may be a linear or branched alkyl group which may be suitably substituted. Preferably the hydroxyalkyl group contains 1 to 10 carbon atoms more preferably from 1 to 0.6 carbon atoms more preferably from 1 to 4 carbon atoms and even more preferably 2 4 carbon atoms. Hydroxyalkyl starch therefore preferably comprises hydroxyethyl starch hydroxypropyl starch and hydroxybutyl starch wherein hydroxyethyl starch and hydroxypropyl starch are particularly preferred.

The at least one hydroxyalkyl group comprised in HAS may contain two or more hydroxy groups. According to a preferred embodiment the at least one hydroxyalkyl group comprised HAS contains one hydroxy group.

The expression hydroxyalkyl starch also includes derivatives wherein the alkyl group is mono or polysubstituted. In this context it is preferred that the alkyl group is substituted with a halogen especially fluorine or with an aryl group provided that the HAS remains soluble in water. Furthermore the terminal hydroxy group a of hydroxyalkyl group may be esterified or etherified.

Furthermore instead of alkyl also linear or branched substituted or unsubstituted alkene groups may be used.

Hydroxyalkyl starch is an ether derivative of starch. Besides of said ether derivatives also other starch derivatives can be used in the context of the present invention. For example derivatives are useful which comprise esterified hydroxy groups. These derivatives may be e.g. derivatives of unsubstituted mono or dicarboxylic acids with 2 12 carbon atoms or of substituted derivatives thereof. Especially useful are derivatives of unsubstituted monocarboxylic acids with 2 6 carbon atoms especially derivatives of acetic acid. In this context acetyl starch butyl starch and propyl starch are preferred.

In the case of derivatives of dicarboxylic acids it is useful that the second carboxy group of the dicarboxylic acid is also esterified. Furthermore derivatives of monoalkyl esters of dicarboxylic acids are also suitable in the context of the present invention.

For the substituted mono or dicarboxylic acids the substitute groups may be preferably the same as mentioned above for substituted alkyl residues.

Techniques for the esterification of starch are known in the art see e.g. Klemm D. et al Comprehensive Cellulose Chemistry Vol. 2 1998 Whiley VCH Weinheim N.Y. especially chapter 4.4 Esterification of Cellulose ISBN 3 527 29489 9 .

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the hydroxyalkyl starch is hydroxyethyl starch.

HES is mainly characterized by the molecular weight distribution and the degree of substitution. There are two possibilities of describing the substitution degree 

HES solutions are present as polydisperse compositions wherein each molecule differs from the other with respect to the polymerisation degree the number and pattern of branching sites and the substitution pattern. HES is therefore a mixture of compounds with different molecular weight. Consequently a particular HES solution is determined by average molecular weight with the help of statistical means. In this context Mis calculated as the arithmetic mean depending on the number of molecules. Alternatively M the weight mean represents a unit which depends on the mass of the HES.

In the context of the present invention hydroxyethyl starch may have a mean molecular weight weight mean of from 1 to 300 kDa wherein a mean molecular weight of from 5 to 100 kDa is more preferred. Hydroxyethyl starch can further exhibit a molar degree of substitution of from 0.1 to 0.8 and a ratio between C Csubstitution in the range of from 2 to 20 with respect to the hydroxyethyl groups.

As far as the residues R Rand Raccording to formula I are concerned there are no specific limitations given that compound I remains capable of being reacted with a compound according to formula II . According to a preferred embodiment R Rand Rare independently hydrogen or a hydroxyalkyl group a hydroxyaryl group a hydroxyaralkly group or a hydroxyalkarly group having of from 1 to 10 carbon atoms. Hydrogen and hydroxyalkyl groups having of from 1 to 6 carbon atoms are preferred. The alkyl aryl aralkyl and or alkaryl group may be linear or branched and suitably substituted.

Therefore the present invention also related to a method as described above wherein R Rand Rare independently hydrogen or a linear or branched hydroxyalkyl group with from 1 to 6 carbon atoms.

Thus R Rand Rmay be hydroxyhexyl hydroxypentyl hydroxybutyl hydroxypropyl such as 1 hydroxypropyl 2 hydroxypropyl 3 hydroxypropyl 1 hydroxyisopropyl 2 hydroxyisopropyl hydroxyethyl such as 1 hydroxyethyl 2 hydroxyethyl or hydroxymethyl. Hydrogen and hydroxyethyl groups are preferred hydrogen and the 2 hydroxyethyl group being especially preferred.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein R Rand Rare independently hydrogen or a 2 hydroxyethyl group.

According to the present invention hydroxyalkyl starch is reacted with a compound of formula II wherein compound II may be reacted with another compound prior to the reaction with compound I to give a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative. As to compound II there are no specific limitations if compound II is capable of being reacted via the NH group bridging R and R with compound I at its reducing end which is not oxidized to give a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative.

Preferred residues R of compound II are hydrogen and alkyl cycloalkyl aryl aralkyl arylcycloalkyl alkaryl or cycloalkylaryl residues where cycloalkyl aryl aralkyl arylcycloalkyl alkaryl or cycloalkylaryl residues may be linked directly to the NH group bridging R and R of compound II or according to another embodiment may be linked by an oxygen bridge to the NH group bridging R and R of compound II . The alkyl aryl aralkyl or alkaryl residues may be suitably substituted. As preferred substituents halogenes such as F Cl or Br may be mentioned. Especially preferred residues R are hydrogen alkyl and alkoxy groups and even more preferred are hydrogen and unsubstituted alkyl and alkoxy groups.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein R is hydrogen or a linear or branched alkyl or alkoxy group.

Among the alkyl and alkoxy groups groups with 1 2 3 4 5 or 6 C atoms are preferred. More preferred are methyl ethyl propyl isopropyl methoxy ethoxy propoxy and isopropoxy groups. Especially preferred are methyl ethyl methoxy ethoxy and particular preference is given to methyl or methoxy.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein R is hydrogen or a methyl or a methoxy group.

Apart from the functional group X R may comprise at least one additional functional group W. This at least one additional functional group W generally may be anywhere in R . Preferably W is directly linked to the NH group R is linked to.

In general there are no specific limitations regarding functional group W given that compound I is capable of being reacted with compound II . In preferred embodiments functional group W comprises the structure unit NH and or the structure unit C G where G is O or S and or the structure unit SO . According to more preferred embodiments the functional group W is selected from the group consisting of

According to preferred embodiments of the present invention where R is H and W is linked directly to the NH group bridging R and R R and the NH group bridging R and R form together with W the one of following groups 

As far as the at least one functional group X which is comprised in R and or R preferably in R no specific limitations exist. In general all functional groups are possible which allow the reaction with at least one further compound.

As far as this reaction with a further compound is concerned all kinds of interactions of the at least one functional group with the at least one further compound are possible. Among others reactions of the at least one functional group X with a further compound are possible which lead to a covalent linkage a ionic linkage and or a van der Waals linkage the covalent linkage being especially preferred.

Among these groups the thio group the amino group the hydroxylamino group the alkoxyamino groups and the following groups are especially preferred 

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the at least one functional group X is selected from the group consisting of SH NH O NH NH O alkyl C G NH NH G C G NH NH NH C G NH NH and SO NH NHwhere G is O or S and if G is present twice it is independently O or S.

As far as the alkoxyamino groups are concerned particular preference is given to the propoxyamino group the ethoxyamino group and the methoxyamino group the methoxyamino group NH O CHbeing especially preferred.

According to yet another aspect of the present invention the at least one functional group X may be a group which is not capable of reacting directly with a given further compound but which may be chemically modified in order to be capable of reacting in the desired way. This modification of the functional group X comprised in compound II may be carried out either prior to the reaction of compound II with compound I or after the reaction of compound II with compound I . If compound II comprises at least two optionally chemically different functional groups X it is possible to modify at least one functional group X prior to the reaction of compound II with compound I and at least one functional group X after the reaction of compound II with compound I .

As an example of a functional group X to be modified prior to the reaction with a further compound a 1 2 amino alcohol or a 1 2 diol may be mentioned which is modified e.g. by oxidation to form an aldehyd or a keto group.

Another example for a functional group X to be modified prior to the reaction with a further compound is a NHgroup which is modified by the reaction with e.g. a compound according to the following formula

Another example for a functional group X to be modified prior to the reaction with a further compound is a NHgroup which is modified by the reaction with e.g. a compound according to the following formula

The at least one functional group X may be linked directly to the NH group bridging R and R . Thus according to one embodiment of the present invention the functional group X is equivalent to R . Specific examples of compounds where X is directly linked to the NH group bridging R and R are among others 

Another specific example of a such a compound which is also comprised in the present invention is NH.

According to another embodiment of the present invention the NH group bridging R and R may be separated from the at least one functional group X by a linear or branched alkyl or cycloalkyl or aryl or aralkyl or arylcycloalkyl or alkaryl or cycloalkylaryl group wherein these groups may comprise at least one heteroatom such as N O S and wherein these groups may be suitably substituted. The size of the group separating NH bridging R and R and the at least one functional group X may be adapted to the specific needs. Generally the separating group has generally from 1 to 60 preferably from 1 to 40 more preferably from 1 to 20 more preferably from 1 to 10 more preferably from 1 to 6 and especially preferably from 1 to 4 carbon atoms. If heteroatoms are present the separating group comprises generally from 1 to 20 preferably from 1 to 8 and especially preferably from 1 to 4 heteroatoms. According to particularly preferred embodiments of the present invention the separating group comprises 1 to 4 oxygen atoms. The separating group may comprise an optionally branched alkyl chain or an aryl group or a cycloalkyl group having e.g. from 5 to 7 carbon atoms or be a aralkyl group an alkaryl group where the alkyl part may be a linear and or cyclic alkyl group. According to an even more preferred embodiment the separating group is an alkyl chain of from 1 to 20 preferably from 1 to 8 more preferably from 1 to 6 more preferably from 1 to 4 and especially preferably from 2 to 4 carbon atoms. In case heteroatoms are present a chain comprising 1 to 4 oxygen atoms is particularly preferred.

Specific examples of compounds II where X is separated from the NH group bridging R and R are among others 

The group separating NH bridging R and R and the at least one functional group X may be suitably substituted. Preferred substituents are e.g halides such as F Cl Br or I.

The group separating NH bridging R and R and the at least one functional group X may comprise one or more cleavage sites such as

According to an especially preferred embodiment of the present invention the compound II is O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxyl amine

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein compound II is O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxyl amine or carbohydrazide.

In case compound II comprises one or more chiral centers compound II may be present in R conformation or in S conformation or as racemic compound with respect to each chiral center.

As described above compound I may be reacted with compound II as such or with compound II which has been reacted with at least one further compound prior to the reaction with compound I .

The reaction of compound I with compound II as such may be carried out in at least one suitable solvent. The respective solvent or mixture of two or more solvents may be adapted to the specific needs of the reaction conditions and the chemical nature of compounds I and II . According to an especially preferred embodiment of the present invention water is used as solvent either alone or in combination with at least one other solvent. As at least one other solvent DMSO DMF methanol and ethanol may be mentioned. Preferred solvents other than water are DMSO DMF methanol and ethanol.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of compound I with compound II is carried out in an aqueous system.

The term aqueous system as used in the context of the present invention refers to a solvent or a mixture of solvents comprising water in the range of from at least 10 per weight preferably at least 50 per weight more preferably at least 80 per weight even more preferably at least 90 per weight or up to 100 per weight based on the weight of the solvents involved. The preferred reaction medium is water.

As far as the temperatures which are applied during the reaction are concerned no specific limitations exist given that the reaction results in the desired hydroxyalkyl starch derivative.

In case compound I is reacted with compound II compound II being a hydroxylamine or a hydrazide the temperature is preferably in the range of from 5 to 45 C. more preferably in the range of from 10 to 30 C. and especially preferably in the range of from 15 to 25 C.

In case compound I is reacted with compound II said reaction being a reductive amination the temperature is preferably in the range of up to 100 C. more preferably in the range of from 20 to 95 C. more preferably in the range of from 25 to 90 C. more preferably in the range of from 70 to 90 C. and especially preferably in the range of from 75 to 85 C.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of compound I and compound II compound II being a hydroxylamine or a hydrazide is carried out at a temperature of from 5 to 45 C.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of compound I and compound II said reaction being a reductive amination is carried out at a temperature of from 25 to 90 C.

During the course of the reaction the temperature may be varied preferably in the above given ranges or held essentially constant.

The reaction time for the reaction of compound I with II may be adapted to the specific needs and is generally in the range of from 1 h to 7 d.

In case compound II is a hydroxylamine or a hydrazide the reaction time is preferably in the range of from 1 h to 3 d and more preferably of from 2 h to 48 h.

In case the reaction of compound I and compound II is a reductive amination the reaction time is preferably in the range of from 2 h to 7 d.

The pH value for the reaction of compound I with II may be adapted to the specific needs such as the chemical nature of the reactants.

In case compound II is a hydroxylamine or a hydrazide the pH value is preferably in the range of from 4.5 to 6.5.

In case the reaction of compound I and compound II is a reductive amination the pH value is preferably in the range of from 8 to 12.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of compound I and compound II compound II being a hydroxylamine or a hydrazide is carried out at a pH of from 4.5 to 6.5.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of compound I and compound II said reaction being a reductive amination is carried out at a pH of from 8 to 12.

Specific examples of above mentioned reaction conditions are e.g. a reaction temperature of about 25 C. and a pH of about 5.5 in case compound is a hydroxylamine and a reaction temperature of about 80 C. and a pH of about 11 in case the reaction of compound I and compound II is a reductive amination.

The suitable pH value of the reaction mixture may be adjusted by adding at least one suitable buffer. Among the preferred buffers sodium acetate buffer phosphate or borate buffers may be mentioned.

According to a preferred embodiment of the present invention the reaction product resulting from the reaction of compound I with compound II is reacted with at least one further compound via the at least one functional group X.

If necessary the at least one functional group X may be protected with at least one suitable protecting group prior to the reaction of compound I with compound II . In this respect all conceivable protecting groups are possible which prevent the protected compound II from reacting with compound I via the at least one functional group X. Hence the protecting group may be chosen depending from the chemical nature of the functional group X to be protected from e.g. the solvent the reaction is carried out in or the pH of the reaction mixture. Preferred protecting groups are among others the benzyloxycarbonyl group the tert butoxycarbonyl group the methoxyphenyl group the 2 4 dimethoxyphenyl group triarly methyl groups trityl the monomethoxytrityl group the dimethoxytrityl group the monomethyltrityl group the dimethyltrityl group the trifluoracetyl group phthalimin compounds 2 trialkylslyl ethoxy carbonyl compounds Fmoc the tert butyl group or trialkyl silyl groups.

If two or more different functional groups X are present in compound II at least one group may be protected whereas at least one other group may be left unprotected.

After the reaction of compound I with compound II the at least one protecting group may be left in the reaction product or removed by suitable methods such as conventional methods known to the person skilled in the art. If two different functional groups X are protected by suitable protecting groups it is possible to remove at least one protecting group so as to make at least one functional group X available for further reaction with at least one further compound and leave at least one other functional group protected until the reaction product of compound I with compound II is reacted with the further compound. Afterwards the protecting group of the functional group still protected may be removed to make the remaining functional group X available for reaction with yet a further compound.

The use of at least one protecting group may be important for preventing the reaction from resulting in a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative consisting of a compound II which has been reacted with two or more compounds I i.e. a multiple HAS substituted compound II . The same result however may be achieved by reacting compound I with an excess of compound II . If an excess amount of compound II is used in the process of the present invention the molar ratio of compound II to compound I is preferably in the range of from 2 to 100.

Once the reaction product of the reaction of compound I with compound II is formed it may be isolated from the reaction mixture by at least one suitable method. If necessary the reaction product may be precipitated prior to the isolation by at least one suitable method.

If the reaction product is precipitated first it is possible e.g. to contact the reaction mixture with at least one solvent or solvent mixture other than the solvent or solvent mixture present in the reaction mixture at suitable temperatures. According to a particularly preferred embodiment of the present invention where water is used as solvent the reaction mixture is contacted with a mixture of ethanol and acetone preferably a 1 1 mixture indicating equal volumes of said compounds at a temperature preferably in the range of from 20 to 50 C. and especially preferably in the range of from 0 to 25 C.

Isolation of the reaction product may be carried out by a suitable process which may comprise one or more steps. According to a preferred embodiment of the present invention the reaction product is first separated off the reaction mixture or the mixture of the reaction mixture with e.g. the ethanol acetone mixture by a suitable method such as centrifugation or filtration. In a second step the separated reaction product may be subjected to a further treatment such as an after treatment like dialysis centrifugal filtration or pressure filtration ion exchange chromatography HPLC MPLC gel filtration and or lyophilisation. According to an even more preferred embodiment the separated reaction product is first dialysed preferably against water and then lyophilized until the solvent content of the reaction product is sufficiently low according to the desired specifications of the product. Lyophilisation may be carried out at temperature of from 20 to 35 C. preferably of from 25 to 30 C.

The thus isolated reaction product of compound I and compound II may be further reacted with at least one other compound via at least one functional group X comprised in said reaction product.

Depending on the chemical nature of the functional group X every conceivable compound capable of forming a chemical linkage with this group X may be used. For this reaction one or more suitable solvents may be used and all reaction parameters such as the temperature during the reaction the reaction time the ratios of the reactants or the pH value of the reaction mixture may be adapted to the specific needs.

According to a particularly preferred embodiment of the present invention the at least one compound capable of forming a chemical linkage with the at least one functional group X is a polypeptide or a mixture of at least two different polypeptides.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction product of compound I and compound II is reacted with a polypeptide via the functional group X comprised in compound II .

According to another particularly preferred embodiment of the present invention the at least one further compound capable of forming a chemical linkage with the at least one functional group X is a crosslinking compound which is capable of forming a first chemical linkage with the at least one functional group X of the reaction product of compound I and compound II and a second chemical linkage with second further compound.

According to an even more preferred embodiment of the present invention the second further compound is a polypeptide or a mixture of at least two different polypeptides.

In the context of this embodiment of the present invention it is possible to react the reaction product of compound I and compound II the first hydroxyalkyl starch derivative with the crosslinking compound to give a second hydroxyalykl starch derivative. This second hydroxyalykl starch derivative may be subsequently reacted with the second further compound preferably a polypeptide to give a third hydroxyalykl starch derivative.

It is however also possible to react the reaction product of compound I and compound II the first hydroxyalykl starch derivative with a reaction product of the crosslinking compound with the second further compound preferably a polypeptide.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction product of compounds I and II is reacted with a further compound said further compound being a crosslinking compound via reaction of a functional group V comprised in the crosslinking compound and a functional group X comprised in the reaction product of compounds I and II .

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction product of compounds I and II is reacted with a further compound said further compound being a crosslinking compound via reaction of a functional group V comprised in the crosslinking compound and a functional group X comprised in the reaction product of compounds I and II said crosslinking compound having been reacted with a second further compound prior to the reaction with the reaction product of compounds I and II .

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the second further compound is a polypeptide preferably erythropoietin which is reacted with the crosslinking compound via reaction of a functional group X comprised in the crosslinking compound.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein compound II is reacted with a first further compound preferably a crosslinking compound to give a first reaction product said first reaction product is reacted with a second further compound to give a second reaction product and said second reaction product is reacted with compound I .

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein a first further compound preferably a crosslinking compound is reacted with a second further compound preferably a polypeptide to give a first reaction product said first reaction product is reacted with compound II to give a second reaction product and said second reaction product is reacted with compound I to give the hydroxyalkyl starch derivative.

According to especially preferred embodiments of the present invention the crosslinking compounds are used to form a chemical bridge between compound II or the reaction product of compounds I and II and a second further compound wherein the functional group of the second further compound which reacts with the crosslinking compound is a SH group or an aldehyde group or a keto group and the functional group of compound II or the reaction product of compounds I and II which reacts with the crosslinking compound is a group comprising the structure NH particularly preferably NH.

In the context of the present invention the term crosslinking compound relates to chemical compounds which are capable of forming a linkage between compound II or the reaction product of compounds I and II and at least one given second further compound. Depending on the chemical nature of the second further compound the crosslinking compound comprises at least one functional group V capable of being reacted with the functional group X comprised in compound II or the reaction product of compounds I and II and at least one further functional group which is capable of forming a chemical linkage with the second further compound. This at least one further functional group comprised in the crosslinking compound may be a functional group of the type discussed above with regard to the functional group X.

The crosslinking compound may be used to enlarge the length of the overall chemical bridge between compound I and the second further compound preferably a polypeptide and or to influence the chemical nature of the resulting reaction product either with or without the second further compound and or provide the possibility to form a linkage between several second further compounds and the reaction product of compound I II and the crosslinking compound and or to chemically modify the functional group X comprised in the reaction product of compound I and II so as to render said reaction product capable of reacting with a given further compound.

Thus embodiments of the present invention which are discussed above and which relate to the chemical modification of the functional group X being a NHgroup with a further compound e.g.

According to a preferred embodiment of the present invention the functional group V may be a functional group of the type discussed above as group X.

According to another preferred embodiment either functional group X or functional group V is a thio group and functional group V or functional group X is preferably selected from the group consisting of

According to yet another preferred embodiment either functional group X or functional group V is selected from the group consisting of an activated ester as described above or a carboxy group which is optionally transformed into an activated ester. In this particular case the functional group V or the functional group X respectively comprises the chemical structure NH .

Therefore the crosslinking compound is a compound having at least two functional groups which are the same or different. In the case of two functional group the crosslinking compound may be homo bifuncational or hetero bifunctional. A homobifunctional crosslinking compound e.g. provides the possibility to form a bridge between the reaction product of compounds I with II and a second further compound the reaction product and the further compound having the same type of functional groups. A hetero bifunctional crosslinking compound e.g. provides the possibility to form a bridge between the reaction product of compounds I with II and a second further compound the reaction product and the further compound having functional groups which are not capable of reacting with each other.

The at least two functional groups of the crosslinking compound may be linked directly together or may be separated by a linear or branched alkyl or cycloalkyl or aryl or aralkyl or arylcycloalkyl or alkaryl or cycloalkylaryl group wherein these groups may comprise at least one heteroatom such as N O S and wherein these groups may be suitably substituted. The length of the group separating the at least two functional groups of the crosslinking compound may be adapted to the specific needs. Generally the separating group has from 1 to 60 preferably from 1 to 40 more preferably from 1 to 20 more preferably from 1 to 10 more preferably from 5 to 10 carbon atoms. If heteroatoms are present the separating group comprises generally from 1 to 20 preferably from 1 to 8 and especially preferably from 1 to 4 heteroatoms. According to an even more preferred embodiment the separating group is an alkyl or aralkyl chain of from 1 to 20 carbon atoms. Moreover the crosslinking compound may further comprise at least one cleavage site as discussed above with regard to compound II .

Other examples of crosslinking compounds which are to be mentioned in the context of the present invention may be categorized e.g. according to the following list 

In Table 1 at the end of the present description some preferred examples of crosslinking compounds are listed.

In case the at least one further compound e.g. the crosslinking compound comprises one or more chiral centers the at least one further compound may be present in R conformation or in S conformation or as racemic compound with respect to each chiral center.

The term polypeptide as used in the context of the present invention refers to a compound which comprises at least 2 amino acids which are linked via a peptide bond i.e. a bond with structure C O NH . The polypeptide may be a naturally occurring compound or a polypeptide which does not occur naturally the latter comprising naturally occurring amino acids and or at least one amino acid which does not naturally occur. The backbone of the polypeptide the polypeptide chain may be further substituted with at least one suitable substituent thus having at least one sidechain. The at least one functional group Y may be part of the polypeptide backbone or of at least one substituent of the backbone wherein embodiments are possible comprising at least one functional group being part of the polypeptide backbone and at least one functional group being part of at least one substituent of the polypeptide backbone.

As far as the polypeptide is concerned there exist no restrictions given that the polypeptide comprises at least one functional group Y. Said functional group Y may be linked directly to the polypeptide backbone or be part of a side chain of the backbone. Either side chain or functional group Y or both may be part of a naturally occurring polypeptide or may be introduced into a naturally occurring polypeptide or into a polypeptide which at least partially does not occur naturally prior to the reaction with the functional group X.

Moreover the polypeptide can be at least partly of any human or animal source. In a preferred embodiment the polypeptide is of human source.

The polypeptide may be a cytokine especially erythropoietin an antithrombin AT such as AT III an interleukin especially interleukin 2 IFN beta IFN alpha G CSF CSF interleukin 6 and therapeutic antibodies.

According to a preferred embodiment the polypeptide is an antithrombin AT preferably AT III Levy J H Weisinger A Ziomek C A Echelard Y Recombinant Antithrombin Production and Role in Cardiovascular Disorder Seminars in Thrombosis and Hemostasis 27 4 2001 405 416 Edmunds T Van Patten S M Pollock J Hanson E Bernasconi R Higgins E Manavalan P Ziomek C Meade H McPherson J Cole E S Transgenically Produced Human Antithrombin Structural and Functional Comparison to Human Plasma Derived Antithrombin Blood 91 12 1998 4661 4671 Minnema M C Chang A C K Jansen P M Lubbers Y T P Pratt B M Whittaker B G Taylor F B Hack C E Friedman B Recombinant human antithrombin III improves survival and attenuates inflammatory responses in baboons lethally challenged with Blood 95 4 2000 1117 1123 Van Patten S M Hanson E H Bernasconi R Zhang K Manavaln P Cole E S McPherson J M Edmunds T Oxidation of Methionine Residues in Antithrombin J. Biol. Chemistry 274 15 1999 10268 10276 .

According to another preferred embodiment the polypeptide is human IFN beta in particular IFN beta la cf. Avonex REBIF and IFN beta 1b cf. BETASERON .

A further preferred polypeptide is human G CSF granulocyte colony stimulating factor . See e.g. Nagata et al. The chromosomal gene structure and two mRNAs for human granulocyte colony stimulating factor EMBO J. 5 575 581 1986 Souza et al. Recombinant human granulocyte colony stimulating factor effects on normal and leukemic myeloid cells Science 232 1986 61 65 and Herman et al. Characterization formulation and stability of Neupogen Filgrastim a recombinant human granulocyte colony stimulating factor in Formulalion characterization and stability of protein drugs Rodney Pearlman and Y. John Wang eds. Plenum Press New York 1996 303 328.

If a mixture of at least two different polypeptides is used the at least two polypeptides may differ e.g. in the molecular mass the number and or sequence of amino acids different degrees of glycosilation the number and or chemical nature of the substituents or the number of polypeptide chains linked by suitable chemical bonds such as disulfide bridges.

According to a preferred embodiment of the present invention the reaction product of compound I and compound II optionally further reacted with a crosslinking compound is isolated preferably according to at least one of the above mentioned processes and then reacted with a polypeptide having at least one functional group Y capable of being reacted with the at least one functional group X of the reaction product of compound I and compound II optionally further reacted with a crosslinking compound to form at least one chemical linkage. Functional groups Y of polypeptides such as proteins are e.g. 

In the context of the present invention the term carbohydrate moiety refers to hydroxyaldehydes or hydroxyketones as well as to chemical modifications thereof see R mpp Chemielexikon Thieme Verlag Stuttgart Germany 9edition 1990 Volume 9 pages 2281 2285 and the literature cited therein . Furthermore it also refers to derivatives of naturally occurring carbohydrate moieties like glucose galactose mannose sialic acid and the like. The term also includes chemically oxidized naturally occurring carbohydrate moieties. The structure of the oxidized carbohydrate moiety may be cyclic or linear.

The carbohydrate moiety may be linked directly to the polypeptide backbone. Preferably the carbohydrate moiety is part of a carbohydrate side chain. More preferably the carbohydrate moiety is the terminal moiety of the carbohydrate side chain.

In an even more preferred embodiment the carbohydrate moiety is a galactose residue of the carbohydrate side chain preferably the terminal galactose residue of the carbohydrate side chain. This galactose residue can be made available for reaction with the reaction product of compound I and compound II by removal of terminal sialic acids followed by oxidation as described hereinunder.

In a still further preferred embodiment the reaction product of compound I and II is linked to a sialic acid residue of the carbohydrate side chains preferably the terminal sialic acid residue of the carbohydrate side chain.

Methods for the chemical oxidation of carbohydrate moieties of polypeptides are known in the art and include the treatment with perjodate Charnow et al. 1992 J. Biol. Chem. 267 15916 15922 .

By chemically oxidizing it is in principle possible to oxidize any carbohydrate moiety being terminally positioned or not. However by choosing mild conditions 1 mM periodate 0 C. in contrast to harsh conditions 10 mM periodate 1 h at room temperature it is possible to preferably oxidize the terminal sialic acid of a carbohydrate side chain.

Alternatively the carbohydrate moiety may be oxidized enzymatically. Enzymes for the oxidation of the individual carbohydrate moieties are known in the art e.g. in the case of galactose the enzyme is galactose oxidase. If it is intended to oxidize terminal galactose moieties it will be eventually necessary to remove terminal sialic acids partially or completely if the polypeptide has been produced in cells capable of attaching sialic acids to carbohydrate chains e.g. in mammalian cells or in cells which have been genetically modified to be capable of attaching sialic acids to carbohydrate chains. Chemical or enzymatic methods for the removal of sialic acids are known in the art Chaplin and Kennedy eds. 1996 Carbohydrate Analysis a practical approach especially Chapter 5 Montreuill Glycoproteins pages 175 177 IRL Press Practical approach series ISBN 0 947946 44 3 .

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction product of compound I and compound II is reacted with the polypeptide via an oxidized carbohydrate moiety comprised in the polypeptide.

According to another preferred embodiment of the present invention the functional group of the polypeptide is the thio group. Therefore the reaction product of compound I and II may be linked to the polypeptide via a thioether group wherein the S atom can be derived from any thio group comprised in the polypeptide.

The thio group may be present in the polypeptide as such. Moreover it is possible to introduce a thio group into the polyeptide according to a suitbale method. Among others chemical methods may be mentioned. If a disulfide bridge is present in the polypeptide it is possible to reduce the S S structure to get a thio group. It is also possible to transform an amino group present in the polypeptide into a SH group by reaction the polypeptide via the amino group with a compound which has at least two different functional groups one of which is capable of being reacted with the amino group and the other is an SH group or a precursor of an SH group. This modification of an amino group may be regarded as an example where the protein is first reacted with a compound L which has at least two different functional groups one of which is capable of being reacted with the amino group and the other is an SH group and the resulting reaction product is then reacted with e.g. a HAS derivative comprising HAS and a compound D said derivative comprising a functional group being capable of reacting with the SH group. It is also possible to introduce an SH group by mutation of the polypeptide such as by introducing a cystein or a suitable SH functional amino acid into the polypeptide or such as removing a cystein from the polypeptide so as to disable another cystein in the polypeptide to form a disulfide bridge.

In the context of this embodiment it is particularly preferred to react the polypeptide with a reaction product which results from the reaction of the reaction product of compounds I and II with a crosslinking compound.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction product of compound I and compound II is reacted with a crosslinking compound and the resulting reaction product is further is reacted with the polypeptide via an oxidized carbohydrate moiety and or a thio group comprised in the polypeptide.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the polypeptide is erythropoietin.

The EPO can be of any human see e.g. Inoue Wada Takeuchi 1994 An improved method for the purification of human erythropoietin with high in vivo activity from the urine of anemic patients Biol. Pharm. Bull. 17 2 1804 Miyake Kung Goldwasser 1977 Purification of human erythropoietin J. Biol. Chem. 252 15 5558 64 or another mammalian source and can be obtained by purification from naturally occurring sources like human kidney embryonic human liver or animal preferably monkey kidney. Furthermore the expression erythropoietin or EPO encompasses also an EPO variant wherein one or more amino acids e.g. 1 to 25 preferably 1 to 10 more preferred 1 to 5 most preferred 1 or 2 have been exchanged by another amino acid and which exhibits erythropoietic activity see e.g. EP 640 619 B1 . The measurement of erythropoietic activity is described in the art for measurement of activity in vitro see e.g. Fibi et al. 1991 Blood 77 1203 ff Kitamura et al 1989 J. Cell Phys. 140 323 334 for measurement of EPO activity in vivo see Ph. Eur. 2001 911 917 Ph. Eur. 2000 1316 Erythropoietini solutio concentrata 780 785 European Pharmacopoeia 1996 2000 European Pharmacopoeia 1996 Erythropoietin concentrated solution Pharmaeuropa 8 371 377 Fibi Hermentin Pauly Lauffer Zettlmeissl. 1995 N and O glycosylation muteins of recombinant human erythropoietin secreted from BHK 21 cells Blood 85 5 1229 36 EPO and modified EPO forms were injected into female NMRI mice equal amounts of protein 50 ng mouse at day 1 2 and 3 blood samples were taken at day 4 and reticulocytes were determined . Further publications where tests for the measurement of the activity of EPO are described Barbone Aparicio Anderson Natarajan Ritchie 1994 Reticulocytes measurements as a bioassay for erythropoietin J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 12 4 515 22 Bowen Culligan Beguin Kendall Villis 1994 Estimation of effective and total erythropoiesis in myelodysplasia using serum trasferrin receptor and erythropoietin concentrations with automated reticulocyte parameters Leukemi 8 1 151 5 Delorme Lorenzini Giffin Martin Jacobsen Boone Elliott 1992 Role of glycosylation on the secretion and biological activity of erythropoietin Biochemistry 31 41 9871 6 Higuchi Oheda Kuboniwa Tomonoh Shimonaka Ochi 1992 Role of sugar chains in the expression of the biological activity of human erythropoietin J. Biol. Chem. 267 11 7703 9 Yamaguchi Akai Kawanishi Ueda Masuda Sasaki 1991 effects of site directed removal of N glycosylation sites in human erythropoietin on its production and biological properties J. Biol. Chem. 266 30 20434 9 Takeuchi Inoue Strickland Kubota Wada Shimizu Hoshi Kozutsumi Takasaki Kobata 1989 Relationship between sugar chain structure and biological activity of recombinant human erythropoietin produced in Chinese hamster ovary cells Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85 20 7819 22 Kurtz Eckardt 1989 Assay methods for erythropoietin Nephron. 51 1 11 4 German Zucali Sulkowski 1985 Purification of human urinary erythropoietin on controlled pore glass and silicic acid Exp. Hematol. 13 3 833 7 Krystal 1983 Physical and biological characterization of erythroblast enhancing factor EEF a late acting erythropoietic stimulator in serum distinct from erythropoietin Exp. Hematol. 11 1 18 31.

Preferably the EPO is recombinantly produced. This includes the production in eukaryotic or prokaryotic cells preferably mammalian insect yeast bacterial cells or in any other cell type which is convenient for the recombinant production of EPO. Furthermore the EPO may be expressed in transgenic animals e.g. in body fluids like milk blood etc. in eggs of transgenic birds especially poultry preferred chicken or in transgenic plants.

The recombinant production of a polypeptide is known in the art. In general this includes the transfection of host cells with an appropriate expression vector the cultivation of the host cells under conditions which enable the production of the polypeptide and the purification of the polypeptide from the host cells. For detained information see e.g. Krystal Pankratz Farber Smart 1986 Purification of human erythropoietin to homogeneity by a rapid five step procedure Blood 67 1 71 9 Quelle Caslake Burkert Wojchowski 1989 High level expression and purification f a recombinant human erythropoietin produced using a baculovirus vector Blood 4 2 652 7 EP 640 619 B1 and EP 668 351 B1.

The EPO may comprise one or more carbohydrate side chains preferably 1 to 12 more preferably 1 to 9 even more preferably 1 to 6 and particularly 1 to 4 especially preferably 4 carbohydrate side chains attached to the EPO via N and or O linked glycosylation i.e. the EPO is glycosylated. Usually when EPO is produced in eukaryotic cells the polypeptide is posttranslationally glycosylated. Consequently the carbohydrate side chains may have been attached to the EPO during biosynthesis in mammalian especially human insect or yeast cells. The structure and properties of glycosylated EPO have been extensively studied in the art see EP 428 267 B1 EP 640 619 B1 Rush Derby Smith Merry Rogers Rohde Katta 1995 Microheterogeneity of erythropoietin carbohydrate structure Anal Chem. 67 8 1442 52 Takeuchi Kobata 1991 Structures and functional roles of the sugar chains of human erythropoietins Glycobiology 1 4 33746 Review .

Therefore the hydroxyalkyl starch derivative according to the present invention may comprise at least one preferably 1 to 12 more preferably 1 to 9 even more preferably 1 to 6 and particularly preferably 1 to 4 HAS molecules per EPO molecule. The number of HAS molecules per EPO molecule can be determined by quantitative carbohydrate compositional analysis using GC MS after hydrolysis of the product and derivatisation of the resulting monosaccharides see Chaplin and Kennedy eds. 1986 Carbohydrate Analysis a practical approach IRL Press Practical approach series ISBN 0 947946 44 3 especially Chapter 1 Monosaccharides page 1 36 Chapter 2 Oligosaccharides page 37 53 Chapter 3 Neutral Polysaccharides page 55 96 .

According to an especially preferred embodiment of the present invention the carbohydrate moiety linked to EPO is part of a carbohydrate side chain. More preferably the carbohydrate moiety is the terminal moiety of the carbohydrate side chain. In an even more preferred embodiment the carbohydrate moiety is a galactose residue of the carbohydrate side chain preferably the terminal galactose residue of the carbohydrate side chain. This galactose residue can be made available for reaction with the reaction product of compound I and compound II by removal of terminal sialic acids followed by oxidation as described hereinunder. In a further preferred embodiment the reaction product of compound I and II is linked to a sialic acid residue of the carbohydrate side chains preferably the terminal sialic acid residue of the carbohydrate side chain. The sialic acid is oxidized as described herein.

Particularly preferably this galactose residue is made available for reaction with the reaction product of compounds I and II or with the reaction product of the reaction of the reaction product of compounds I and II and a crosslinking compound via functional group X by removal of terminal sialic acid followed by oxidation.

As mentioned above the reaction product of compound I and compound II optionally reacted with a crosslinking compound may be reacted with a thio group comprised in EPO.

It is also possible to react the reaction product of compound I and compound II optionally reacted with a crosslinking compound with a thio group as well as with a carbohydrate moiety each of them comprised in the at least one further compound preferably a polypeptide more preferably erythropoietin.

According to a preferred embodiment this SH group may be linked to a preferably oxidized carbohydrate moiety e.g. by using a hydroxylamine derivative e.g. 2 aminooxy ethylmercaptan hydrochloride Bauer L. et al. 1965 J. Org. Chem. 30 949 or by using a hydrazide derivative e.g. thioglycolic acid hydrazide Whitesides et al. 1977 J. Org. Chem. 42 332. 

According to a further preferred embodiment the thio group is preferably introduced in an oxidized carbohydrate moiety of EPO more preferably an oxidized carbohydrate moiety which is part of a carbohydrate side chain of EPO.

Preferably the thio group is derived from a naturally occurring cysteine or from an added cysteine. More preferably the EPO has the amino acid sequence of human EPO and the naturally occurring cysteines are cysteine 29 and or 33. In a more preferred embodiment the reaction product of compound I and compound II optionally reacted with a crosslinking compound is reacted with cysteine 29 whereas cysteine 33 is replaced by another amino acid. Alternatively the reaction product of compound I and compound II optionally reacted with a crosslinking compound is reacted with cysteine 33 whereas cysteine 29 is replaced by another amino acid.

In the context of the present invention the term added cysteines indicates that the polypeptides preferably EPO comprise a cysteine residue which is not present in the wild type polypeptide.

In the context of this aspect of the invention the cysteine may be an additional amino acid added at the N or C terminal end of EPO.

Furthermore the added cysteine may have been added by replacing a naturally occurring amino acid by cysteine or a suitably substituted cysteine. Preferably in the context of this aspect of the invention the EPO is human EPO and the replaced amino acid residue is serine 126.

The reaction conditions of the reaction of the reaction product of compounds I and II optionally reacted with a crosslinking compound with the at least one further compound may be adapted to the specific needs of the respective reaction such as in the case the at least one further compound is a polypeptide or in the case the at least one further compound is a crosslinking compound or in the case the at least one further compound is a reaction product of a crosslinking compound and a polypeptide. As buffer compounds at least one of the above mentioned compounds may be preferably used. As solvent or mixture of solvents at least one of the above mentioned solvents may be preferably used. Isolation and or after treatment may be carried out wherein preferred methods are selected from the methods discussed above.

If the reaction product of compound I and compound II is for example further reacted with a polypeptide as further compound preferably EPO water is preferably used as solvent for the reaction. Additionally to water at least one further solvent may be present. As preferred possible further solvent DMSO DMF methanol or ethanol may be mentioned.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II with a polypeptide preferably EPO is carried out in an aqueous system.

As far as the temperatures which are applied during this reaction are concerned no specific limitations exist given that the reaction results in the desired hydroxyalkyl starch derivative comprising the reaction product of compounds I and II reacted with the polypeptide via the at least one functional group X. The temperature of the reaction is preferably in the range of from 4 to 37 C. more preferably in the range of from ID to 30 C. especially preferably in the range of from 15 to 25 C.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II with the polypeptide is carried out at a temperature of from 4 to 37 C.

During the course of the reaction the temperature may be varied preferably in the above given ranges or held essentially constant.

The reaction time for reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II with the polypeptide may be adapted to the specific needs and is generally in the range of from 0.5 to 48 h preferably in the range of from 2 to 24 h and especially preferably in the range of from 10 to 20 h.

The pH value for the reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II with the polypeptide may be adapted to the specific needs such as the chemical nature of the reactants.

If e.g. the reaction product of compound I and II is reacted with a further compound via the reaction of a functional group X which is a hydroxylamino group O NHwith at least one aldehyd group which is comprised in the polypeptide the pH is preferably in the range of from 4.5 to 6 more preferably at about 5.5.

If the reaction product of compound I and compound II is for example further reacted with a crosslinking compound as further compound preferably EPO water is preferably used as solvent for the reaction. Additionally to water at least one further solvent may be present. As preferred possible further solvent DMSO DMF methanol or ethanol may be mentioned.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II with a crosslinking compound is carried out in an aqueous system.

As far as the temperatures which are applied during this reaction are concerned no specific limitations exist given that the reaction results in the desired hydroxyalkyl starch derivative comprising the reaction product of compounds I and II reacted with the crosslinking compound via the at least one functional group X. The temperature of the reaction is preferably in the range of from 4 to 37 C. more preferably in the range of from 10 to 30 C. especially preferably in the range of from 15 to 25 C.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II with the crosslinking compound is carried out at a temperature of from 4 to 37 C.

During the course of the reaction the temperature may be varied preferably in the above given ranges or held essentially constant.

The reaction time for reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II with the crosslinking compound may be adapted to the specific needs and is generally in the range of from 10 min to 10 h preferably of from 20 min to 5 h and more preferably of from 30 min to 2 h.

The pH value for the reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II with the crosslinking compound may be adapted to the specific needs such as the chemical nature of the reactants.

If e.g. the reaction product of compound I and II is reacted with a crosslinking compound which is a crosslinking compound via the functional group X which is comprised in the reaction product of compound I and II and is an amino group NH the pH is preferably in the range of from 7 to 8.5 more preferably at about 7.2.

If the reaction product of the reaction of the reaction product of compounds I and II and a crosslinking compound is for example further reacted with a polypeptide preferably EPO water is preferably used as solvent for the reaction. Additionally to water at least one further solvent may be present. As preferred possible further solvent DMSO DMF methanol or ethanol may be mentioned.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of the reaction product of the compound I and compound II which is further with reacted with a crosslinking compound with a polypeptide is carried out in an aqueous system.

As far as the temperatures which are applied during this reaction are concerned no specific limitations exist given that the reaction results in the desired hydroxyalkyl starch derivative comprising the reaction product of compounds I and II reacted with a crosslinking compound and further reacted with a polypeptide via the at least one functional group X comprised in the crosslinking compound. The temperature of the reaction is preferably in the range of from 4 to 37 C. more preferably in the range of from 10 to 30 C. especially preferably in the range of from 15 to 25 C.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II which is further reacted with a crosslinking compound with the polypeptide is carried out at a temperature of from 4 to 37 C.

During the course of the reaction the temperature may be varied preferably in the above given ranges or held essentially constant.

The reaction time for the reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II which is further reacted with a crosslinking compound with the polypeptide may be adapted to the specific needs and is generally in the range of from 0.5 to 48 h preferably in the range of from 2 to 24 h and especially preferably in the range of from 10 to 20 h.

The pH value for the reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II which is further reacted with a crosslinking compound with the polypeptide may be adapted to the specific needs such as the chemical nature of the reactants.

If e.g. the reaction product of compound I and II is which is further reacted with a crosslinking compound is reacted with a polypeptide via the functional group X which is comprised in the crosslinking compound and is an amino group NH the pH is preferably in the range of from 7 to 8.5 more preferably at about 7.2.

The suitable pH value of the reaction mixture may be adjusted in each case by adding at least one suitable buffer. Among the preferred buffers sodium acetate buffer sodium phosphate buffer or borate buffers may be mentioned.

The reaction product resulting from the reaction of the reaction product of compound I and compound II with the at least one further compound the at least one further compound being either a polypeptide or a crosslinking compound and the reaction product further comprising the compounds resulting from the reactions of compound I compound II a crosslinking compound and a polypeptide may be isolated from the reaction mixture by at least one suitable method and subjected to at least one further treatment such as at least an after treatment such as dialysis and or lyophilization.

Once the above mentioned reaction product is formed it may be isolated from the reaction mixture by at least one suitable method.

Isolation of the reaction product may be carried out by a suitable process which may comprise one or more steps.

According to a preferred embodiment of the present invention where the reaction product does not comprise a polypeptide the reaction product is first separated off the reaction mixture or the mixture of the reaction mixture by preferably centrifugal filtration. In a second step the separated reaction product may be subjected to a further treatment such as an after treatment like dialysis and or lyophilisation. According to an even more preferred embodiment the separated reaction product is first dialysed preferably against water and then lyophilized until the solvent content of the reaction product is sufficiently low according to the desired specifications of the product.

According to another embodiment of the present invention where the reaction product comprises the polypeptide the reaction product is preferably isolated as described in Example 7.8.

According to a further embodiment of the present invention compound II is reacted with a further compound prior to the reaction with compound I i.e. a derivate of compound II is produced by the reaction of compound II via the at least one functional group X with at least one further compound comprising at least one functional group Y as described above prior to the reaction with compound I .

If compound II is first reacted with a further compound preferably a polypeptide more preferably EPO water is preferably used as solvent for the reaction. Additionally to water at least one further solvent may be present. As preferred possible further solvent DMSO DMF methanol and ethanol may be mentioned.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction of compound II prior to the reaction with compound I with a further compound preferably a polypeptide even more preferably EPO is carried out in an aqueous system.

As far as the temperatures which are applied during the reaction are concerned no specific limitations exist given that the reaction results in the desired derivative of compound II comprising the reaction product of compound II reacted with at least one further compound via the at least one functional group X preferably a polypeptide more preferably EPO. The temperature of the reaction are preferably in the range of from 4 to 37 C. more preferably in the range of from 10 to 30 C. especially preferably in the range of from 15 to 25 C.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a method as described above wherein the reaction compound II with the at least one further compound is carried out at a temperature of from 4 to 37 C.

During the course of the reaction the temperature may be varied preferably in the above given ranges or held essentially constant.

The reaction time the pH value for reaction of compound II with the at least one further compound may be adapted to the specific needs such as the chemical nature of the reactants. The suitable pH value of the reaction mixture may be adjusted by adding at least one suitable buffer. Among the preferred buffers acetate phosphate or borate buffers such as sodium acetate sodium phosphate or sodium borate buffers may be mentioned.

The reaction product resulting from the reaction of compound II with the at least one further compound may be isolated from the reaction mixture by at least one suitable method and subjected to at least one further treatment such as at least an after treatment such as dialysis and or lyophilization.

Once the reaction product of reaction compound II with the at least one further compound is formed it may be isolated from the reaction mixture by at least one suitable method.

Isolation of the reaction product may be carried out by a suitable process which may comprise one or more steps as already described above.

If desired and or necessary the NH group bridging R and R of compound II may be protected with a suitable protecting group prior to the reaction of compound II with the at least one further compound. As protecting group one of the above mentioned protecting groups may be used. Prior to the reaction of the reaction product of compound II and the at least one further compound such as a polypeptide preferably EPO with compound I the protecting group is removed by a at least one suitable method.

If compound II is first reacted with a crosslinking compound or a reaction product of a crosslinking compound and a polypeptide all reaction conditions may be adjusted to the specific needs of these reactions. Among others the above mentioned buffer systems and or solvents may be used.

In a second step the reaction product of the reaction of compound II with the at least one further compound is reacted with compound I .

For this reaction all reaction conditions may be adjusted to the specific needs of these reactions. Among others the above mentioned buffer systems and or solvents may be used.

The reaction product resulting from the reaction of the reaction product of compound II and the at least one further compound with compound I may be isolated from the respective reaction mixture by at least one suitable method and subjected to at least one further treatment such as at least an after treatment such as dialysis and or lyophilization. In this context every suitable method described above may be used.

Generally isolation of the HAS polypeptide conjugate either with or without crosslinking compound can be performed by using known procedures for the purification of natural and recombinant polypeptides such as size exclusion chromatography ion exchange chromatography RP HPLC hydroxyapatite chromatography hydrophobic interaction chromatography or combinations of at least two methods thereof.

The covalent attachment of HAS to the polypeptide can be verified by carbohydrate compositional analysis after hydrolysis of the modified protein.

Demonstration of HAS modification at N linked oligosaccharides of the polypeptide can be accomplished by removal of the HAS modified N glycans and observation of the predicted shift to higher mobility in SDS PAGE Western Blotting analysis.

HAS modification of the polypeptide at cysteine residues can be demonstrated by the failure to detect the corresponding proteolytic Cys peptide in RP HPLC and MALDI TOF MS in the proteolytic fragments of the HAS modified product Zhou et al. 1998 Application of capillary electrophoresis liquid chromatography electrospray mass spectrometry and matrix assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight mass spectrometry to the characterization of recombinant human erythropoietin Electrophoresis 19 13 2348 55 . The isolation of the HAS containing fraction after proteolytic digestion of the Cys modified polypeptide enables the verification in this fraction of the corresponding peptide by conventional amino acid compositional analysis.

All embodiments disclosed above with respect of the HAS polypeptide of the invention concerning properties of the polypeptide or HAS apply also to the method of the invention for the production of a HAS polypeptide conjugate. Furthermore all embodiments disclosed above with respect to HAS EPO or the preparation thereof which relate to peptides in general or to HAS apply also to the method of the invention for the production of a HAS polypeptide conjugate.

According to an especially preferred embodiment of the present invention hydroxyethyl starch is reacted with a compound II preferably selected from the homo and heterobifunctional compounds described above and the resulting reaction product is reacted with a glycoprotein preferably erythropoietin preferably with the oxidized terminal carbohydrate moiety of a EPO carbohydrate side chain.

According to another especially preferred embodiment of the present invention hydroxyethyl starch is reacted with a compound II preferably selected from the homo and heterobifunctional compounds described above to give a first hydroxyethyl starch derivative. This first hydroxyethyl starch derivative is subsequently reacted with a crosslinking compound to give a second hydroxyethyl starch derivative. This second hydroxyethyl starch derivative is subsequently reacted with a glycoprotein preferably erythropoietin preferably with a SH group comprised in the glycoprotein to give a third hydroxyethyl starch derivative. Preferably the crosslinking compound is a heterobifunctional compound. More preferably the crosslinking compound is reacted with a functional group comprising the structure NH which is comprised in the first hydroxyethyl starch derivative. More preferably this functional group is NH.

One advantage of the present invention is that it is not necessary to use toxicologically critical solvents in at least one reaction step preferably all reaction steps the reaction step involved and thus is not necessary to remove these solvents after the production process in order to avoid the contamination of the products with the solvent Furthermore it is not necessary to perform additional quality controls with respect to residual toxicologically critical solvents. If organic solvents preferably in addition to water are used it is preferred to use toxicologically uncritical solvents such as ethanol and or propylenglycol.

Another advantage of the present invention is that irreversible or reversible structural changes are avoided in the steps where an aqueous system is used as solvent which are otherwise induced by organic solvents. Consequently polypeptide derivatives obtained according to the method of the invention are different from those prepared in organic solvents such as DMSO.

Furthermore it has been surprisingly observed that the conjugation of HAS to polypeptides such as EPO in an aqueous solution minimizes or avoids side reactions. Consequently this embodiment of the method of the invention leads to improved hydroxyalkyl starch products with great purity.

According to another aspect the present invention also relates to the hydroxy alkyl starch derivative obtainable by a process comprising reacting hydroxyalkyl starch HAS of formula I 

As already described above in the context of the methods of the present invention O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine is used as a preferred compound II and hydroxyethyl starch is used as a preferred hydroxyalkyl starch.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative obtainable by a method wherein hydroxyethyl starch is reacted via its reducing end with O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine.

Depending on the respective reaction conditions the solvent or solvent mixture used and or the residues R and or R it is possible that the hydroxyalkyl starch derivate obtainable by the method or methods described above may have the following constitutions IIIa 

Therefore the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative as described above having a constitution according to formula IIIa .

It is also possible that e.g. in the case where R is hydrogen that the hydroxyalkyl starch derivate obtainable by the method or methods described above may have the following constitutions IIIa or IIIa where IIIa and IIIb may be both present in the reaction mixture having a certain equilibrium distribution 

Therefore the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative as described above having a constitution according to formula IIIb .

Moreover the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative as described above being present in a mixture of constitutions according to formulae IIIa and IIIb .

Depending on the reaction conditions and or the chemical nature of compound II used for the reaction the compounds according to formula IIIa may be present with the N atom in equatorial or axial position where also a mixture of both forms may be present having a certain equilibrium distribution.

Depending on the reaction conditions and or the chemical nature of compound II used for the reaction the compounds according to formula IIIb may be present with the C N double bond in E or Z conformation where also a mixture of both forms may be present having a certain equilibrium distribution.

In some cases it may be desirable to stabilize the compound according to formula IIIa . This is especially the case where the compound according to formula IIIa is produced and or used in an aqueous solution. As stabilizing method acylation of the compound according to formula IIIa is particularly preferred especially in the case where R is hydrogen. As acylation reagent all suitable reagents may be used which result in the desired hydroxyalkyl starch derivative according to formula IVa 

According to especially preferred embodiments of the present invention the residue Ra being part of the acylation reagent is methyl. As acylation reagents carboxylic acid anhydrides carboxylic acid halides and carboxylic acid active esters are preferably used.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivate obtainable by a method as described above wherein said derivative has a constitution according to formula IVa .

The acylation is carried at a temperature in the range of from 0 to 30 C. preferably in the range of from 2 to 20 C. and especially preferably in the range of from 4 to 10 C.

In other cases it may be desirable to stabilize the compound according to formula IIIb . This is especially the case where the compound according to formula IIIb is produced and or used in an aqueous solution. As stabilizing method reduction of the compound according to formula IIIb is particularly preferred especially in the case where R is hydrogen. As reduction reagent all suitable reagents may be used which result in the desired hydroxyalkyl starch derivative according to formula IVb 

According to especially preferred embodiments of the present invention as reduction reagents boro hydrides such as NaCNBHor NaBHare used.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivate obtainable by a method as described above wherein said derivative has a constitution according to formula IVb .

The reduction is carried at a temperature in the range of from 4 to 100 C. preferably in the range of from 10 to 90 C. and especially preferably in the range of from 25 to 80 C.

The present invention further relates to mixtures of compounds IIIa and IIIb IVa and IVb IIIa and IVa IIIa and IVb IIIb and IVa IIIb and IVb IIIa and IIIb and IVa IIIa and IIIb and IVb IVa and IVb and IIIa and IVa and IVb and IIIb wherein IIIa and or IVa may be independently present in a conformation where the N atom in equatorial or axial position and or wherein IIIb may be present with the C N double bond in E or Z conformation.

According to one aspect of the present invention compound I is reacted with compound II to give a first reaction product. Said first reaction product is then optionally stabilized according to at least one of the methods described above. The first optionally stabilized reaction product is then reacted with at least one further compound via the reaction of at least one functional group X comprised in R of the first reaction product with at least one functional group Y comprised in the at least one further compound to give a second reaction product. Said second reaction product is then optionally stabilized according to at least one of the methods described above.

According to yet another aspect of the present invention the at least one further compound is a polypeptide or a crosslinking compound or a reaction product of a crosslinking compound with a polypeptide. In case the at least one further compound is a polypeptide the functional group Y is comprised in the polypeptide. In case the at least one further compound is a crosslinking compound the functional group Y is comprised in the crosslinking compound and optionally also in the polypeptide. In case the at least one further compound is a reaction product of a crosslinking compound with a polypeptide the functional group Y is comprised in the crosslinking compound.

According to a further aspect of the present invention compound II is reacted with at least one further compound via the reaction of at least one functional group X comprised in R of compound II with at least one functional group Y comprised in the at least one further compound to give a first reaction product. The at least one further compound is preferably a polypeptide or a crosslinking compound or a reaction product of a crosslinking compound with a polypeptide as discussed above. Said first reaction product is then reacted with compound I via the reaction of the reducing end of compound I with the NH group of the first reaction product bridging the original residues R and R of compound II to give a second reaction product. Said second reaction product is then optionally stabilized according to at least one of the methods described above.

According to an especially preferred embodiment of the present invention hydroxyethyl starch is used as compound I O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine is used as compound I and EPO having an oxidized terminal carbohydrate moiety of a carbohydrate side chain is used as further compound. More preferably hydroxyethyl starch is reacted with O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine to give a first hydroxyethyl starch derivate and that first derivative is further reacted with EPO having an oxidized terminal carbohydrate moiety of a carbohydrate side chain to give a second hydroxyethyl starch derivate. In this specific case no stabilizing reaction whatsoever has to be carried out.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative obtainable by a method wherein hydroxyethyl starch is reacted via its reducing end with O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine and the reaction product is reacted with erythropietin via the oxidized terminal carbohydrate moiety of a carbohydrate side chain of the erythropietin.

According to yet another especially preferred embodiment of the present invention hydroxyethyl starch is used as compound I O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine is used as compound II a heterobifunctional crosslinking compound having a maleimide group and a N hydroxy succinimide active ester group is used and EPO having at least one SH group referred to as ThioEPO is used as polypeptide. More preferably hydroxyethyl starch is reacted with O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxyl amine to give a first hydroxyethyl starch derivate that first derivative is further reacted with the N hydroxy succinimide active ester group of the crosslinking compound to give a second derivative and that second derivative is reacted via the maleimide group with the ThioEPO to give a third hydroxyethyl starch derivate.

The hydroxyalkyl starch derivative which in the following is referred to as HAS EPO conjugate and which is formed by reaction of compound I with compound II and possibly a crosslinking compound and erythrpoietin has the advantage that it exhibits an improved biological stability when compared to the erythropoietin before conjugation. This is mainly due to the fact that this hydroxyalkyl starch derivative is less or even not recognized by the removal systems of the liver and kidney and therefore persists in the circulatory system for a longer period of time. Furthermore since the HAS is attached site specifically the risk of destroying the in vivo biological activity of EPO by conjugation of HAS to EPO is minimized.

The HAS EPO conjugate of the invention may exhibit essentially the same in vitro biological activity as recombinant native EPO since the in vitro biological activity only measures binding affinity to the EPO receptor. Methods for determining the in vitro biological activity are known in the art.

Furthermore the HAS EPO exhibits a greater in vivo activity than the EPO used as a starting material for conjugation unconjugated EPO . Methods for determining the in vivo biological activity are known in the art.

The HAS EPO conjugate may exhibit an in vivo activity of from 110 to 300 preferably from 110 to 200 more preferably from 110 to 180 or from 110 to 150 most preferably from 110 to 140 if the in vivo activity of the unconjugated EPO is set as 100 .

Compared to the highly sialylated EPO of Amgen see EP 428 267 B1 the HAS EPO exhibits preferably at least 50 more preferably at least 70 even more preferably at least 85 or at least 95 at least 150 at least 200 or at least 300 of the in vivo activity of the highly sialylated EPO if the in vivo activity of highly sialylated EPO is set as 100 . Most preferably it exhibits at least 95 of the in vivo activity of the highly sialylated EPO.

The high in vivo biological activity of the HAS EPO conjugate of the invention mainly results from the fact that the HAS EPO conjugate remains longer in the circulation than the unconjugated EPO because it is less recognized by the removal systems of the liver and because renal clearance is reduced due to the higher molecular weight. Methods for the determination of the in vivo half life time of EPO in the circulation are known in the art Sytkowski Lunn Davis Feldman Siekman 1998 Human erythropoietin dimers with markedly enhanced in vivo activity Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 3 11848 .

Consequently it is a great advantage of the present invention that a HAS EPO conjugate is provided which may be administered less frequently than the EPO preparations commercially available at present While standard EPO preparations have to be administered at least every 3 days the HAS EPO conjugate of the invention is preferable administered twice a week more preferably once a week.

Furthermore the method of the invention has the advantage that an effective EPO derivative can be produced at reduced costs since the method does not comprise extensive and time consuming purification steps resulting in low final yield e.g. it is not necessary to purify away under sialylated EPO forms which are known to exhibit low or no in vivo biological activity.

Furthermore the present invention relates to a pharmaceutical composition comprising in a therapeutically effective amount the HAS polypeptide conjugate preferably the HAS EPO conjugate more preferably the HES EPO conjugate of the present invention. In a preferred embodiment the pharmaceutical composition comprises further at least one pharmaceutically acceptable diluent adjuvant and or carrier useful in erythropoietin therapy.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a pharmaceutical composition comprising in a therapeutically effective amount a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative as described above wherein the reaction product of compound I with compound II is reacted via the at least one functional group X comprised in compound II with at least one further compound or wherein compound I is reacted via the at least one functional group X with at least one further compound prior to the reaction with compound I and wherein the at least one further compound is a polypeptide.

According to preferred embodiments of the present invention the polypeptide preferably erythropoietin is reacted with compound II or with the reaction product of compound I and compound II via a thio group or an oxidized carbohydrate moiety comprised in the polypeptide.

According to an even more preferred embodiment of the present invention the polypeptide preferably erythropoietin is reacted with compound II or with the reaction product of compound I and compound II via an oxidized carbohydrate moiety comprised in the polypeptide.

Therefore the present invention relates to a pharmaceutical composition as described above wherein the polypeptide is reacted with compound II or with the reaction product of compound I and compound II via an oxidized carbohydrate moiety comprised in the polypeptide.

According to preferred embodiments the polypeptide is GCS F AT III IFN beta or erythropoietin more preferably erythropoietin.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a pharmaceutical composition as described above wherein the polypeptide is erythropoietin.

According to an especially preferred embodiment of the present invention the pharmaceutical composition as described above is produced by reacting hydroxyethyl starch in an aqueous medium with a compound according to the following formula

According to a particularly preferred embodiment the erythropoietin is oxidised with sodium periodate prior to the aformentioned reaction.

According to another particularly preferred embodiment the erythropoietin is partially desialylated and subsequently oxidised with sodium periodate prior to the reaction.

According to a further preferred embodiment of the present invention pharmaceutical compositions comprising a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative which are produced on the basis of a completely reduced Thio EPO according to Example 5 are excluded.

According to another preferred embodiment the present invention also relates to a pharmaceutical composition comprising in a therapeutically effective amount a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative as described above wherein the reaction product of compound I with compound II is reacted via the at least one functional group X comprised in compound II with at least one further compound or wherein compound II is reacted via the at least one functional group X with at least one further compound prior to the reaction with compound I and wherein the at least one further compound is a crosslinking compound and the reaction product of the reaction product of compounds I and II with the crosslinking compound is reacted with a polypeptide.

According to a still further preferred embodiment the present invention relates to the aforementioned pharmaceutical composition wherein the polypeptide is erythropoietin.

The above mentioned pharmaceutical composition is especially suitable for the treatment of anemic disorders or hematopoietic dysfunction disorders or diseases related thereto.

A therapeutically effective amount as used herein refers to that amount which provides therapeutic effect for a given condition and administration regimen. The administration of erythropoietin isoforms is preferably by parenteral routes. The specific route chosen will depend upon the condition being treated. The administration of erythropoietin isoforms is preferably done as part of a formulation containing a suitable carrier such as human serum albumin a suitable diluent such as a buffered saline solution and or a suitable adjuvant. The required dosage will be in amounts sufficient to raise the hematocrit of patients and will vary depending upon the severity of the condition being treated the method of administration used and the like.

The object of the treatment with the pharmaceutical composition of the invention is preferably an increase of the hemoglobin value of more than 6.8 mmol I in the blood. For this the pharmaceutical composition may be administered in a way that the hemoglobin value increases between from 0.6 mmol l and 1.6 mmol l per weeks If the hemoglobin value exceeds 8.7 mmol l the therapy should be preferably interrupted until the hemoglobin value is below 8.1 mmol l.

The composition of the invention is preferably used in a formulation suitable for subcutaneous or intravenous or parenteral injection. For this suitable excipients and carriers are e.g. sodium dihydrogen phosphate disodium hydrogen phosphate sodium chlorate polysorbate 80 HSA and water for injection. The composition may be administered three times a week preferably two times a week more preferably once a week and most preferably every two weeks.

Preferably the pharmaceutical composition is administered in an amount of 0.01 10 g kg body weight of the patient more preferably 0.1 to 5 g kg 0.1 to 1 g kg or 0.2 0.9 g kg most preferably 0.3 0.7 g kg and most preferred 0.4 0.6 g kg body weight.

In general preferably between 10 g and 200 g preferably between 15 g and 100 g are administered per dosis.

The invention further relates to a HAS polypeptide according to the present invention for use in method for treatment of the human or animal body.

The invention further relates to the use of a HAS EPO conjugate of the present invention for the preparation of a medicament for the treatment of anemic disorders or hematopoietic dysfunction disorders or diseases related hereto.

The invention is further illustrated by the following examples tables and figures which are in no way intended to restrict the scope of the present invention.

In the context of the present invention the degree of substitution denoted as DS relates to the molar substitution as described above see also Sommermeyer et al. 1987 Krankenhauspharmazie 8 8 271 278 in particular p. 273 . Throughout the invention the DS of the HES18 04 when measured according to Sommermeyer et al. 1987 Krankenhauspharmazie 8 8 271 278 was 0.5.

The reaction of 1 2 dihydroxy 3 amino propane with HES was confirmed indirectly by quantification of formaldehyde resulting from the oxidative cleavage of the 1 2 diole in the reaction product by periodate as described by G. Avigad Anal. Biochem. 134 1983 449 504.

0.96 g of HES18 0.4 MW 18 000 D DS 0.4 were dissolved in 8 ml aqueous 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 and 8 mmol carbohydrazide Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D were added. After stirring for 18 h at 25 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 ml of a cold 1 1 mixture of acetone and ethanol v v . The precipitated product was collected by centrifugation re dissolved in 40 ml water and dialysed for 3 d against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn D and lyophilized.

0.96 g of HES18 0.4 MW 18 000 D DS 0.4 were dissolved in 8 ml aqueous 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 and 8 mmol adepic dihydrazide Lancaster Synthesis Frankfurt Main D were added. After stirring for 18 h at 25 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 ml of a cold 1 1 mixture of acetone and ethanol v v . The precipitated product was collected by centrifugation re dissolved in 40 ml water and dialysed for 3 d against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn D and lyophilized.

0.96 g of HES18 0.4 MW 18 000 D DS 0.4 were dissolved in 8 mmol aqueous 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 and 8 mmol 1 4 phenylene bis 3 thiosemicarbazide Lancaster Synthesis Frankfurt Main D were added. After stirring for 18 h at 25 C. 8 ml water was added to the reaction mixture and the suspension was centrifugated for 15 min at 4 500 rpm. The clear supernatant was decanted and subsequently added to 160 ml of a cold 1 1 mixture of acetone and ethanol v v . The precipitated product was collected by centrifugation re dissolved in 40 ml water and centrifugated for 15 min at 4 500 rpm. The clear supernatant was dialysed for 3 d against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn D and lyophilized.

O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine was synthesized as described in Boturyn et al. Tetrahedron 53 1997 p. 5485 5492 in 2 steps from commercially available materials.

0.96 g of HES18 0.4 MW 18 000 D DS 0.4 were dissolved in 8 ml aqueous 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 and 8 mmol O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine were added. After stirring for 18 h at 25 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 ml of a cold 1 1 mixture of acetone and ethanol v v . The precipitated product was collected by centrifugation re dissolved in 40 ml water and dialysed for 3 d against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn D and lyophilized.

Oxidized erythropoietin was produced as described in Example 7. As oxidised erythropoietin EPO GT 1 A as described in Example 7.11 c was used EPO GT 1 without acid hydrolysis treated with mild periodate oxidation .

Oxidized EPO 1.055 g l in 20 mM PBS buffer was adjusted to pH 5.3 with 5 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2. To 19 l of the EPO solution 18 l of a solution of the HES derivate as produced according to example 2.1 MW 18 kD 18.7 g l in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 was added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analyzed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

Oxidized EPO 1.055 g l in 20 mM PBS buffer was adjusted to pH 5.3 with 5 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2. To 19 l of the EPO solution 18 l of a solution of the HES derivate as produced according to example 2.3 MW 18 kD 18.7 g l in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 was added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analyzed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen

Oxidized EPO 1.055 g l in 20 mM PBS buffer was adjusted to pH 5.3 with 5 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2. To 19 l of the EPO solution 18 l of a solution of the HES derivate as produced according to example 2.4 MW 18 kD 18.7 g l in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 was added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analyzed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

241.5 g erythropoietin EPO GT 1 see Example 7 in 500 l of a 0.1 M sodium borate buffer 5 mM EDTA 10 mM DTT Lancaster Morcambe UK pH 8.3 were incubated for 1 h at 37 C. The DTT was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 10 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm subsequent washing 3 times with the borate buffer and twice with a phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 MNaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 .

To 50 nmol HES derivate as produced according to example 2.1 and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 6.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min each with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 5 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 nmol HES derivate as produced according to example 2.2 and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min each with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 5 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 nmol HES derivate as produced according to example 2.3 and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min each with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 5 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 nmol HES derivate as produced according to example 2.4 and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min each with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 5 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 nmol HES derivate as produced according to example 1.1 at incubation conditions of 80 C. and 17 h Example 1.1 a as well as of 25 C. and 3 d Example 1.1 b and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min each with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 5 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 nmol HES derivate as produced according to example 1.3 at incubation conditions of 80 C. and 17 h Example 1.3 a as well as of 25 C. and 3 d Example 1.3 b and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 M EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 IC. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min each with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 5 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

HES EPO conjugates were synthesized by coupling of HES derivatives average mw of 18 000 Dalton hydroxyethyl substitution degree of 0.4 to the partially mild periodate oxidized sialic acid residues on the oligosaccharide chains of recombinant human EPO. Based on carbohydrate structural analysis the modifications introduced did not affect the structural integrity of the core oligosaccharide chains since MALDI TOF MS of the mild acid treated HES modified glycans revealed intact neutral N acetyllactosamine type chains which were indistinguishable from those observed in unmodified EPO product. The results obtained indicate that at least 3 modified HES residues are attached per EPO molecule in the case of the EPO preparation which was subjected to modification without prior partial sialic acid removal. An EPO variant lacking about 50 of the sialic acid residues of the former protein showed a similar apparent high molecular weight mobility in SDS PAGE 60 110 KDa vs 40 KDa for the BRP EPO standard . The HES modified EPO is stable under standard ion exchange chromatography conditions at room temperature at pH 3 10.

The EPO bioassay in the normocythaemic mouse system indicates that the HES modified EPO has 2.5 3.0 fold higher specific activity IU mg in this assay when compared to the International BRP EPO reference standard based on protein determination using the UV absorption value from the European Pharmacopeia and an RP HPLC EPO protein determination method calibrated against the BRP EPO standard preparation

Samples were incubated with 25 units according to manufacturer s specification Roche Diagnostics Germany of recombinant PNGase F over night at 37 C. Complete digestion was monitored by the specific mobility shift of the protein in SDS PAGE. The released N glycans were separated from the polypeptide by addition of 3 volumes of cold 100 ethanol and incubation at 20 C. for at least 2 hours Schroeter S et al. 1999 . The precipitated protein was removed by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 4 C. at 13000 rpm. The pellet was then subjected to two additional washes with 500 l of ice cold 75 ethanol. The oligosaccharides in the pooled supernatants were dried in a vacuum centrifuge Speed Vac concentrator Savant Instruments Inc. USA . The glycan samples were desalted using Hypercarb cartridges 25 mg or 100 mg of HyperCarb as follows prior to use the columns were washed with 3 500 l of 80 acetonitrile v v in 0.1 TFA followed by washes with 3 500 l of water. The samples were diluted with water to a final volume of 300 l 600 l before loading onto the cartridge which then was rigorously washed with water. Oligosaccharides were eluted with 1.2 ml 25 mg cartridges 1.8 ml in the case of 100 mg cartridges 25 acetonitrile in water containing 0.1 trifluoroacetic acid v v . The eluted oligosaccharides were neutralized with 2 M NHOH and were dried in a Speed Vac concentrator. In some cases desalting of N glycosidase released oligosaccharides was performed by adsorption of the digestion mixture from samples 

 b Analysis of Oligosaccharides by Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry MALDI TOF TOF MS 

A Bruker ULITRAFLEX time of flight TOF TOF instrument was used native desialylated oligosaccharides were analyzed using 2 5 dihydroxybenzoic acid as UV absorbing material in the positive as well as in the negative ion mode using the reflectron in both cases. For MS MS analyses selected parent ions were subjected to laser induced dissociation LID and the resulting fragment ions separated by the second TOF stage LIFT of the instrument Sample solutions of 1 l and an approximate concentration of 1 10 pmol lwere mixed with equal amounts of the respective matrix. This mixture was spotted onto a stainless steel target and dried at room temperature before analysis.

EPO was expressed from recombinant CHO cells as described Mueller P P et al. 1999 Dorner A J et al. 1984 and the preparations were characterized according to methods described in the Eur. Phar. 42002 1316 . The final product had a sialic acid content of 12 nMol 1.5 nMol per nMol of protein. The structures of N linked oligosaccharides were determined by HPAEC PAD and by MALDI TOF MS as described. Nimtz et al. 1999 Grabenhorst 1999 . The EPO preparations that were obtained contained di tri and tetrasialylated oligosaccharides 2 12 15 28 and 60 80 respectively sulphated and pentasialylated chains were present in small amounts . The overall glycosylation characteristics of EPO preparations were similar to that of the international BRP EPO standard preparation.

The isoelectric focusing pattern of the recombinant EPO was comparable to that of the international BRP Reference EPO standard preparation showing the corresponding isoforms. 25 of the EPO protein lacked O glycosylation at Serof the polypeptide chain.

EPO GT 1 protein 2.84 mg ml was heated to 80 C. in 20 mM Na phosphate buffer pH 7.0 and then 100 l of 1 N HSOwas added per 1 ml of the EPO solution incubation was continued for 5 min 10 min and 60 min respectively yielding EPO preparations of different degree of sialylation. Quantitation of oligosaccharides with 0 4 sialic acids was performed after liberation of oligosaccharides with polypeptide N glycosidase and isolation of N linked chains was performed by desalting using Hypercarb cartridges 25 mg HyperSep Hypercarb ThermoHypersil Keystone UK . EPO preparations were neutralized by addition of 1 N NaOH and were frozen in liquid Nand were stored at 20 C. until further use.

To 10 mg of untreated or mild acid treated EPO dissolved in 3.5 ml of 20 mM Na phosphate buffer pH 7.0 was added 1.5 ml of 0.1 M Na acetate buffer pH 5.5 and the mixture was cooled to 0 C. in an ice bath 500 l of 10 mM Na periodate was added and the reaction mixture was kept in the dark for 60 min at 0 C. Then 10 l of glycerol was added and incubation was continued for further 10 min in the dark. The partially oxidized EPO forms were separated from reagents by desalting using VIVASPIN concentrators 10 000 MWCO PES Vivascience AG Hannover Germany according to manufacturer s recommendation at 3000 rpm in a laboratory centrifuge equipped with a fixed angle rotor. After freezing in liquid nitrogen the EPO preparations were stored in a final volume of 4 ml at 20 C.

100 g aliquots of the partially oxidized EPO preparation were subjected to N glycosidase treatment and oligosaccharides were isolated using Hypercarb cartridges as described. Oligosaccharides were desialylated by mild acid treatment and were analyzed by HPAEC PAD and their retention times were compared to those of authentic standard oligosaccharides as described Nimtz et al. 1990 and 1993 .

5 mg of EPO GT 1 was incubated in 5 ml of 0.1 M Tris HCl buffer pH 8.1 in the presence of 30 mM dithioerythreitol DTT at 37 C. for 60 minutes removal of DTT was achieved by using a Vivaspin concentrator at 4 C. 4 cycles of buffer exchange. The final reduced EPO preparation was frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at 20 C. in 50 mM Na acetate buffer pH 5.5.

Quantitative determination of EPO protein was performed by measuring UV absorption at 280 nm according to the Eur. Phar. European Pharmacopeia 4 Monography January 2002 1316 erythropoietin concentrated solution in a cuvette with 1 cm path length. In addition EPO was quantitated by applying a RP HPLC method using a RP C4 column Vydac Protein C4 Cat. 214TP5410 Grace Vydac Ca US the HPLC method was calibrated using the erythropoietin BRP 1 reference standard European Pharmacopeia Conseil de l Europe B.P. 907 F67029 Strasbourg Cedex 1 .

4.485 mg of completely desialylated EPO was incubated in 20 mM Na phosphate buffer pH 6.8 in the presence of 16 l catalase 6214 units 200 ml and 80 l of galactose oxidase 2250 units ml from Dactyliuni dendiroides Sigma Aldrich Steinheim Germany incubation at 37 C. was over night 2 times 20 l of galactose oxidase was added after 4 hours and after 8 hours after starting of the incubation.

Purification of EPO Front Incubations of Periodate or Galactose Oxidase Oxidized EPO Protein Preparations with Activated HES

Purification of EPO samples removal of unreacted HES derivatives was carried out at room temperature. The EPO incubation mixtures approximately 5 mg of EPO protein were diluted 1 10 with buffer A 20 mM N morpholine propane sulfonic acid MOPS NaOH in HO bidest pH 8.0 and were applied to a column containing 3 ml Q Sepharose HP Pharmacia Code no. 17 1014 03 Lot no. 220211 equilibrated with 10 column volumes CV of buffer A by using a flow rate of 0.5 ml min. The column was washed with 6 8 CV of buffer A flow rate 0.8 ml min and elution was performed by using buffer B 20 mM morpholine ethane sulfonic acid MES NaOH 0.5 M NaCl in HO bidest pH 6.5 at a flow rate of 0.5 ml min. EPO was detected by UV absorption at 280 nm and eluted in about 6 ml. The column was regenerated by using 3 CV of buffer C 20 mM MES 1.5 M NaCl in HO adjusted to pH 6.5 and was re equilibrated by using 10 CV of buffer A flow rate 0.7 ml min .

Buffer exchange of EPO eluates obtained from the Q Sepharose step was performed using Vivaspin concentrators and phosphate buffered saline PBS with each 3 centrifugation cycles per sample samples were adjusted to 2 ml with PBS and were stored at 20 C.

Purified native and desialylated oligosaccharides were analyzed by high pH anion exchange HPAE chromatography using a Dionex BioLC system Dionex USA equipped with a CarboPac PA1 column 0.4 25 cm in combination with a pulsed amperometric detector PAD Schr ter et al. 1999 Nimtz et al. 1999 . Detector potentials E and pulse durations M were E1 50 mV T1 480 ms E2 500 mV T2 120 ms E3 500 mV T3 60 ms and the output range was 500 1500 nA. The oligosaccharides were then injected onto the CarboPac PA1 column which was equilibrated with 100 solvent A. For desialylated oligosaccharides elution flow rate 1 ml min was performed by applying a linear gradient 0 20 of solvent B over a period of 40 min followed by a linear increase from 20 100 solvent B over 5 min. Solvent A was 0.2 M NaOH in bidistilled HO solvent B consisted of 0.6 M NaOAc in solvent A. For native oligosaccharides the column was equilibrated with 100 solvent C 0.1 M NaOH in bidistilled HO and elution flow rate 1 ml min was performed by applying a linear gradient 0 35 of solvent D over a period of 48 min followed by a linear increase from 35 100 solvent D over 10 min. Solvent D consisted of 0.6 M NaAc in solvent C.

Monosaccharides were analyzed as the corresponding methyl glycosides after methanolysis N reacetylation and trimethylsilylation by GC MS Chaplin M. F. 1982 A rapid and sensitive method for the analysis of carbohydrate. 123 336 341 . The analyses were performed on a Finnigan GCQ ion trap mass spectrometer Finnigan MAT corp. San Jose Calif. running in the positive ion E1 mode equipped with a 30 m DB5 capillary column. Temperature program 2 min isotherm at 80 C. then 10 degrees minto 300 C.

Monosaccharides were identified by their retention time and characteristic fragmentation pattern. The uncorrected results of electronic peak integration were used for quantification. Monosaccharides yielding more than one peak due to anomericity and or the presence of furanoid and pyranoid forms were quantified by adding all major peaks. 0.5 g of myo inositol was used as an internal standard compound.

EPO GT 1 preparations subjected to mild acid treatment for 5 10 or 60 mL were analyzed by SDS PAGE before and after liberation of N linked oligosaccharides by incubation with N glycosidase as shown in . N linked oligosaccharides were subjected to HPAEC PAD oligosaccharide mapping . The untreated EPO GT 1 contained 90 of N linked oligosaccharides with 3 or 4 sialic acid residues whereas after 5 min. of incubation in the presence of mild acid 

SDS PAGE mobility of mild periodate treated EPO forms that were previously subjected to a 5 and 10 minute treatment with acid or were not treated are compared in . The conditions used for periodate oxidation of sialic acids did not change the SDS PAGE pattern of EPO preparations compare . Oxidation of sialic acids resulted in a shift of oligosaccharides in HPAEC PAD analysis to earlier elution times compare .

 aa Time Course of HES Modification of EPO GT 1 A with Hydroxylamine Modified HES Derivative X Produced According to Example 2.4

400 g of hydroxylamine modified HES derivative X was added to 20 g of EPO GT 1 A mild periodate oxidized EPO not acid hydrolyzed prior to mild periodate oxidation in 20 L of 0.5 M NaOAc buffer pH 5.5 and the reaction was stopped after 30 min 2 4 and 17 hours respectively by freezing samples in liquid nitrogen. Subsequently samples were stored at 20 C. until further analysis.

SDS PAGE sample buffer was added and the samples were heated to 90 C. and applied onto SDS gels. As shown in increasing incubation times resulted in an increased shift towards higher molecular weight of the protein. After 17 hours of incubation in the presence of the hydroxylamine modified HES derivative X a diffuse Coomassie stained protein band was detected migrating in an area between 60 and 11 KDa based on the position of molecular weight standards see left part of . Upon treatment with N glycosidase most of the protein was shifted towards the position of de glycosylated EPO see right gel arrow A indicates migration position of N glycosidase arrow B indicates migration position of de N glycosylated EPO the diffuse protein band visible in the region between the 28 KDa and 36 KDa molecular weight standards presumably represents EPO forms which are modified by HES and the O glycosylation site of the molecule. In view of the specificity of N glycosidase we conclude from this result that in fact HES modification occurs at the periodate oxidized sialic acid residues of glycans of the EPO protein.

HES EPO conjugates I originating from EPO GT 1 after mild periodate oxidation i.e. from EPO GT 1 A II resulting from EPO GT 1 subjected to 5 min acid hydrolysis and Mild periodate oxidation m resulting from EPO GT 1 subjected to 10 min acid hydrolysis and mild periodate oxidation were synthesized as described before. A control incubation K was included containing unmodified EPO GT 1 under the same buffer conditions to which an equivalent amount of unmodified HES was added. The incubation mixtures were subjected to further purification for subsequent biochemical analysis of the HES EPO derivatives.

Incubations HES EPO conjugates I II and III as well as the control incubation K were subjected to a Q Sepharose purification step as described under Material and Methods Example 7.8 in order to remove the excess of nonreacted HES reagent which was expected in flow through of the ion exchange column. Due to the high amounts of basic EPO forms contained in previously acid treated samples II and III we expected considerable amounts of modified EPO product from these incubations in the flow through. As is shown in almost all of the EPO material from samples I was retained by Q Sepharose column whereas only approximately 20 30 of the samples III and II was recovered in the fraction eluting with high salt concentration. All of the protein material from the incubations with HES derivative X both in the flow through and the fractions eluting with high salt had apparent higher molecular weight in SDS PAGE when compared to the control EPO.

In order to characterize in more detail the HES modified EPO sample A and K see were compared to periodate oxidized form EPO GT 1 A. The samples were subjected to N glycosidase treatment and as is depicted in and the release of N glycans resulted in the two low molecular weight bands at the position of the O glycosylated and nonglycosylated EPO forms of the standard EPO preparation. In the case of sample A a further band migrating at the position of the 28 KDa mw standard was detected suggesting HES modification at the O glycan of this EPO variant cf. Example 7.11 c aa . This band and also the heavily HES modified high mw form of N glycosylated EPO see and disappeared after subjecting the samples to mild hydrolysis which is in agreement with the view that HES modification was achieved at the periodate oxidised sialic acid residues of erythropoietin.

Aliquots of the N glycosidase incubation mixtures were hydrolyzed using conditions enabling the complete removal of sialic acids residues and also the sialic acid linked HES derivative from oligosaccharides after neutralization the mixtures were then absorbed onto small Hypercarb columns for their desalting. The columns were washed rigorously with water followed by elution of bound neutral oligosaccharides with 40 acetonitile in HO containing 0.1 of trifuloacetic acid. The resulting oligosaccharides were subjected to MALDI TOF MS. The spectra of the desialylated oligosaccharide fractions from sample A EPO GT 1 A and sample K showed identical masses for complex type oligosaccharides at m z 1810 Da diantennary 2175 triantennary 2540 tetraantennary 2906 tetraantennary plus 1 N acetyllactosamine repeat and 3271 tetraantennary plus 2 N acetyllactosamine repeats small signals corresponding to lack of fucose 146 and galactose minus 162 were detected which are attributable to the acid hydrolysis conditions applied for sialic acid removal see MALDI Figures 15 16 and 17 .

In a parallel experiment the N glycosidase digestion mixture was absorbed onto 1 ml RP C18 cartridge without prior acid hydrolysis of oligosaccharides and elution was performed with 5 acetonitrile in water containing 0.1 TFA under these conditions the EPO protein was completely retained onto the RP material and oligosaccharides were washed off from the column with 5 acetonitrile in HO containing 0.1 TFA. The de N glycosylated EPO protein was eluted with 70 acetonitrile in HO containing 0.1 TFA. The oligosaccharide fractions from the RP C18 step of N glycosidase treated sample A EPO GT 1 A and sample K were neutralized and subjected to desalting using Hypercarb cartridges as described before. The isolated oligosaccharides were subjected to HPAEC PAD mapping before see and after mild acid treatment under conditions which enabled quantitative removal of sialic acids from glycans see .

The HPAEC PAD profile for the native material obtained from the HES modified sample A showed only neglectable signals for oligosaccharides whereas EPO GT 1 A derived oligosaccharides exhibited the same glycan profile as the one shown in sample named EPO GT 1 after mild periodate treatment . The elution profile of oligosaccharides obtained from the control EPO sample K yielded the expected pattern compare profile in . For comparison the native oligosaccharide profile of the international BRP EPO standard is included for comparison and as reference standard.

After mild acid hydrolysis all oligosaccharide preparations showed an identical elution profile of neutral oligosaccharide structures see with the expected qualitative and quantitative compositon of di tri and tetraantennary complex type carbohydrate chains as described in the methods section for the EPO preparation which was used as a starting material in the present study. This result demonstrates that the HES modification of the EPO sample results in a covalent linkage of the HES derivative which is detached from the EPO protein by N glycosidase and is acid labile since it is removed from the N glycans using mild acid treatment conditions known to desialylate carbohydrates see .

In order to further confirm HES modification of EPO at the N glycans of the molecule EPO samples were digested with N glycosidase and the EPO protein was adsorbed onto RP C18 cartridges whereas oligosaccharide material was washed off as described above. As shown in Table 2 glucose and hydroxyethylated glucose derivatives were detected only in the EPO protein which was subjected to HES modification at cysteine residues and in oligosaccharide fractions of EPO sample A2.

The EPO bioassay in the normocythaemic mouse system indicates was performed according to the procedures described in the European Pharmacopeia the laboratory that carried out the EPO assay was using the International BRP EPO reference standard preparation. For the HES modified EPO A2 preparation a mean value for the specific activity of 294 600 units per mg EPO of protein was determined indicating an approximately 3 fold higher specific activity when compared to the International BRP EPO reference standard preparation that was included in the samples sent for activity assays.

