---

title: Controlled pilot oxidizer for a gas turbine combustor
abstract: A combustor () for a gas turbine () includes a main burner oxidizer flow path () delivering a first portion () of an oxidizer flow (e.g., ) to a main burner () of the combustor and a pilot oxidizer flow path () delivering a second portion () of the oxidizer flow to a pilot () of the combustor. The combustor also includes a flow controller () disposed in the pilot oxidizer flow path for controlling an amount of the second portion delivered to the pilot.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07752850&OS=07752850&RS=07752850
owner: Siemens Energy, Inc.
number: 07752850
owner_city: Orlando
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050701
---
This invention was made with U.S. Government support through Government Contract Number DE FC26 03NT41891 awarded by the Department of Energy and in accordance with the terms set forth in said contract the U.S. Government may have certain rights in the invention.

This invention relates generally to gas turbines and in particular to controlling an oxidizer flow to a pilot of a combustor of the gas turbine.

The design of a gas turbine combustor is complicated by the necessity for the gas turbine to operate reliably with a low level of emissions at a variety of power levels. High power operation at high firing temperatures tends to increase the generation of oxides of nitrogen. Low power operation at lower combustion temperatures tends to increase the generation of carbon monoxide and unburned hydrocarbons due to incomplete combustion of the fuel. Under all operating conditions it is important to ensure the stability of the flame to avoid unexpected flameout damaging levels of acoustic vibration and damaging flashback of the flame from the combustion chamber into the fuel premix section of the combustor. A relatively rich fuel air mixture will improve the stability of the combustion process but will have an adverse affect on the level of oxides of nitrogen NOx emissions. A careful balance must be achieved among these various constraints in order to provide a reliable engine capable of satisfying very strict modern emissions regulations. A pilot flame is commonly used to stabilize the flame over a variety of engine loading conditions.

It is known to use catalytic combustion in combustion turbine engines to reduce NOx emissions. One such catalytic combustion technique known as a rich catalytic lean burn RCL combustion process includes mixing fuel with a first portion of air to form a rich fuel mixture. The rich fuel mixture is passed over a catalytic surface and mixed with a second portion of air in a downstream combustion zone to complete the combustion process. U.S. Pat. No. 6 415 608 describes a gas turbine engine having an annular combustor design using catalytic reactor elements in an RCL configuration. The catalytic reaction takes place in a series of annularly mounted modules each module comprising a catalytic reactor element a fuel injection region a rich fuel air mixing region and a downstream mixing zone at the catalytic reactor element exit.

One of the challenges of gas turbine combustor design is the wide range of loading conditions over which the gas turbine engine must operate. In conventional gas turbine engine operation the amount of fuel provided to the turbine is increased with increasing load on the turbine. Accordingly power output of the gas turbine is primarily controlled by fuel flow to the combustor while air flow to the combustor is kept relatively constant. As a result a comparatively richer mixture is provided to the gas turbine under relatively higher loading conditions because of the increased fuel flow while a leaner mixture is provided under low loading conditions because of a reduced fuel flow. Consequently a pilot is commonly used in gas turbine combustors to form a region having a higher fuel concentration to increase flame stability at no load and low load conditions. However because the pilot produces a diffusion flame the pilot is a source of a significant amount of undesirable NOx. Typically such piloted combustors may produce 5 15 ppm of NOx. Typically 90 of the NOx emissions may be directly attributed to the pilot. Because a pilot is not needed for flame stability at relatively higher gas turbine loads the fuel flow to the pilot may be gradually decreased as load increases until the pilot is no longer fueled. However a volume of air flow to the pilot is typically kept constant effectively increasing an air fuel ratio AFR in the combustor as the fuel to the pilot is reduced. A resulting increased AFR may adversely affect flame stability at higher loads when the fuel flow to the pilot is reduced or stopped. The inventors of the present invention have innovatively realized that by reducing the amount of air flow provided to the pilot as the fuel flow is reduced improved flame stability may be maintained at higher loads while reducing the NOx penalty of the pilot. The NOx penalty from the pilot is reduced because the pilot region becomes a much smaller percentage of the total combustor flow.

A first portion of the flow of compressed air may be delivered to a main burner oxidizer flow path of the main burner and a second portion of the air may be delivered to a pilot oxidizer flow path of the pilot . The first portion of the fuel and the first portion of the air may be allowed to mix in the main burner to produce a main burner combustible mixture . The second portion of the fuel and the second portion of the air may be allowed to mix in the pilot to produce a pilot combustible mixture . The main burner combustible mixture and the pilot combustible mixture are discharged from the main burner and pilot respectively and allowed to mix and combust in a downstream burnout zone to produce a hot combustion gas . The pilot provides flame stability in the burnout zone for example when the gas turbine is operated at reduced loads.

A turbine receives hot combustion gas discharged from the burnout zone where it is expanded to extract mechanical shaft power. In one embodiment a common shaft interconnects the turbine with the compressor as well as an electrical generator not shown to provide mechanical power for compressing the ambient air and for producing electrical power respectively. Expanded combustion gas may be exhausted directly to the atmosphere or it may be routed through additional heat recovery systems not shown .

In an aspect of the invention a flow controller may be disposed in the pilot oxidizer flow path for controlling an amount of the second portion delivered to the pilot . In an exemplary embodiment the flow controller may include a gate valve selectively positionable in the flow path to control a flow of the second portion . The gate valve may be movable from a fully open state as indicated by the position of the gate valve to a fully closed state as indicated by the dotted line position of the gate valve to selectively control the amount of the second portion delivered to the pilot . It should be noted that other types of flow controllers such as butterfly valves spool valves ball valves and other valves used for flow control may be used. The flow controller may include a biasing mechanism such as a spring to return the valve to a fully open state in the absence of a valve actuating force acting to position the valve away from a fully open state.

The flow controller may also include an actuator such as an electro mechanical hydraulic or pneumatic operated mechanism for supplying a valve actuating force to control movement of the valve between the fully open and fully closed positions. The actuator may be controlled by a processor responsive for example to an operating condition of the gas turbine such as a load on the gas turbine. The processor may receive a signal indicative of the operating condition and generate appropriate commands to control the actuator to drive the valve to a desired position for controlling an amount of the pilot oxidizer portion . For example as a load is increased on the gas turbine the valve of the flow controller may be gradually driven to a fully open state a no load to a fully closed state at a full or base load. In another aspect the position of the valve may be correlated with an amount of fuel being delivered to the pilot . Advantageously the flow controller allows an amount of the pilot oxidizer portion to be reduced as a need for the pilot to stabilize combustion is reduced. Accordingly a desired AFR may be maintained in the downstream burnout zone sufficient to achieve stable combustion over various load conditions as a piloting is reduced.

In a catalytic combustion embodiment of the invention shown in the main burner of the combustor is configured as an annulus having the pilot disposed in a central core region of the annulus. The main burner includes a plurality of catalytic combustion modules arranged around the central core region . The combustor may include a combustor basket having a central axis for retaining the combustion modules circumferentially installed in the combustor basket radially outward of the central core region . Each catalytic combustion module receives a respective catalytic combustion module portion of the first portion of the fuel and a combustion mixture portion of the air form the compressor of .

In a backside cooling embodiment the flow of air may be split into a combustion portion for mixing with the catalytic combustion module portion and a backside portion . A first portion of the backside portion may be delivered to the main burner oxidizer flow path of the main burner and a second portion of the backside portion may be delivered to the pilot oxidizer flow path of the pilot . In an aspect of the invention a fractional amount of the of the first portion delivered to the main burner along the main burner oxidizer flow path and a fractional amount of the second portion delivered to the pilot along the pilot flow oxidizer path may be determined by the respective sizes of the flow paths and the resulting pressure drops induced along the paths . For example the main burner oxidizer flow path and the pilot oxidizer flow path may be sized so that about 94 of the backside portion is directed along the main burner oxidizer flow path and about 6 is directed along pilot oxidizer flow path .

In an embodiment of the invention each catalytic combustion module may include a plurality of spaced apart tubes coated with a catalyst on respective tube outside diameter surfaces. The combustion mixture portion and the catalytic combustor module portion may be mixed to form a fuel oxidizer mixture directed to flow around the tubes to catalytically oxidize a portion of the fuel oxidizer mixture . The first portion of the backside portion may be conducted along the main burner oxidizer flow path and directed to flow within the interior of the tubes for providing backside cooling of the fuel oxidizer mixture as the mixture is partially oxidized. As the first portion of the backside cooling portion exits each catalytic oxidation module downstream it is mixed with the fuel oxidizer mixture in a post catalytic mixing zone to form a partially oxidized fuel oxidizer mixture . The partially oxidized fuel oxidizer mixture is then discharged into the burnout zone . The second portion of the fuel and the second portion of the backside portion may be allowed to mix in the pilot to produce a pilot combustible mixture . The pilot combustible mixture is then discharged into the burnout zone and allowed to mix with partially oxidized fuel oxidizer mixture and combusted in the downstream burnout zone to produce the hot combustion gas .

In an aspect of the invention the flow controller may be disposed in the pilot oxidizer flow path for controlling an amount of the second portion delivered to the pilot . In an exemplary embodiment the flow controller may include a gate valve selectively positionable in the flow path . The gate valve may be movable from a fully open state to a fully closed state to selectively control the amount of the second portion of the backside portion of the air delivered to the pilot . In an embodiment of the invention the valve may be positioned in a fully open state to provide from about 10 to 2 or more preferably 7 to 5 of the second portion to the pilot. In a fully closed state the valve may be positioned to provide from about 0.75 to 0.25 and more preferably 0.6 to 0.4 of the second portion to the pilot . The flow controller may include biasing mechanism to return the valve to a fully open state in the absence of a valve actuating force acting to position the valve away from a fully open state.

The flow controller may also include an actuator supplying a valve actuating force to control movement of the valve between the fully open and fully closed positions. The actuator may be controlled by the processor responsive for example to an operating condition of the gas turbine. The processor may receive a signal indicative of the operating condition and generate appropriate commands to control the actuator to drive the valve to a desired position for controlling an amount of the second portion provided to the pilot . Advantageously the flow controller allows the amount of the second portion to be reduced as the need for the pilot to stabilize combustion is reduced such as when the gas turbine is operated at base load. Accordingly a desired AFR may be maintained in the downstream burnout zone when the second portion delivered to the pilot is reduced for example at higher loads. In a further aspect a reduced amount of air flow may be provided to the pilot even when no fuel is being provided to enhance mixing in the central region downstream of the pilot outlet to limit dead zone formation that may adversely affect combustion stability.

While the preferred embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described herein it will be obvious that such embodiments are provided by way of example only. Numerous variations changes and substitutions will occur to those of skill in the art without departing from the invention herein. Accordingly it is intended that the invention be limited only by the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

