---

title: Combined skirt-reefing and slider method for controlled parachute opening
abstract: A parachute system having a parachute canopy having a skirt, and a plurality of gores spaced about the skirt. The plurality of gores is defined by first and second groups of gores. The parachute system includes a slider having a plurality of through-holes, a line loop attached to the slider, a first reefing line extending through the first group of gores and having a pair of ends attached to the line loop, and a second reefing line extending through the second group of gores and having a pair of ends attached to the line loop. A corresponding group of suspension lines passes through a corresponding through-hole in the slider. Each suspension line in each group of suspension lines is attached to a corresponding gore. A single reefing line cutter is engaged with the line loop and configured to cut the line loop after a predetermined amount of time has elapsed so as to release the reefing lines and allow the slider to slide down the suspension lines.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07419122&OS=07419122&RS=07419122
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07419122
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051109
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by the U.S. Government for Governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon.

The present invention generally relates to a combined skirt reefing and slider method for controlled parachute opening.

An important and desirable operating capability in a parachute system is the ability to control the opening of the parachute so as to decrease its opening force. Such an operating capability provides for controlled and safe airdrops thereby protecting personnel and cargo. This aforesaid operating capability is particularly important for current precision airdrop systems that deploy parachutes at an altitude of about 25 000 feet. At this high altitude the true aircraft speed is high as 200 knots as compared to 130 knots near sea level . This relatively high aircraft speed results in extremely high opening forces if the parachute is not inflated in a controlled manner to decrease the peak opening force.

Parafoils gliding ram air inflated parachutes are currently used to implement precision airdrops. In some instances sliders are used on the parafoils to control the opening of the parafoil. However the relatively high cost of parafoils prohibits the use of parafoils on a large scale. Other types of parachute systems used today include low cost standard round cargo parachutes that are not designed for high altitude deployment. Skirt reefing techniques are commonly used to control the opening of round parachutes. These skirt reefing techniques typically use reefing lines in conjunction with pyrotechnic cutters. Other prior art techniques for controlling the canopy opening process use loose sliders. However these aforesaid prior art techniques do not sufficiently address unacceptably high opening forces that jeopardize the structural integrity of both the canopy fabric and suspension lines.

What is needed is a cargo parachute system having a skirt reefing system that sufficiently reduces the opening forces and which is relatively more economical to implement in comparison to prior art cargo parachute reefing systems.

In one aspect the present invention is directed to a parachute system that generally comprises a parachute canopy having a skirt and a plurality of gores spaced about the skirt wherein the plurality of gores are defined by a first group of gores and a second group of gores. The parachute system includes a slider which is generally symmetrical in shape e.g. square or circular having a plurality of through holes or openings a line loop attached to the slider a first reefing line extending through the first group of gores and having a pair of ends attached to the line loop and a second reefing line extending through the second group of gores and having a pair of ends attached to the line loop. The parachute system further includes a plurality of groups of suspension lines. Each group of suspension lines passes through a corresponding through hole in the slider. Thus the quantity of through holes in the slider depends on the quantity of suspension lines and the quantity of groupings of the suspension lines. Each suspension line in each group of suspension lines is attached to a corresponding gore. The parachute system also has a single reefing line cutter engaged with the loop and configured to cut the line loop after a predetermined amount of time has elapsed so as to release the reefing lines and allow the slider to slide down the suspension lines.

In a related aspect the present invention is directed a device for controlling the opening process of a parachute comprising a slider having a plurality of through holes for the passage therethrough of suspension lines a line loop attached to the slider and a single reefing line cutter engaged with the line loop and configured to cut the line loop after a predetermined amount of time has elapsed.

Referring to parachute of the present invention generally comprises a generally round canopy which has canopy skirt . Parachute further includes gores A P reefing lines and and slider . As shown in there are sixteen gores A P that are equidistantly spaced along canopy skirt . However in alternate embodiments of the invention there may be more than or less than sixteen gores. Reefing line reefs gores A H and reefing line reefs gores I P. Slider is positioned at canopy skirt . Slider is generally symmetrical in shape. In one embodiment shown in slider is configured to have a generally square shape. In another embodiment slider is configured to have a generally circular shape. The quantity of openings in slider depends on the quantity of suspension lines and their grouping. Each grouping passes through an opening. Slider is configured in to have openings and . Each of these aforesaid openings is located in a respective corner of slider . Slider is fabricated from suitable materials known in the parachute art.

Referring to there is shown a plan view of slider . For purposes of clarity and to simplify and facilitate description of the invention reefing lines and and the parachute suspension lines are not shown in . In a preferred embodiment line loop is sewn onto slider . In a preferred embodiment line loop is generally centrally located on slider . Line loop goes through reefing line cutter . Reefing line cutter is attached to slider for example with stitching as shown in . Reefing line cutter is configured to implement a cutting action after a predetermined amount of time has elapsed i.e. the delay time. In a preferred embodiment reefing line cutter is configured as a pyrotechnic cutter which is well known in the art.

Referring to A and B both ends of reefing line are connected to line loop . Similarly both ends of reefing line are connected to line loop . Parachute further includes a plurality of groups and of suspension lines. Group comprises four separate suspension lines A D. Group comprises four separate suspension lines A D. Similarly group comprises four separate suspension lines and group comprises four separate suspension lines. For purposes of clarity and to simplify the ensuing description of the invention the individual suspension lines in groups and are not shown. Suspension lines A D pass through opening in slider and are connected to gores I L respectively. Suspension lines A D pass through opening in slider and are connected to gores E H respectively. Similarly suspension lines A D pass through opening in slider and are connected to gores M P respectively. Suspension lines A D pass through opening in slider and are connected to gores A D. All of these aforesaid suspension lines are connected at link . Riser is connected to and between link and payload .

Referring to B and as a result of the connection of reefing lines and to slider in the manner described in the foregoing description slider is fixed at canopy skirt during this reefed initial opening stage. Slider impedes inlet airflow to canopy and thereby retards or slows the opening of canopy . The airflow around slider is uniform. Thus at this initial reefed stage slider functions as a diffuser that diffuses inlet airflow to canopy thereby retarding the opening of canopy . When the predetermined amount of time has elapsed reefing line cutter cuts line loop which causes the release of reefing lines and as shown in . Canopy then starts to inflate and expand as indicated by arrows . Slider then starts to slide down the suspension lines of groups and as indicated by arrow thereby controlling the opening process of canopy and advancing canopy to the second stage of opening. Eventually slider reaches the bottom of the suspension lines as shown in .

The present invention effectively controls the opening of parachute using only one reefing line cutter as compared to two or four reefing line cutters used in many prior art parachutes. As shown in the foregoing description the initial position of slider is well controlled at canopy skirt in contrast to the loose sliders commonly used in prior art parachute systems. Furthermore the release of slider is accurately controlled by the firing of reefing line cutter . When slider is initially positioned at canopy skirt slider acts as a diffuser to improve the inlet airflow and retard the opening of canopy . The interactive nature between reefing lines and and slider allows for considerable flexibility in the selection of reefing time and slider size for different parachute canopy sizes and desired degree of opening control.

Thus the present invention provides a parachute system that uses a combined skirt reefing and slider technique that controls the opening of a parachute canopy and allows parachute to be used for either high altitude or low altitude high velocity deployment. The combination of skirt reefing and the of a slider in accordance with the invention provides an effective means to control and slow or retard the parachute opening and to provide airflow to the canopy during initial opening. The present invention may be implemented with cargo parachutes or with smaller parachutes designed for personnel or relatively small payloads.

The principles preferred embodiments and modes of operation of the present invention have been described in the foregoing specification. This invention should not be construed as limited to the particular forms disclosed as these are to be regarded as illustrative rather than restrictive. Variations and changes may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit of the invention. Accordingly the foregoing detailed description should be considered as exemplary in nature and not limiting the scope and spirit of the invention as set forth in the attached claims.

