---

title: Peptide-modified polyurethane compositions and associated methods
abstract: Peptide-modified polyurethanes comprising the reaction product of an isocyanate, a chain extender, and a peptide are provided. Also provided processes for making a peptide-modified polyurethane comprising: providing an isocyanate; providing a chain extender; providing a peptide; and allowing the isocyanate, chain extender, and peptide to react thereby forming the peptide-modified polyurethane, as well as methods for treating a subject comprising: providing a peptide-modified polyurethane that comprises the reaction product of an isocyanate, a chain extender, and a peptide; and administering the peptide-modified polyurethane to the subject.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08791073&OS=08791073&RS=08791073
owner: William Marsh Rice University
number: 08791073
owner_city: Houston
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050516
---
This Application claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 571 313 filed on May 14 2004 and entitled Peptide Modified Polyurethane Compositions and Methods. 

The present invention was developed under grants from the National Science Foundation Grant Nos. HRD 9817555 0114264 and BES 9875607 and National Institutes of Health Grant No. R01 HL60485 . The U.S. Government may have certain rights to the invention.

The present invention generally relates to peptide modified polyurethane compositions and methods of using such compositions. These compositions have improved properties that make them useful for a variety of applications including in particular the manufacture of medical devices articles or implants that contact living tissues or bodily fluids.

Polyurethanes represent a major class of synthetic polymers that have been evaluated for use with a variety of medical implants. Polyurethanes have favorable mechanical properties e.g. high tensile strength tear and abrasion resistance and stability in biological environments and are generally biocompatible. Accordingly polyurethanes are used with medical implants such as cardiac pacemakers catheters implantable prostheses cardiac assist devices heart valves and vascular grafts. The favorable mechanical properties of some polyurethanes can be attributed to their two phase morphology which is derived from microphase separation of soft and hard polymer segments. The soft segment has a low glass transition temperature Tg and the hard segment has a high Tg. For polyurethanes used with certain medical implants the soft segments may be formed from a polyether polyol such as polytetramethylene oxide PTMO and the hard segments may be derived from a diisocyanate such as 4 4 methylenediphenyl diisocyanate MDI and a polyol chain extender such as 1 4 butanediol.

Vascular grafts are a type of medical implant in which synthetic polymers are useful. Certain vascular diseases often result in a need to open replace or bypass diseased or damaged blood vessel segments. In these situations a graft may be used to direct blood flow around occluded segments of the vasculature commonly referred to as bypass grafting. In coronary artery bypass grafting CABG occluded coronary arteries can be replaced with autologous tissue such as saphenous veins. But some patients may not have suitable donor tissue e.g. due to peripheral vascular disease or prior surgery and a synthetic blood vessel substitute or graft may be required.

Synthetic polymers such as ePTFE expanded polytetrafluoroethylene Dacron polyethylene teraphthalate and microporous polyurethanes have been developed for use with synthetic grafts and other medical implants. In large diameter e.g. 6 mm applications these synthetic polymers have been successfully used as vascular grafts but generally are not suitable for small diameter applications such as CABG. In small diameter applications synthetic grafts often become occluded decreasing the patency of the graft. Similarly grafts with low blood flow are more susceptible to patency failure as compared to those in high blood flow. Thus synthetic grafts are used infrequently for bypass or reconstructive procedures that require small diameters such as the coronary artery and arteries below the knee.

Compliance also affects the function of small diameter synthetic grafts. Vascular compliance is the ability of a blood vessel wall to expand and contract passively with changes in pressure and constitutes an important function of large arteries and veins. The compliance of a blood vessel generally is a structural property which depends on the geometry diameter and wall thickness of the blood vessel rather than a material property. To avoid discontinuity of blood flow velocity the compliance of a graft should match the compliance of the vessel it is replacing. Generally smaller synthetic grafts are unable to meet the compliance requirements of small diameter vessels.

Endothelialization of synthetic grafts may improve graft patency and improve a synthetic polymer s blood compatibility. Patency and compatibility however may be dependent on the attachment and retention e.g. proliferation and migration of endothelial cells on the graft or polymer surface. This dependency may be problematic since endothelial cells are known to detach upon exposure to physiological shear stresses. One way to adhere and retain endothelial cells on a synthetic polymer is to modify the polymer s surface. A number of surface modification strategies exist such as attaching ionic groups heparin thrombomodulin and growth factors to the graft or synthetic polymer. Another approach is to attach cell surface receptors and adhesion proteins adhesive peptides which are capable of mediating cell adhesion to the surface of a synthetic material. For example modifications of materials with adhesive peptides that promote integrin mediated cell attachment such as the RGD arginine glycine aspartic acid peptide promote cell adhesion and spreading. RGD is known to interact with platelet integrin glycoprotein IIB IIIA so while RGD may enhance endothelial cell adhesion it ultimately may decrease graft performance. The laminin derived peptide YIGSR tyrosine isoleucine glycine serine arginine which binds nonintegrin receptors on endothelial cells also may promote endothelialization when attached to synthetic polymers.

In general the degradability of a synthetic material used with a medical implant should be considered. In some applications degradable materials e.g. poly lactic acid are advantageous because they can be used for both tissue engineering and delivery of therapeutic agents to the implantation site. For example cells may attach and grow on a degradable material proliferate and eventually adsorb and replace the material. These degradable materials are often degraded in vivo by hydrolysis or enzymatic mechanisms. To decrease thrombosis degradable materials modified with adhesive peptides have been tested. For example RGD has been attached to degradable block copolymers of biotinylated polyethylene glycol PEG with poly lactic acid PLA and poly lactic acid co lysine .

The physiological response to a medical implant often includes platelet adhesion platelet aggregation and smooth muscle cell proliferation. In turn this results in neointimal lesions at the implant placement site. Nitric oxide NO is a natural mediator of vascular homeostasis and known to be a vasodilator a regulator of vascular cell proliferation and migration and an inhibitor of thrombus formation. NO has been shown to decrease the incidence of intimal hyperplasia in several animal models and the inhibition of platelet adhesion and aggregation by NO and several NO releasing materials has been reported. Synthetic materials that are capable of releasing NO may therefore be suitable for use with medical implants. However the rate at which such materials release NO may be important. For example if the release rate is too high a dose of NO may cause a cytotoxic response while too little may not stimulate endothelial cell proliferation to a desired degree or inadequately inhibit platelet adhesion and cell growth.

The present invention generally relates to peptide modified polyurethane compositions and methods of using such compositions. These compositions have improved properties that make them useful for a variety of applications in particular the manufacture of medical devices articles or implants that contact living tissues or bodily fluids.

According to one embodiment the present invention provides a peptide modified polyurethane comprising the reaction product of an isocyanate a chain extender and a peptide.

According to another embodiment the present invention provides a process for making a peptide modified polyurethane comprising providing an isocyanate providing a chain extender providing a peptide and allowing the isocyanate chain extender and peptide to react thereby forming the peptide modified polyurethane.

According to another embodiment the present invention provides a method for treating a subject comprising providing a peptide modified polyurethane that comprises the reaction product of an isocyanate a chain extender and a peptide and administering the peptide modified polyurethane to the subject.

The features and advantages of the present invention will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art upon a reading of the description of the embodiments that follows.

While the present disclosure is susceptible to various modifications and alternative forms specific example embodiments have been shown in the figures and are herein described in more detail. It should be understood however that the description of specific example embodiments is not intended to limit the invention to the particular forms disclosed but on the contrary this disclosure is to cover all modifications and equivalents as defined by the appended claims.

The present invention generally relates to peptide modified polyurethane compositions and methods of using such compositions.

As used herein the abbreviations for the genetically encoded L enantiomeric amino acids are conventional and are as follows 

The present invention provides peptide modified polyurethanes comprising a polyurethane polymer and a peptide that has been incorporated into the backbone chain of the polyurethane polymer. The term polyurethane as used herein refers to any polymeric molecule having in its backbone chain one or more urethane linkages urea linkages or both e.g. polyurethane polyurea polyurethaneurea . In general the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention should be biocompatible and suitable for use in medical applications. The term biocompatible refers to the property of being biologically compatible by not producing a significant toxic injurious or immunological response in living tissue. The peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be useful in medical applications e.g. small diameter vascular grafts. In certain embodiments the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may have desirable mechanical properties e.g. elasticity and tensile strength. In certain embodiments the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be bioactive. The term bioactive means having an effect on a living organism e.g. the ability to control cellular behaviors such as proliferation migration and extracellular matrix production. For example the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be capable of releasing NO at physiological pHs or capable of being degraded in vivo or both. Accordingly the present invention also provides a material comprising a peptide modified polyurethane composition as described herein having one or more of biocompatibility bioactivity degradability and improved mechanical properties.

The peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention generally include an isocyanate. The isocyanates that can be used in the present invention are typically polyisocyanates and diisocyanates. Suitable isocyanates also can be aromatic or aliphatic. Examples of suitable isocyanates include but are not limited to toluene diisocyanate TDI methylene diphenyl diisocyanate MDI methylene dicyclohexane diisocyanate H12MDI naphthalene diisocyanate NDI hexamethylene diisocyanate HDI p phenylene diisocyanate pPDI trans cyclohexane 1 4 diisocyanate CHDI 1 6 diisocyanatohexane DICH isophorone diisocyanate tetramethylxylene diisocyanate TMXDI and an isomer thereof and a combination thereof. It will be appreciated that this list is not exhaustive and that the invention encompasses any isocyanate known or that may be found to be suitable in the manufacture of polyurethanes.

The peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention also include a chain extender. The term chain extender means any compound having at least two functional groups per molecule that are capable of reacting with an isocyanate group. In general any chain extender or mixture of chain extenders suitable in the art of polyurethane manufacture may be used. In certain embodiments the chain extender comprises a polyol e.g. a molecule with two or more reactive hydroxyl groups per molecule such as for example a diol. In other embodiments the chain extender comprises a polyamine e.g. a molecule with two or more reactive amine groups per molecule such as for example a diamine. Chain extenders with more than two functional groups may be capable of forming a branched network a crosslinked network or both. In certain embodiments the chain extender may comprise a polysiloxane for example polydimethyl siloxane PDMS . Examples of other suitable chain extenders include but are not limited to 1 4 butanediol 1 4 butadiene 1 6 hexanediol 1 8 octanediol 1 9 nonanediol 1 10 decanediol 1 12 dodecanediol 1 4 cyclohexanedimethanol 1 4 cyclohexanediol hydroxyquinone bis 2 hydroxyethyl ether 2 ethyl 1 3 hexanediol 2 butyl 2 ethyl 1 3 propanediol 2 2 4 trimethyl 1 3 pentanediol polytetramethylene oxide PTMO poly tetramethylene ether glycol polyethylene adipate ethylene diamine 1 4 diaminocyclo hexane ethylene diamine 1 4 diaminocyclo hexane and an isomer thereof and a combination thereof.

The peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention also include a peptide. Thus certain embodiments of the present invention provide peptide modified polyurethane compositions that include an isocyanate a chain extender and a peptide. The term peptide means a compound having at least two amino acids per molecule. The term amino acid refers to any of the natural amino acids synthetic amino acids or other compounds with amino acid like properties.

In certain embodiments the peptides used in peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may include a bioactive peptide. The term bioactive peptide refers to peptides capable of performing a desired biological function. Examples of bioactive peptides include but are not limited to cell modulating peptides e.g. an antibody fragment an integrin binding peptide a fibronectin derived peptide and a laminin derived peptide chemotactic peptides anticoagulant peptides antithrombotic peptides antitumor peptides anti infectious peptides growth potentiating peptides anti inflammatory peptides or combinations thereof. Bioactive peptides also include peptide fragments of proteins that are bioactive and that have the functional properties of those proteins. Other examples of suitable bioactive peptides include but are not limited to RGDC SEQ ID. NO 1 RGEC SEQ ID. NO 2 RGDT SEQ ID. NO 3 RGDS SEQ ID. NO 4 LDV SEQ ID. NO 5 REDV SEQ ID. NO 6 RGDV SEQ ID. NO 7 LRGDN SEQ ID. NO 8 IKVAV SEQ ID. NO 9 YIGSR SEQ ID. NO 10 PDSGR SEQ ID. NO 11 RNIAEIIKDA SEQ ID. NO 12 RGDT SEQ ID. NO 13 DGEA SEQ ID. NO 14 DGEAGC SEQ ID. NO 15 EPRGDNYR SEQ ID. NO 16 EILDV SEQ ID. NO 17 REDV SEQ ID. NO 18 SIKVAV SEQ ID. NO 19 RGD SEQ ID. NO 20 KQAGDV SEQ ID. NO 21 HRSNRKGV SEQ ID. NO 22 VTXG SEQ ID. NO 23 and combinations thereof. In the context of the present invention when a peptide is provided as a sequence of amino acids it means that the peptide may be any peptide in which at least a portion of the peptide comprises the sequence provided.

In certain embodiments the bioactive peptide also may be a proteolytically degradable peptide. Such a proteolytically degradable peptide may be used to form a material capable of being degraded in vivo. Suitable proteolytically degradable peptides may be chosen among other things based on their ability to degrade upon exposure to proteolytic enzymes involved with tissue formation processes such as cell migration and tissue remodeling e.g. matrix metalloproteases collagenases and plasmins . Examples of suitable proteolytically degradable peptides include but are not limited to collagenase sensitive peptides e.g. LGPA SEQ ID. NO 24 and elastase sensitive peptides e.g. AAAAAAAAA SEQ ID. NO 25 . In certain exemplary embodiments the proteolytically degradable peptide may be provided with other peptides e.g. cell adhesive peptides like YIGSR. In addition the degradation rate may be tailored e.g. based on adjusting the type and ratio of peptides present and adjusting the overall molecular weight of a given peptide modified polyurethane molecule.

In certain embodiments the bioactive peptide may be capable of reversibly binding NO or may be capable of being modified to reversibly release NO. Such a bioactive peptide may comprise a NO nucleophile complex a NO donor group or both. In general NO nucleophile complexes e.g. diazeniumdiolate ions and NO donating groups e.g. S nitrosothiols may spontaneously decompose and release NO under physiological conditions. Thus these bioactive peptides may provide a means for delivering NO. In certain exemplary embodiments the bioactive peptide may include one or more lysines capable of forming a diazeniumdiolate ion e.g. KKKK SEQ ID. NO 26 and K N O NO SEQ ID. NO 27 . In other exemplary embodiments the bioactive peptide may include one or more cysteines capable of forming S nitrosothiols e.g. CCC SEQ ID. NO 28 .

A variety of suitable bioactive peptides are known in the art. Other useful bioactive peptides may be identified thorough the use of synthetic peptide combinatorial libraries such as those described in Houghton et al. Biotechniques 13 3 414 421 1992 or using phage display procedures such as those described in Hart et al. J. Biol. Chem. 269 12468 1994 . To determine the biological effect of certain peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention samples may be tested using in vitro assays e.g. assays designed to measure cell proliferation or cell adhesion or both . Using such assays peptide modified polyurethanes having the desired biological activity can be identified. In certain embodiments in which the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention are used with medical implants suitable bioactive peptides may be chosen based on for example the ability to promote the adhesion of endothelial cells the ability to promote the retention of endothelial cells under shear stresses the ability to promote the proliferation and migration of endothelial cells the ability to decrease platelet adhesion the ability to reversibly bind nitric oxide the ability to impart certain mechanical properties and a combination thereof.

In general the bioactive peptides may be tailored to facilitate incorporation into the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention. For example a bioactive peptide may comprise one or more amino acid spacer groups e.g. glycine at either or both the N and C terminal ends. Spacer groups may among other things provide a means to expose at least part of the peptide sequence on the surface of the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention. The peptides also may comprise a C terminal amine group for example to facilitate incorporation of the peptide into peptide modified polyurethanes. Such an amine group may be provided by among other things a lysine. Examples of a suitable bioactive peptides with glycine spacers and C terminal lysines include but are not limited to GGGYIGSRGGGK SEQ ID. NO 29 GGGCCCGGGK SEQ ID. NO 30 SGGKKKGGS SEQ ID. NO 31 and SGG K N O NO GGS SEQ ID. NO 32 .

In some embodiments other bioactive molecules may be incorporated into the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention. For example growth factors e.g. epidermal growth factor transforming growth factor and vascular endothelial cell growth factor may be included for example to regulate cell behaviors such as proliferation migration and differentiation.

In certain embodiments the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention also may include a PEG molecule. PEG may provide a means to adjust the flexibility of the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention. In addition PEG s hydrophilic nature may limit platelet adhesion depending on for example its ratio of hard and soft segments its molecular weight and the type of PEG chosen. In general the amount molecular weight and ratio of a given PEG may be varied to achieve certain desired properties. In some embodiments the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may comprise about 4 600 g mole of PEG. In other embodiments PEG may be incorporated into the peptide modified polyurethanes at about a 15 molar ratio. A person having ordinary skill in the art will recognize that an upper level exist in which the incorporation of PEG can result in undesirable mechanical properties or in which the peptide is no longer exposed to the surface thereby preventing cell attachment.

The choice and combination of peptides bioactive peptides bioactive molecules and PEG in the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be tailored to achieve a desired effect. For example combinations of bioactive peptides e.g. cell adhesive peptides proteolytic peptides or NO binding peptides and PEG may result in a peptide modified polyurethane that is degradable and benefits from synergistic effects leading to faster levels of endothelialization while minimizing intimal hyperplasia. Other combinations may result in a peptide modified polyurethane that is capable of enhancing attachment proliferation migration and extracellular matrix production of endothelial cells without increasing platelet adhesion.

In certain embodiments the mechanical properties of the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be tailored to achieve a desired result. In general the choice or combination of peptides PEG or both may influence certain mechanical properties e.g. elasticity and tensile strength . For example incorporation of a YIGSR peptide may increase elongation while permitting tensile strength to remain unaltered. Such mechanical properties may be helpful among other things to transmit mechanical stimuli to seeded endothelial cells and also improve compliance matching e.g. to reduce intimal hyperplasia at anastomotic sites . As another example incorporation of a YIGSR peptide and PEG may increase both elongation and tensile strength.

Certain embodiments of the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be further described as comprising a reaction product of an isocyanate a chain extender and a peptide. In certain embodiments the reaction product may further comprise a PEG. As referred to herein the term reaction product will be understood to mean any product that is produced during the course of the reaction between an isocyanate a chain extender and a peptide and optionally other additives that contemporaneously may be present e.g. mixed in when the isocyanate the chain extender and the peptide are reacted and includes the composition ultimately produced when the reaction is allowed to proceed fully to completion as well as an intermediate product. For example if the reaction between an isocyanate a chain extender and a peptide is allowed to proceed fully to completion the reaction product may include a composition such as for example a PUU YIGSR a PUU PEG YIGSR a PUU YIGSR LGPA a PU BD NO a PU BD PEG YIGSR or a PU BD PEG YIGSR NO. As referred to herein the term intermediate product will be understood to mean any product that is produced during the course of the reaction between an isocyanate a chain extender and a peptide and optionally other additives that contemporaneously may be present e.g. mixed in when the isocyanate the chain extender and the peptide are reacted . For example if the reaction between an isocyanate a chain extender and a peptide is halted before the reaction is complete the resulting composition is an intermediate product of the reaction between an isocyanate a chain extender and a peptide. As another example a prepolymer e.g. PUU PPD PU BD or a PUU PPD PEG is an intermediate product of the reaction between an isocyanate a chain extender and a peptide.

After administration into a recipient subject like a human or an animal the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be metabolically altered through in vivo processes such as endothelialization degradation NO release or a combination thereof. Thus the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may comprise a metabolically produced form of a reaction product of an isocyanate a chain extender and a peptide.

In certain embodiments the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention comprise a reaction product of MDI PTMO PPD and GGGYIGSRGGK. Such compounds are referred to as PUU YIGSR. 

In certain embodiments the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention comprise a reaction product of MDI PTMO PPD PEG and GGGYIGSRGGK. Such compounds are referred to as PUU PEG YIGSR. 

In certain embodiments the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention comprise a reaction product of MDI PTMO PPD GGGYIGSRGGK and GGGLGPAGGK SEQ ID. NO 33 . Such compounds are referred to as PUU YIGSR LGPA. 

In certain embodiments the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention comprise a reaction product of MDI PTMO BD and SGG K N O NO GGS. Such compounds are referred to as PU BD NO. 

In certain embodiments the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention comprise a reaction product of MDI PTMO BD PEG and GGGYIGSRGGK. Such compounds are referred to as PU BD PEG YIGSR. 

In certain embodiments the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention comprise a reaction product of MDI PTMO BD PEG GGGYIGSRGGK and SGG K N O NO GGS. Such compounds are referred to as PU BD PEG YIGSR NO. 

In certain embodiments the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be prepared by first preparing a prepolymer. In certain exemplary embodiments the prepolymer may comprise a reaction product of MDI PTMO and PPD. Such prepolymers are referred to as PUU PPD. In other exemplary embodiments the prepolymer may comprise a reaction product of MDI PTMO and BD. Such prepolymers are referred to as PU BD. In other exemplary embodiments the prepolymer may comprise a reaction product of MDI PTMO PPD and PEG. Such compounds are referred to as PUU PPD PEG. 

The peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be prepared by any suitable technique familiar to those skilled in the manufacture of polyurethanes. These methods include but are not limited to manual or mechanical mixing with or without any solvents present casting reaction extrusion and reaction injection molding. The amounts of the chain extenders isocyanates and peptides may be chosen based on the particular peptide modified polyurethane desired. In general a particular molar ratio of chain extender functional groups to isocyanate group will affect the molecular weight of the resultant peptide modified polyurethane being synthesized. If desired conventional polyurethane additives can be incorporated into the peptide modified polyurethanes during preparation e.g. catalysts antioxidants stabilizers lubricants dyes pigments inorganic fillers organic fillers and reinforcing materials .

Peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention are easily adaptable to a variety of fabrication techniques including but not limited to solvent casting blow molding machining and other conventional processing techniques such as injection molding and extrusion. The peptide modified polyurethanes also may be processed by conventional methods such as extrusion injection and compression. The peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention are particularly useful for preparing biomaterials especially for devices and implants requiring one or more of the aforementioned properties.

In certain embodiments peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be fabricated to comprise a plurality of micropores. The micropores may have an open and interconnected structure among other things to induce cell migration through the micropores. In general the size and number of micropores may be controlled depending on the desired result. For example the size and number of micropores may affect for example the ability of cells to grow into and migrate through the micropores. The size and number of micropores also may affect the mechanical properties of a peptide modified polyurethane such as strength and compliance. In some embodiments the micropores have a size sufficient to allow cell growth into and through the micropores or a size sufficient to prevent excessive blood leakage through the micropores or both. Such embodiments may be suitable for use in medical applications such as vascular graft applications among others. In other embodiments peptide modified polyurethanes comprising micropores may be used to promote transmural and anastomotic tissue in growth from surrounding tissues or to promote the formation of a continuous monolayer of cells or both.

Peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention that comprise micropores may be fabricated using any method. Examples of suitable methods include but are not limited to solvent casting salt leaching gas foaming gas foaming salt leaching super critical point CO excimer laser ablation phase separation and freeze drying salt leaching. The method chosen may depend on among other things a desired result or a particular application or both. In certain embodiments peptide modified polyurethanes comprising micropores may be fabricated using a gas foaming and salt leaching method. This method may be advantageous when forming peptide modified polyurethanes for use in vascular grafts because among other things pore size and number can be controlled simultaneously.

In certain embodiments the present invention provides peptide modified polyurethanes having favorable mechanical properties and compatibility in biological environments particularly when implanted in vivo for extended periods of time. Accordingly the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be used as a biomaterial. The term biomaterial is used in its broadest sense referring to a material that is used in situations in which it comes in contact with the cells or bodily fluids or both of living animals or humans. Thus the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be useful in manufacturing medical devices articles or implants.

In certain embodiments the present invention provides a medical device article or implant composed wholly or partly of the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention. Such devices articles or implants may be capable of endothelialization at an anastomotic site. Examples of medical devices articles or implants include but are not limited to cardiac pace makers cardiac assist devices heart valves extra corporeal devices blood pumps balloon pumps A V shunts biosensors artificial joints orthopedic implants blood contacting devices sutures vascular implants stents vascular grafts heart valves drug pumps drug delivery catheters infusion catheters thromboresistant scaffold for endothelialization and drug delivery guidewires.

It is understood that the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention also may have applications in nonmedical areas. Such applications may include for example their use in the manufacture of structural components for pumps vehicles mining screens and laminating compounds.

In certain embodiments the present invention provides an article composed wholly or partly of the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention.

The present invention also provides methods of using the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention. Suitable uses include among other things those disclosed above. For example the peptide modified polyurethanes may be used as a method to treat a cardiovascular disease or disorder e.g. a vascular graft.

In certain embodiments the present invention provides a method of controlling the mechanical properties of a polyurethane polymer by incorporating a peptide into the polyurethane polymer. Such methods offer a simpler alternative to surface modification of polyurethanes because among other things the peptide can be used as a chain extender during polymer synthesis. Additionally this sort of bulk incorporation allows one to develop microporous materials that are for example uniformly cell adhesive. For example the amino acid sequence incorporation methods of the present invention may produce a polyurethane polymer that is more elastic without decreasing its tensile properties. This improved elasticity may be helpful to transmit mechanical stimuli to seeded endothelial cells and also to improve compliance matching potentially reducing intimal hyperplasia at anastomotic sites.

Furthermore the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention may be designed to include multiple peptides with different biological functions to optimize among other things biological performance of the peptide modified polyurethane as well as the biological performance of the device article or implant comprising the peptide modified polyurethane. For example a mixture of several peptides including for example one or more of cell adhesive peptides chemotactic peptides and NO generating peptides may be included among other things during the chain extender reaction. The inclusion of a mixture of peptides may among other things promote endothelial cell attachment growth and migration while minimizing platelet adhesion and thrombosis. In certain embodiments PEG may be included in the soft segment domain of such materials.

To facilitate a better understanding of the present invention the following examples of specific embodiments are given. In no way should the following examples be read to limit or to define the entire scope of the invention.

A PUU PPD prepolymer was synthesized by reacting methylene di p phenyl isocyanate MDI Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. with poly tetramethylene oxide PTMO Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. and then extended with p phenylene diamine PPD ACROS New Jersy . A 10 w v solution of MDI 8 mmol MW 250 in 20 mL anhydrous N N dimethylformamide DMF Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. was prepared in a 100 mL three neck round flask and stirred at room temperature. A 10 w v solution of PTMO 4 mmol MW 1 000 in 40 mL anhydrous DMF was added and the mixture was heated to 75 C. and held there for 2 hours under argon gas. The reactor was cooled to room temperature before PPD 4 mmol MW 108 in 4 mL anhydrous DMF was added as a chain extender. The polymer solution was then incubated at 45 C. for 2 hours under argon gas resulting in the formation of the PUU PPD prepolymer. The resultant polymer solution containing the PUU PPD prepolymer was then cooled to room temperature precipitated in methanol and dried under vacuum.

One example of a peptide modified polyurethane comprising a YIGSR peptide PUU YIGSR was synthesized as follows. The prepolymer prepared above was synthesized by reacting MDI with PTMO as described above and extended with a combination of GGGYIGSRGGGK peptide Sigma Genosys Woodlands Tex. and PPD. A 10 w v solution of MDI 2.4 mmol in 6 mL anhydrous DMF was prepared in a 100 mL three neck round flask and stirred at room temperature. A 10 w v solution of PTMO 1.2 mmol in 12 mL anhydrous DMF was added and the mixture was heated to 75 C. and held there for 2 hours under argon gas. The reactor was cooled to room temperature before GGGYIGSRGGGK peptide 0.11 mmol in 10 mL anhydrous DMF and PPD 1.1 mmol in 10 mL anhydrous DMF were added as chain extenders. The polymer mixture was incubated at 45 C. for 2 hours under argon gas. The polymer solution was cooled to room temperature precipitated in methanol and dried under vacuum.

One example of peptide modified polyurethane comprising PEG PUU PPD PEG was synthesized as follows. First a PUU PPD prepolymer was synthesized as described above. Then PTMO and polyethylene glycol PEG MW 4 600 g mol Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. were dried for 48 hours under vacuum and used as the soft segments molar ratio of PTMO to PEG 85 15 . Polymer synthesis proceeded as described above but used a mixture of 85 PTMO 15 PEG to form the soft segments.

One example of peptide modified polyurethane comprising PEG and a YIGSIR peptide PUU PEG YIGSIR was synthesized as follows. A prepolymer was synthesized by reacting MDI with PTMO PEG mixture 85 15 molar ratio as described above and extended with a combination of GGGYIGSRGGGK peptide Sigma Genosys Woodlands Tex. and PPD to form PUU PEG YIGSIR.

A polyurethane prepolymer PU BD was synthesized by reacting MDI Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. with PTMO Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. and then extended with 1 4 butadiene BD Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. as shown in . A 10 w v solution of MDI 4 mmol MW 250 in 10 mL DMF Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. was prepared in a 100 mL three neck round flask and stirred at room temperature. A 10 w v solution of PTMO 2 mmol MW 2000 in 20 mL anhydrous DMF was added and the mixture was heated to 75 C. and held there for 3 hours under argon gas. The reactor was cooled to room temperature before BD 2 mmol MW 90 in 2 mL anhydrous DMF was added as a chain extender. The polymer solution was then incubated at 45 C. for 3 hours under argon gas. The polymer solution was cooled to room temperature precipitated in methanol and dried under vacuum.

A lysine containing peptide SGGKKKKGGS was synthesized using standard fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl Fmoc chemistry on an Applied Biosystems 431A peptide synthesizer Foster Calif. . The lysine residues have pendant amine groups that can be converted to diazeniumdiolates while serine residues contain pendant hydroxyl groups to allow incorporation of the peptide into the polymer chain. The peptide was dissolved in DI water and reacted with NO gas at room temperature under argon gas in a 100 mL round bottom flask overnight. The extent of conversion of amine groups of lysine to diazeniumdiolates was measured using the Ninhydrin assay which quantifies amines in solution. The diazeniumdiolate peptide SGG K N O NO GGS was freeze dried and stored at 80 C.

One example of peptide modified polyurethane comprising nitric oxide PU BD NO was synthesized as follows. The polyurethane prepolymer was synthesized by reacting MDI with PTMO as described above and extended with a combination of SGG K N O NO GGS peptide 0.22 mmol and BD 0.54 mmol in 5 mL anhydrous DMF as shown in . The polymer mixture was incubated at 45 C. for 3 hours under argon gas then cooled to room temperature precipitated in ethyl acetate and dried under vacuum.

One example of peptide modified polyurethane comprising PEG YIGSR and nitric oxide PU BD PEG YIGSR NO was synthesized as follows. A peptide having the YIGSR sequence was synthesized as described above. A polyurethane prepolymer was synthesized by reacting methylene di p phenyl isocyanate MDI Aldrich chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. with a mixture of poly tetramethylene oxide PTMO Aldrich chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. and poly ethylene glycol PEG Aldrich chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. before chain extension using the SGGYIGSRGGS peptide and 1 4 butanediol BD Aldrich chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. . MDI was recrystallized in hexane and a 10 w v solution of MDI 4 mmol MW 250 in 10 mL anhydrous N N dimethylformamide DMF Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. was prepared in a 100 mL three neck round flask and stirred at room temperature. PTMO 1.7 mmol MW 2 000 and PEG 0.3 mmol MW 4 600 were dried for 48 hours under vacuum and mixed at an 85 15 PTMO PEG molar ratio in 20 mL anhydrous DMF. This was added to the MDI solution and the mixture heated to 75 C. and held there for 3 hours under argon. The reactor was cooled to room temperature before the peptide SGGYIGSRGGS 0.1 mmol and BD 0.65 mmol MW 90 in anhydrous DMF were added as chain extenders. The polymer solution was then stirred at 45 C. for 3 hours under argon. The polymer solution was cooled to room temperature precipitated in ethyl acetate and dried under vacuum. The resultant polymer was one example of a PU BD PEG YIGSR peptide modified polyurethane see .

Next the lysine containing peptide SGGKKKKGGS was synthesized and reacted with NO to form SGG K N O NO GGS as described above. The polyurethane prepolymer was synthesized by reacting MDI with a PTMO PEG mixture as described above and extended with a combination of SGG K N O NO GGS peptide 0.2 mmol SGGYIGSRGGS peptide 0.1 mmol and BD 0.45 mmol in anhydrous DMF. The polymer mixture was stirred at 45 C. for 3 hours under argon then cooled to room temperature precipitated in ethyl acetate and dried under vacuum. The resultant polymer was one example of a PU BD PEG YIGSR NO peptide modified polyurethane .

One example of peptide modified polyurethane comprising a proteolytic peptide was synthesized as follows. PUU YIGSR LGPA was prepared as follows. PUU PPD prepolymer was synthesized as described above and extended with a combination of GGGYIGSRGGGK GGGLGPAGGGK Sigma Genosys Woodlands Tex. and PPD. A prepolymer was synthesized using a 10 w v solution of MDI 2.4 mmol and PTMO 1.2 mmol at 75 C. for 3 hours under argon gas as above. Next chain extension was performed using GGGYIGSRGGGK 0.11 mmol GGGLGPAGGGK 0.33 mmol and PPD 0.76 mmol in anhydrous DMF at 45 C. for 3 hours under argon. The polymer solution was cooled to room temperature precipitated in ethyl acetate and dried under vacuum.

Polyurethanes were characterized via H NMR using a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer Advance 400 Bruker Germany DMF d Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. . Molecular weight distributions were obtained by GPC with UV and evaporative light scattering detectors Polymer Laboratories Amherst Mass. . Samples for GPC analysis were dissolved in HPLC grade DMF at a concentration of 1 mg mL and run at 70 C. through PLgel 5 m Mixed C columns Polymer Laboratories Amherst Mass. at a flow rate of 1 mL min. Calibration was performed using polystyrene standards PS Polymer Laboratories Amherst Mass. ranging in molecular weight from 5 000 96 4000 Da. DSC thermagrams were obtained using a Differential Scanning Calorimeter Pyris 1 Perkin Elmer Wellesley Mass. . Samples were cooled below 60 C. and increased at 10 C. min to 300 C. under nitrogen gas. Glass transition temperatures and melting temperatures were analyzed using Pyris software. Fourier transform infrared FT IR spectroscopy was performed using a Nicolet 500 spectrometer. Thin films were prepared by mixing samples with KBr and pressed into pellets under vacuum. Sixteen scans were taken of each sample at a resolution of 4 cm.

Polyurethane films were dissolved in tetrahydrofuran THF 0.3 wt and sterilized using 0.2 m pore size PTFE syringe filters Whatman N.J. . Polyurethane films were prepared on glass coverslips 18 mm Fisher Scientific PA by solvent casting at room temperature. Polyurethane films were held under vacuum for 48 hours to ensure removal of the solvent. The polyurethane films were held under vacuum for 48 hours to ensure removal of the solvent and sterilized under UV light.

The equilibrium contact angles of DI water on polyurethane films were measured using a contact angle goniometer CAM Micro . Six measurements were taken to calculate average contact angles on the surface of each film. ESCA analysis was performed using a Physical Electronics Model 5700 XPS instrument. Photo emissions were produced through the use of a X ray source 1486.6 eV operated in the fixed retard ratio mode at a pass energy of 23.5 eV. Spectra were acquired over a 10 45 take off angle range. Charge neutralization was accomplished via bombardment with a low energy beam.

To evaluate the distribution of YIGSR peptide on the surface of certain polyurethane films films were reacted with the fluorescent probe 7 chloro 4 nitrobenzo 2 oxa 1 3 diazole NBD Cl Molecular Probes Eugene Oreg. . This fluorescent compound reacts with tyrosine residues. 250 mM NBD Cl was prepared in DMSO. Polyurethane films were placed in a well of a 12 well tissue culture plate 2 mL potassium phosphate buffer solution pH 8.0 was added and then 80 l NBD Cl solution was added. Samples were incubated at 37 C. for 2 hours. Unreacted NBD Cl was rinsed with buffer solution over one week. The surfaces were observed using a Nikon E600 fluorescence microscope equipped with a Sony DXC 950P CCD camera. A Nikon multiband DAPI FITIC Texas red excitation wavelengths 385 415 485 505 555 585 nm emission wavelengths 450 470 510 540 590 650 nm filter was used.

To investigate the distribution of hard and soft segments in a peptide modified polyurethane the surfaces of certain polyurethane films were imaged by AFM NanoScope IIIa Digital Instruments Santa Barbara Calif. . A 125 m etched silicon cantilever was used. The radius of curvature of a silicon tip was 5 10 nm and the resonance frequency was 300 kHz. Phase and height images were obtained using tapping mode under ambient conditions from r 0.92 to 0.80 r set point amplitude free amplitude of oscillation . The data obtained were analyzed with Nanoscope IIIa controller and software.

Uniaxial mechanical testing was performed using an Instron model 5565 at a cross head speed of 25 mm min with a 5 kN load cell. Polymers were dissolved in DMF Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. at 10 wt and sterilized using 0.2 m pore size PTFE syringe filters Whatman N.J. . Polyurethane films were prepared in Teflon molds by solvent casting at 60 C. under vacuum for 48 hours. Test specimens were prepared according to ASTMD 638 VI. The tensile strength was calculated from the maximum load at break and the initial cross sectional area of the specimen. Sample thickness was measured using a digital caliper Mitutoyo Hauppauge N.Y. .

Sterilized polyurethane films were reacted with NO gas under argon at room temperature overnight. After rinsing the films with N 2 hydroxyethylpiperazine N 2 ethanesulfonic acid HEPES buffered saline HBS pH 7.4 three times to remove physically adsorbed NO gas on the surface the films were incubated in HBS at 37 C. Release of NO from the films was measured using the Griess assay which quantifies nitrites the primary degradation product of NO in solution.

Bovine aortic endothelial cells BAECs Clonetics San Diego Calif. and Sprague Dawley rat aortic smooth muscle cells SDSMCs passage 2 5 were used. Dulbecco s modified Eagles s medium DMEM Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. was prepared with 10 fetal bovine serum FBS BioWhitaker Walkersville Md. 2 mM L glutamine 1 U mL penicillin and 100 mg L streptomycin GPS Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. . Endothelial basal medium EBM Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. was prepared with 10 endothelial medium supplement Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. which contained FBS basic fibroblast growth factor bFGF heparin epidermal growth factor and hydrocortisone. BAECs were maintained on a mixture of EBM and DMEM 25 75 or 50 50 volume ratio at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment.

To evaluate viability of endothelial cells on films eight well FlexiPerms Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. were attached to polyurethane films to create culture wells on each surface. BAEC suspensions were prepared and seeded at a concentration of 17 000 cells cmon the films. Calcein AM and ethidium homodimer 1 Live Dead Assay Kit Molecular Probes Inc. Eugene Oreg. were used to determine endothelial cell viability after 24 or 72 hours in culture. Calcein AM is converted to a green fluorescent product within live cells due to enzymatic activity while ethidium homodimer 1 a red fluorescent compound accumulates in dead cells due to increased membrane permeability.

To evaluate cytotoxicity of any leachable products polyurethane films were placed in glass vials and dried under vacuum for 48 hours. Each film had a 6 cmsurface area. According to USP extraction ratio of synthetic Polyurethane films with thickness less than 0.5 mm 1 mL of HBS HEPES buffered saline buffer 10 mM pH 7.4 solution was added to each vial. Samples were incubated at 37 C. After 30 and 60 days of extraction endothelial cells were seeded into a 24 well tissue culture plate at 15 000 cells cm. About 24 hours after cell seeding the extract solutions were sterilized using a 0.2 m pore size syringe filter and added to the culture medium at 10 15 or 25 v v . After 24 hours of incubation with the extracts cell viability was evaluated by Calcein AM ethidium homodimer staining as described above.

To evaluate adhesion of endothelial cells BAECs were seeded at a concentration of 17 000 cells cmin eight well FlexiPerm chambers Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. attached to polyurethane films or in six well polystyrene plates Corning Inc. Corning N.Y. using hollow stainless steel molds. Cells were cultured at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment. To evaluate cell spreading and adhesion after 4 6 24 or 48 hours of incubation nonadherent cells were removed by rinsing and fresh medium was added. Cells were observed by phase contrast microscopy Zeiss Axiovert 135 Thornwood N.Y. and digital image processing Scion Image was used to determine cell areas. To evaluate cell attachment the medium was removed by rinsing with PBS and adherent cells were detached with trypsin and counted using a Coulter Counter Multisizer 3 Beckman Coulter .

Competitive inhibition of attachment and spreading of endothelial cells was also examined using soluble YIGSR peptides to ensure that improved BAEC adhesion and spreading was due to biospecific interactions with the YIGSR peptides that were incorporated into the polymer structure. Cells were seeded at a concentration of 17 000 cells cmin eight well FlexiPerm chambers attached to polyurethane films and incubated with soluble YIGSR peptide Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. at 0 0.01 0.1 and 1 mM in EBM DMEM 25 75 or 50 50 volume ratio at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment. After 4 hours incubation attachment and spreading of cells were evaluated as described above.

To evaluate cell proliferation eight well FlexiPerms were attached to polyurethane films. Cells were seeded at a concentration of 17 000 cells cm. After 48 hours incubation at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment immunohistochemical staining for proliferating cell nuclear antigen PCNA was employed. The PCNA antibody stains cells in the S phase of mitosis. Cells were washed with PBS fixed with 10 formalin Stephens Scientific N.J. for 10 min permeabilized with methanol Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. for 2 min and incubated in 3 HO Fisher Scientifics PA for 5 min. Cells were incubated with mouse anti human PCNA IgG DAKO Carpinteria Calif. for 1 hour rinsed with PBS and incubated with horseradish peroxidase HOURSP conjugated anti mouse IgG Dako Carpinteria Calif. for 40 min. Antibodies were diluted 1 100 in PBS containing 3 FBS and incubations were performed at room temperature in a humidified chamber. After rinsing with PBS cells were treated with aminoethylcarbazole choursomagen Dako Carpinteria Calif. for 10 min. Counter staining was performed with Mayer s hematoxylin Dako Carpinteria Calif. . Using this procedure proliferating cells appear red and nonproliferating cells appear blue. Two wells were used as controls one well with no primary anti PCNA IgG antibody and one well with neither primary nor secondary HOURSP conjugated anti mouse IgG antibody.

For PU BD and PU BD NO polyurethane films were prepared and sterilized as described above. PU BD NO films were reacted with NO gas under argon at room temperature overnight and then rinsed with PBS. To evaluate BAEC and SDSMC proliferation cells were seeded at a concentration of 17 000 cells cmin a six well cluster polystyrene plate Corning Incorporated Corning N.Y. . After a 24 hour incubation at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment PU BD and PU BD NO films were placed into transwell inserts 24 mm diameter 0.4 m pore polycarbonate membrane Corning Incorporated Corning N.Y. in the six well plates. After another 48 hours of culture at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment immunohistochemical staining for proliferating cell nuclear antigen PCNA was employed to assess cellular proliferation. The PCNA antibody stains cells in the S phase of mitosis and using this procedure proliferating cells appear red and nonproliferating cells appear blue. Cells were fixed in a 10 buffered formalin solution Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. . A 3 hydrogen peroxide solution was used to block endogenous peroxidases and cells were incubated with anti mouse IgG HRP Dako Corp. Carpinteria Calif. diluted 1 100 in PBS with 3 FBS. After rinsing cells were incubated with anti mouse IgG HRP Dako Corp. Carpinteria Calif. which generates a red precipitate. Cells were counterstained with Mayer s hemotoxylin Dako Corp. Carpinteria Calif. . The percentage of proliferating cells per field of view 200 was determined using phase contrast microscopy Ziess Axiovert 135 Thornwood N.Y. by averaging five fields per sample.

To assess migration a fence style assay was utilized. Polyurethane films were placed in the six well tissue culture plates and double walled round Teflon molds inner diameter 6 mm outer diameter 17 mm were placed on top of the films. BAECs were seeded at a concentration of 35 000 cells cmin the inner walls. After 24 hours the original boundaries were recorded and the inner walls were removed. Mitomycin C Calbiochem San Diego Calif. was added to the medium at 0.5 g mL to prevent cell proliferation. After 24 and 48 hours of incubation at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment the cells that had migrated over the original boundary were observed using a phase contrast microscope Zeiss Axiovert 135 .

Endothelialization at an anastomotic site was also simulated in an in vitro system. Polyurethane films were cast on glass and then eight well FlexiPerms were attached to the surfaces. Collagen I Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. was dissolved at 2.5 mg mL in 3 glacial acetic acid. Surfaces coated with collagen I were prepared by adding 50 l of the collagen I solution into each well and drying under vacuum. After washing the surfaces in PBS three times endothelial cells were seeded onto the surfaces at 34 000 cells cm. After 24 hours the FlexiPerms were removed the boundaries were marked and fresh medium was added. After 48 hours incubation at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment the number of cells that had migrated across the boundary simulating an anastomotic site from the collagen I coated surface to the polyurethane surface were counted under a phase contrast microscope as described above.

To evaluate extracellular matrix ECM production eight well FlexiPerms were attached to the polyurethane films. BAEC suspensions were prepared with 5 g mL ascorbic acid added to the culture medium and seeded at a concentration of 17 000 cells cm. Four of the wells on each film were cultured with 1 Ci mL H glycine added to the medium to measure the ECM production via incorporation of the radioactive amino acid into newly synthesized ECM proteins. The other four wells were cultured in the absence of H glycine and used for cell counting. After 48 hours of incubation at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment cells cultured in the absence of H glycine were trypsinized and counted on a Coulter Counter. Cells in the remaining wells were rinsed with PBS and deionized DI water and then lysed in 25 mM ammonium hydroxide for 30 min. The remaining ECM was washed with 70 ethanol and air dried. In order to digest glycoprotein elastin and collagen the ECM was sequentially exposed to 200 g mL trypsin for 4 hours 58 U mL elastase for 4 hours and 76 U mL collagenase for 8 hours at 37 C. Finally the wells were incubated in 1 N NaOH for 1 hour at room temperature to remove any remaining proteins. All enzyme solutions were prepared in TEC buffer 25 mM Tris HCl 5 mM calcium chloride pH 8 . ECM production was determined by the amount of radioactivity in the glycoprotein trypsin sensitive elastin elastase sensitive and collagen collagenase sensitive fractions using scintillation counting Minaxi Tri Carb 4000 Packard Instrument Co. Meridien Conn. . NaOH fractions were also evaluated by scintillation counting to ensure that the ECM had been completely digested.

Polyurethane films were cast on glass coverslips 18 mm Fisher Scientific PA as described above. A solution of 2.5 mg mL collagen I Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. solution was prepared in 3 glacial acetic acid. Glass coverslips were incubated with the collagen I solution for 45 minutes in a humidified environment at room temperature to provide a highly thrombogenic reference material. Blood was obtained from a healthy volunteer and 10 U mL heparin Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. was added to prevent coagulation of the blood. About 10 M mepacrine Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. was added to fluorescently label the platelets. Surfaces of collagen I positive control and various peptide modified polyurethane polyurethane films were incubated with mepacrine labeled whole blood at 37 C. for 20 minutes and then rinsed with PBS to remove all visible blood. The number of adherent platelets per field of view 200 was determined using a fluorescent microscope Zeiss Axiovert 135 Thornwood N.Y. .

PUU PEG and PUU PEG YIGSR were used to fabricate microporous scaffolds using gas foaming and salt leaching via incorporation of sodium bicarbonate. PUU PEG and PUU PEG YIGSR were separately dissolved in anhydrous DMF Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee Wis. at 10 w v concentration and DMF was partially evaporated at 60 C. under vacuum. Sieved sodium bicarbonate salts Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. particle size of 100 200 m weight fraction 90 wt were added into the viscous polymer solutions at room temperature and mixed well. The paste of polymer and salts was placed in a Teflon mold 75 25 1 mm and dried for 24 hour at room temperature. The polymer salt films were immersed in a 50 citric acid solution Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. for 30 minute to induce gas foaming and then in DI water for 3 days to leach remaining salts. DI water was changed everyday and samples were freeze dried for 48 hour. Scaffolds were cut into disk shape diameter 7 mm thickness 1 mm weight 10 20 mg for further study.

The porosity of the above described scaffolds was determined using a mercury intrusion porosimeter Autoscan 500 Quantachrome Boynton Beach Fla. . Scaffolds were loaded into the intrusion chamber for measurement. Mercury was intruded into samples at 500 psi and the intruded mercury volume and pressure were recorded. Porosity was determined from the total intruded volume per unit mass.

The microstructure of the scaffold was investigated using scanning electron microscopy SEM . Samples were sputter coated with gold for 30 sec at 100 mA by a sputter coater Pelco Sputter Coater 91000 Ted Pella Redding Calif. . The surface and cross section of scaffolds were observed using SEM JEOL JSM 5300 Japan operated at 30 kV .

Uniaxial mechanical testing was performed using an Instron model 5565 at a cross head speed of 25 mm min with a 50 N load cell. Test specimens were prepared according to ASTMD 638 VI. Sample thickness was measured using a digital caliper Mitutoyo Hauppauge N.Y. .

Scaffold disks were immersed in 70 ethanol overnight prior to use. The scaffolds were then soaked three times in sterile PBS for 30 minutes each time and in cell culture media for 15 min. For cell seeding the scaffolds were placed in six well tissue culture plates and excess medium was removed. 40 L of cell suspension at 1 10cells mL was added onto the top of the scaffold slowly and allowed to permeate through the matrix. The scaffold was turned over and an additional 40 L of cell suspension was added the opposite surface. six well plates containing cell seeded scaffolds were maintained at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment for cell attachment. After 90 min cell seeded scaffolds were placed in 9 six well plates culture medium was added and constructs were incubated at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment. After three days each cell seeded scaffold was placed in a well of a 24 well plate washed three times with the sterile PBS and fixed with 2.5 glutaraldehyde Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. overnight at 4 C.

For evaluation by SEM the cell seeded scaffolds were dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol water solutions and dried with tetramethylsilane on the ice bath TMS Electron Microscopy Science Fort Washington Pa. . Samples were sputter coated and morphology of cells in the scaffold was observed under SEM as described above.

For histological analysis cell seeded scaffolds were sectioned to 30 m at 30 C. using a cryostat HM505E Microm Walldorf Germany . Sections were stained with Mayer s hematoxylin and observed by light microscopy Zeiss Axiovert 135 .

The scaffolds were prepared as described above and placed in six well plates and 40 L of cell suspension at 1 10cells mL was added onto only the top of the scaffold. The plates were then incubated at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment for 90 minutes to allow cell attachment. Each scaffold was placed into a transwell cell culture insert 6.4 mm diameter 8 m pore PET membrane Becton Dickinson Franklin Lakes N.J. in 24 well companion plates Becton Dickinson . Medium was added to the insert and the well and then incubated at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment. After 7 days of culture each scaffold was removed from the insert well and each insert well was placed in 24 well companion plate. The membrane of the insert well was washed with sterile PBS and adherent cells on the top and bottom of the insert membrane were removed by trypsinization and counted using a Coulter counter Multisizer 3 Beckman Colulter .

The sterile scaffolds were prepared as described above. The scaffolds were placed in six well plates and 40 L of cell suspension at 1 10cells mL was added onto the top and the bottom of the scaffold respectively as described above. The cell seeded scaffolds in the six well plates were placed at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment for cell attachment for 90 minutes and then transferred to 9 six well plates. Additional medium was added and the cell seeded scaffolds were incubated at 37 C. in a 5 COenvironment. After three days of culture cell seeded scaffolds were washed with the sterile PBS and cut into four pieces. Samples were digested with 0.1 N NaOH overnight at 37 C. The digested samples were neutralized with 0.1 N HCl. The digested samples and calf thymus DNA standards were diluted with TE buffer 200 mM Tris HCl 20 mM EDTA pH 7.5 and combined with Hoechst 33258 Molecular Probes Eugene Oreg. a fluorescent DNA binding dye. DNA content was determined by measuring fluorescence using fluorometer VersaFluor BioRad Lab. Hercules Calif. with excitation wavelength of 360 nm and emission wavelength of 460 nm and compared to the calf thymus DNA standards 0 to 100 ng mL .

For hydroxyproline measurement the neutralized samples and hydroxyproline standards were combined with 4 N NaOH in Wheaton cryovial Wheaton Science Products Millville N.J. and autoclaved for 20 minute at 247 F. to hydrolyze collagen. Samples and hydroxyproline standards in DI water 0 100 ng were cooled to room temperature and neutralized with 4 N HCl. Then they were oxidized with Chloramine T ICN Biomedicals Aurora Ohio and developed with p dimethylbenzaldehyde ICN Biomedicals Aurora Ohio . The production of hydroxyproline was determined using spectrophotometer at 550 nm.

The NMR spectra of PUU PPD and PUU YIGSR were obtained and the characteristic proton peaks of tyrosine 6.5 7.0 ppm from the GGGYIGSRGGGK sequence indicated the successful incorporation of the peptide sequence into the PUU YIGSR polymer. To ensure that the peptides were not merely physically entangled or mixed in polymer matrix the polymer was washed and filtered several times with methanol prior to NMR measurement. The peaks of prepolymer PUU PPD and PUU YIGSR were also assigned and characterized. Then the number of the protons was calculated from the intensity. The intensity was compared to theoretical values. The reactivity of the peptide into the polymer was nearly 100 . ESCA and contact angle measurements also supported the conclustion that the peptide sequences were incorporated into the polymer. The peptide concentration of the polymer matrix was approximately 56 mol per gram determined from NMR.

The number average molecular weight Mn the weight average molecular weight Mw and the polydispersity index PDI were determined by GPC using polystyrene standards. The PUU PPD and PUU YIGSR polymers had similar molecular weights PUU PPD Mn 40 001 Mw 53 307 PDI 1.33 and PUU YIGSR Mn 43 054 Mw 54 531 PDI 1.27 .

The surface atomic concentration was determined using ESCA with various take off angles PUU PPD C 83.6 N 1.1 O 15.3 at 10 and C 86.7 N 0.8 O 12.5 at 45 PUU YIGSR C 70.6 N 3.4 O 26.0 at 10 and C 77.2 N 1.3 O 21.4 at 45 . Nitrogen N and oxygen O concentrations are related to the urea linkages of the hard segments and amide linkages of the peptide sequences. The higher level of nitrogen and oxygen detected on the PUU YIGSR surface indicates that the GGGYIGSRGGGK peptide sequences were successfully incorporated into the polymer backbone and present at the surface of the material.

There was no significant difference in the FT IR spectra between PUU PPD and PUU YIGSR. For both PUU PPD and PUU YIGSR the hydrogen bonded urea carbonyl peak occurred at 1640 cm. The urethane carbonyl peaks appeared at 1720 cmfor hydrogen bond and at 1740 cmfor free bond. The CH stretch peaks of the soft segment PTMG appeared at 2850 cmand 2940 cm and the hydrogen bonded NH peak also appeared at 3310 cm.

The thermal behaviors of PUU PPD and PUU YIGSR were examined using DSC. The glass transition temperature Tg was determined to be 30 C. for PUU PPD and 45 C. for PUU YIGSR. The melting point Tm was approximately 260 C. for both polymers. Thus the introduction of peptides into the polymer backbone lowered the glass transition temperature of the soft segment but did not affect the melting temperature of the hard segment.

Polyurethane films fabricated using a solvent casting method on glass coverslips as described above were characterized. The bulk polymer characterization shows that GGGYIGSRGGGK peptide sequences were successfully incorporated into the polymer at a ratio of approximately 56 mol per gram of polymer. Based on this the surface peptide concentration of PUU YIGSR is approximately 0.2 nmol cm. This concentration was calculated using the polymer density 1.25 g cm and the thickness of the monolayer 20 nm . The thickness of the monolayer was obtained based on hard segment length. Water contact angle measurements showed that the contact angle on PUU YIGSR 68.8 1.17 was approximately about 10 lower than the contact angle on PUU PPD 80.16 1.72 indicating that the surface of PUU YIGSR is more hydrophilic and polar due to the incorporated peptides.

In order to study the peptide distribution on the surface of polyurethane films a fluorescent dye NBD Cl was employed that is capable of reacting with the tyrosine residues under aqueous conditions. When reacted with NBD Cl PUU PPD showed no fluorescence however PUU YIGSR showed bright orange fluorescence evenly distributed over its entire surface area. This result suggests that peptides are uniformly distributed on the surface of the PUU YIGSR polymer.

The hard segment distribution on the surface was also examined using AFM. and shows AFM tapping mode images from the surface of polyurethane films at r 0.88. The rvalue is the ratio of set point amplitude and free amplitude of oscillation. At r 0.88 the very top layer of the surface is being detected. The hard segment domains were exposed to the surface and appeared bright. The cylindrical and spherical hard segment domains were distributed in the soft segment matrix very randomly on the PUU PPD surface. However on PUU YIGSR most hard segment domains were cylindrically shaped and arranged parallel to the plane of the surfaces. Even at low tapping force r 0.80 the patterns of hard segment distribution in PUU PPD and PUU YIGSR were very similar to r 0.88.

The incorporation of the peptides into the polymer backbone did not significantly affect the tensile strength 7.3 0.29 MPa for PUU PPD and 7.6 0.71 MPa for PUU YIGSR . However the elastic modulus decreased from 3.9 0.70 MPa for PUU PPD to 0.9 0.07 MPa for PUU YIGSR p

BAECs were seeded and cultured on the polyurethane films and also cultured in extract solutions from the films to evaluate cytotoxicity of any leachables. Over 95 of endothelial cells remained viable at 24 or 72 hours when cultured on PUU PPD and PUU YIGSR films. In addition to evaluate cytotoxicity of any leachables under aqueous conditions the polyurethane films were incubated in HBS buffer solution for 30 or 60 days and BAECs were then cultured with the extract solutions. Over 90 of BAECs were viable over the three different extract concentrations for both PUU PPD and PUU YIGSR.

Next analysis was performed to identify whether the peptides incorporated into the polymer backbone could enhance BAEC adhesion and spreading. The attachment of BAECs on polyurethane films is shown in . The number of adherent cells increased with increasing incubation time. The number of adherent cells on PUU YIGSR was significantly higher than on PUU PPD after both 4 and 24 hours of incubation p

In order to ensure that the improved cell adhesion and spreading were due to biospecific interactions with YIGSR peptides in the bioactive polymer competitive inhibition of endothelial cell attachment and spreading was investigated using soluble YIGSR peptides in the culture media. As shown in the number of adherent cells on PUU YIGSR was significantly greater than on PUU PPD but the values were reduced in the presence of soluble YIGSR peptides over the entire ranges of the soluble peptide concentrations. Cell surface area and the percent of cell spreading were also reduced over the entire range of soluble peptide concentrations and . Thus these results indicate that the improved cell adhesion and spreading were specifically mediated by YIGSR sensitive cell adhesion receptors.

The effect of peptide incorporation on endothelial cell proliferation was examined using immunohistochemical staining with a PCNA HOURSP conjugate. PCNA is present in cells in the S phase of mitosis and indicates proliferative activity. The percent of PCNA positive cells on PUU YIGSR was significantly greater than on PUU PPD after 48 hours of culture 78 5 vs. 60 4 p

A fence style assay was used to assess endothelial cell migration on polyurethane films. The number of cells that had migrated over the original boundary was significantly greater on PUU YIGSR compared to that on PUU PPD 63 8 vs. 37 12 p

To evaluate extracellular matrix ECM production cells were incubated in the presence of H glycine on polyurethane films. Matrix production was determined by incorporation of H glycine into glycoprotein elastin and collagen of ECM by using sequential enzyme digests. The ECM production by BAECs was significantly increased on PUU YIGSR compared to PUU PPD 0.0075 0.0004 cpm cell vs. 0.0055 0.001 cpm cell p

Since some peptides such as RGD support adhesion of platelets the effect of the YIGSR peptide sequences incorporated in the polymer backbone on platelets adhesion was examined using mepacrine labeled whole blood . Platelets adhesion on PUU PPD 29.7 7.1 and PUU YIGSR 28.6 9.1 were dramatically lower than on collagen I 94.1 13.1 the positive control. Additionally there was no significant difference in the number of adherent platelets between PUU PPD and PUU YIGSR indicating that the incorporation of the YIGSR adhesion peptide did not enhance thrombogenicity.

The NMR spectra of certain embodiments of the peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention were obtained and characterized as described above. The characteristic proton peaks of tyrosine 6.5 7.0 ppm from the GGGYIGSRGGGK sequence were assigned indicating the successful incorporation of the peptide sequence into the PUU YIGSR polymer. The peaks of prepolymer PUU PPD PEG and PUU PEG YIGSR were also assigned and characterized. Based on the number of protons calculated from peak intensities the peptide concentration in the polymer was approximately 56 mol g. The surface peptide concentration of PUU PEG YIGSR film was also estimated to be approximately 0.2 nmol cmusing the polymer density and the thickness of the monolayer.

FT IR spectra of the polyurethanes were also obtained and characterized. The incorporation of the PEG as a soft segment did not affect FT IR spectra compared to PUU PPD. For both PUU PPD PEG and PUU PEG YIGSR peaks for hard segments were observed at 1640 cm hydrogen bonded urea carbonyl at 1720 cm urethane carbonyl peaks for hydrogen bond and at 1740 cm urethane carbonyl peaks for free bond . The CH stretch peaks of the soft segment PTMO appeared at 2850 cmand 2940 cm and the hydrogen bonded NH peak also appeared at 3310 cm.

Thermal behaviors from DSC provide successful incorporation of PEG as a soft segment as shown in . The Tg of PUU PPD was observed at 9 C. However two distinct Tg were observed at 14 C. and 40 C. for PUU PPD PEG and PUU PEG YIGSR likely caused by PTMO and PEG respectively. The melting point Tm of PUU PPD and PUU PPD PEG was determined about 180 C. and the Tm of PUU PEG YIGSR was approximately 165 C.

The number average molecular weight Mn the weight average molecular weight Mw and the polydispersity index PDI were determined by GPC. PUU PPD PEG and PUU PEG YIGSR had similar molecular weights PUU PPD Mn 113 489 Mw 153 973 PDI 1.36 PUU PPD PEG Mn 92 645 Mw 124 072 PDI 1.34 and PUU PEG YIGSR Mn 96 675 Mw 116 103 PDI 1.20 .

The surface atomic concentration was determined using ESCA with various take off angles PUU PPD PEG C 58.4 N 12.1 O 30.4 at 10 and C 75.1 N 0.4 O 24.8 at 45 PUU PEG YIGSR C 58.7 N 12.0 O 29.0 at 100 and C 73.0 N 0.9 O 25.9 at 45 . Nitrogen N and oxygen O concentrations are related to the urea linkages of the hard segments and amide linkages of the peptide sequences. The higher level of nitrogen and oxygen detected on the PUU PEG YIGSR at 45 indicates that the GGGYIGSRGGGK peptide sequences were successfully incorporated into the polymer backbone and present at the surface of the material.

Water contact angle measurement demonstrated that the contact angle dropped significantly on PEG modified polyurethanurea PUU PPD PEG 59.6 1.7 and PUU PEG YIGSR 50.6 1.3 compared to PUU PPD 81.6 1.1 . The contact angle of PUU PEG YIGSR was also significantly lower than that of PUU PPD PEG. Thus the combination of the incorporated peptides and PEG made the surface of PUU PEG YIGSR more hydrophilic and polar.

The incorporation of the PEG and peptide sequences into the polyurethane backbone affected the mechanical properties. The mechanical properties of PUU PPD PEG elastic modulus 0.44 0.1 MPa tensile strength 3.1 0.4 MPa elongation 370 84.3 were significantly lower compared to PUU PPD elastic modulus 1.1 0.2 MPa tensile strength 27.2 1.2 MPa elongation 2580 544.7 . However the incorporation of the peptide sequences increased the mechanical properties of PUU PEG YIGSR elastic modulus 0.21 0.1 MPa tensile strength 9.2 1.8 MPa elongation 3532 222.8 .

An analysis was performed to determine whether the incorporation of PEG and peptides into certain peptide modified polyurethanes of the present invention impacted BAEC attachment and spreading. BAECs were seeded on PUU PPD PUU PPD PEG and PUU PEG YIGSR polyurethane films and adhesion and spreading were investigated after 4 hours. The number of adherent cells on PUU PPD PEG was significantly lower than on PUU PPD p

To ensure that improved cell adhesion and spreading were mediated by YIGSR specific cell adhesion receptors competitive inhibition of endothelial cell attachment and spreading was studied using soluble YIGSR peptides in culture media. The adhesion of endothelial cells dramatically increased on PUU PEG YIGSR compared to that on PUU PPD PEG. However adhesion of BAECs was reduced in the presence of soluble YIGSR peptides over the entire ranges of the soluble peptide concentrations 0.01 0.1 and 1 mM as shown in . Similar results were also observed in cell surface area and percent of cell spreading. Fewer cells attached and most attached cells were round in shape over the entire range of soluble peptide concentrations as shown in . These results suggest that adhesion of BAECs to this peptide modified material is predominantly mediated by specific receptor ligand interactions.

Because cell adhesion was low on PUU PPD PEG migration of BAECs was evaluated only on PUU PEG YIGSR. As shown in by 24 and 48 hours after seeding significant migration beyond the original boundary was observed. This suggests that these materials will be capable of supporting autologous endothelialization.

To generate a platelet resistant material peptide modified polyurethanes were synthesized that included PEG as a portion of the soft segment domains. The adhesion of platelets on polyurethanurea films was evaluated using mepacrine labled whole blood and . Adhesion of platelets on PUU PPD 1696 369 mm was lower than on collagen I 4069 324 mm but still substantial. However there was almost no adhesion of the platelets on PUU PPD PEG 129 48 mm or PUU PEG YIGSR 99 34 mm . Thus PUU PEG YIGSR is a material that supports endothelial cell attachment and growth while being resistant to platelet adhesion and resultant complications.

The conversion of free amine groups on the side chains of the SGGKKKKGGS peptide to diazeniumdiolates was measured using the Ninhydrin assay and approximately 93 of amines were converted to NO nucleophile complexes. PU BD NO was synthesized by incorporating the SGG K N O NO GGS sequence into the polymer backbone. The H NMR spectra of PU BD and PU BD NO were obtained and the characteristic proton peaks of the SGGKKKKGGS sequence indicated the successful incorporation of the peptide sequence into the polymer . The peptide concentration of the polymer matrix was approximately 100 mol gram.

The number average molecular weight M the weight average molecular weight M and the polydispersity index PDI were determined by GPC using polystyrene standards. The PU BD and PU BD NO polymers had similar molecular weights PU BD M 54 701 M 75 167 PDI 1.37 and PU BD NO M 50 323 M 71 006 PDI 1.41 .

The incorporation of the peptides into the polymer backbone increased mechanical properties. Both the elastic modulus and tensile strength of PU BD NO were greater than those of PU BD . Subsequent NO release from PU BD NO should not alter the mechanical properties as the original amine in this case lysine is the result. The mechanical properties of PU BD NO were comparable to commercial polyurethane vascular grafts as well as to native tissue.

NO release kinetics from PU BD NO films is shown in occurring over 2 months. Rapid release occurred over the first 48 hours followed by much slower sustained release for almost 60 days. By way of explanation and not of limitation the initial burst of NO release is likely caused by dissociation of diazeniumdiolate complexes on the surface of the films while the prolonged release after 48 hours is likely caused by the escape of NO embedded in the matrix of the material. No release of NO was detected from PU BD films reacted with NO gas.

The effect of NO release on BAEC and SDSMC proliferation was examined using immunohistochemical staining for PCNA. The percentage of PCNA positive BAECs exposed to PU BD NO films releasing NO in a rapid burst was significantly greater than those exposed to PU BD after 48 hours of culture. However the percent of PCNA positive SDSMCs cultured with fast releasing PU BD NO films was significantly lower than those cultured with PU BD films .

To determine the efficacy of our materials in the slower phase of NO release PU BD NO and PU BD films were incubated in HBS for 48 hours and then both BAECs and SDSMCs were exposed to these films as previously described. Again the percentage of PCNA positive BAECs cultured with NO releasing PU BD films was higher than that of BAECs exposed to control PU BD films and the number of positively stained SDSMCs cultured with PU BD NO films was drastically lower than SDSMCs in the presence of PU BD films .

Platelet adhesion to PU BD and PU BD NO was examined using mepacrine labeled whole blood. Platelet adhesion to PU BD was approximately 40 less than on the positive control collagen I . Platelet adhesion on PU BD NO was lower with almost no adherent platelets observed.

To ascertain if these materials would retain their thromboresistance during the slower stages of NO release films were allowed to release in HBS for 48 hours before they were exposed to whole blood as described above. Once more there was a 40 reduction in the number of platelets adhering to PU BD when compared to collagen I . Platelet adhesion to PUDB was again significantly lower.

NO release kinetics from PU BD PEG YIGSR NO films is shown in occurring over 2 months. Rapid release occurred over the first 48 hours followed by much slower sustained release for almost 60 days. By way of explanation and not of limitation the initial burst of NO release is likely caused by dissociation of diazeniumdiolate complexes on the surface of the films while the prolonged release after 48 hours is likely caused by the escape of NO embedded in the matrix of the material. No release of NO was detected from PU BD PEG YIGSR films reacted with NO gas.

BAEC and SDSMC Adhesion and Proliferation on a PU BD PEG YIGSR NO Peptide Modified Polyurethane Film.

The effects of adhesive peptides and NO on BAEC and SDSMC attachment were evaluated. The number of adherent BAECs was greater than adherent SDSMCs on both PU BD PEG YIGSR NO and PU BD PEG YIGSR as shown in .

The effects of adhesive peptides and NO on BAEC and SDSMC prolfieration were evaluated. As shown in the PU BD PEG YIGSR NO films stimulated growth of BAECs but inhibited growth of SDSMCs.

Platelet adhesion to PU BD PU BD PEG YIGSR and PU BD PEG YIGSR NO was examined using mepacrine labeled whole blood. Platelet adhesion to PU BD was approximately 40 less than on the positive control collagen I . Platelet adhesion was even lower on PU BD PEG YIGSR and lowest on PU BD PEG YIGSR NO as shown in .

The NMR spectra were obtained and characterized as described above. The characteristic proton peaks of tyrosine 6.5 7.0 ppm from the GGGYIGSRGGGK sequence were assigned indicating the successful incorporation of the peptide sequence into the PUU YIGSR polymer. The peaks of prepolymer PUU PPD and PUU YIGSR LGPA were also assigned and characterized.

An analysis was performed to determine whether the incorporation of adhesive peptides into a polyurethane impacted BAEC attachment and spreading. The number of adherent cells on PUU YIGSR LGPA was significantly greater than on PUU PPD p

As shown in significantly greater cell migration beyond original boundary was found on PUU YIGSR LGPA surface compared to PUU PPD after 48 hours of incubation.

PUU PEG and PUU PEG YIGSR scaffolds were successfully fabricated using gas foaming and salt leaching. The porosity of the scaffolds was characterized using mercury intrusion porosimetry and SEM. Both PUU PEG and PUU PEG YIGSR scaffolds showed highly interconnected pore structures through the matrices with porosities of approximately 78 PUU PEG 78 3.6 and PUU PEG YIGSR 77 8.4 and pore sizes of 20 200 m. The pores were highly open on both surface and cross section of the scaffolds as shown in .

Uniaxial mechanical testing was performed to determine mechanical properties of the scaffolds as shown in Table 1. The PUU PEG YIGSR scaffolds showed greater tensile strength and elongation at failure compared to PUU PEG tensile strength 1.4 MPa 0.03 vs. 0.19 MPa 0.01 p

Endothelial cells were seeded on the top and bottom of the scaffolds and cultured for three days. Cell attachment and morphology in the scaffolds were visualized using SEM as shown in . On the PUU PEG scaffolds few cells were found to adhere through the scaffolds. Individual cells were distributed randomly on the scaffolds and cell colonies were not found . However confluent endothelial cell attachment and spreading were found throughout the PUU PEG YIGSR scaffold matrix . Endothelial cells created monolayers along the interconnected pore network in the scaffold. This was also consistent with the histological analysis shown in .

To study the interconnectivity of the scaffold matrix and bioactivity of the peptide sequences on the polymer matrix the migration of the cells through the scaffolds were studied. Cells were seeded on the top of the scaffolds and cell seeded scaffolds were maintained in tissue culture plates for 90 minute to ensure cell attachment on the scaffolds then placed into the transwell insert. After 7 days of culture scaffolds were removed. Then each insert well was transferred to another companion plate and cells on the top and bottom of the membrane were counted. No cells were observed on the bottom of companion plates. As shown in Table 1 the number of cells that had migrated through the PUU PEG YIGSR matrices 4266.7 482.2 was significantly greater than for PUU PEG 1026.7 266.3 p

DNA and Hydroxyproline Measurements from a PUU PEG YIGSR Peptide Modified Polyurethane Microporous Scaffold.

The effect of bioactive peptide sequence on endothelial cell proliferation and extracellular matrix production in the scaffolds were studied as shown in Table 1. DNA concentration in PUU PEG YIGSR matrices 4.41 0.34 ng scaffold was significantly greater than that in PUU PEG 1.84 0.26 ng scaffold p

Therefore the present invention is well adapted to attain the ends and advantages mentioned as well as those that are inherent therein. While numerous changes may be made by those skilled in the art such changes are encompassed within the spirit of this invention as defined by the appended claims.

