---

title: Methods and systems for local configuration-based imaging device accounting
abstract: Aspects of the present invention relate to systems, methods and devices for receiving job configuration data, deriving detailed job parameters and calculating job costs in relation to an imaging device job. Some aspects relate to the receiving display content for use as a prompt to obtain job configuration data. Some aspects relate to display of display content for prompting a user to input the job configuration data.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08115944&OS=08115944&RS=08115944
owner: Sharp Laboratories of America, Inc.
number: 08115944
owner_city: Camas
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050729
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 704 066 entitled Methods and Systems for Imaging Device Applications filed Jul. 28 2005.

Imaging devices such as printers copiers scanners and fax machines can have a wide array of functions and capabilities to fit specific uses or combinations of uses. Imaging devices often take the form of a multi function peripheral device MFP that combines the functions of two or more of the traditionally separated imaging devices. An MFP may combine any number of imaging devices but typically comprises the functions of a printer scanner copier and fax machine.

Some imaging devices may contain computing resources for data storage and processing such as processors hard disk drives memory and other devices. As imaging devices add more features and functions they become more costly and complex.

More complex imaging devices and MFPs may comprise network connectivity to provide communication with other computing devices such as personal computers other imaging devices network servers and other apparatus. This connectivity allows the imaging device to utilize off board resources that are available on a connected network.

Imaging devices typically have a user input panel with an array of buttons knobs and other user input devices. Some devices also have a display panel which can be for display only or can be a touch panel display that enables user input directly on the display.

Devices with touch panel displays or displays with buttons arranged in cooperation with the display can display menu data that may be selected by user input. This menu data is typically driven by an on board server module within the imaging device.

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise systems methods and devices for determining imaging job costs fees or charges based on detailed imaging job parameters.

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise systems methods and devices for informing a user of accounting restrictions that are related to job configuration data input by a user.

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise systems methods and devices for automatically modifying an imaging job to comply with accounting restrictions.

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise systems methods and devices for interacting with a remote computing device from an imaging device. These embodiments comprise remote computing devices configured to communicate with imaging devices imaging devices configured to communicate with remote computing devices and systems comprising various combinations of remote computing devices in communication with imaging devices.

The foregoing and other objectives features and advantages of the invention will be more readily understood upon consideration of the following detailed description of the invention taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

Embodiments of the present invention will be best understood by reference to the drawings wherein like parts are designated by like numerals throughout. The figures listed above are expressly incorporated as part of this detailed description.

It will be readily understood that the components of the present invention as generally described and illustrated in the figures herein could be arranged and designed in a wide variety of different configurations. Thus the following more detailed description of the embodiments of the methods and systems of the present invention is not intended to limit the scope of the invention but it is merely representative of the presently preferred embodiments of the invention.

Elements of embodiments of the present invention may be embodied in hardware firmware and or software. While exemplary embodiments revealed herein may only describe one of these forms it is to be understood that one skilled in the art would be able to effectuate these elements in any of these forms while resting within the scope of the present invention.

Embodiments of the present invention comprise interfaces and architecture that integrate imaging devices with remote computing device applications and environments to provide solutions that may not be possible solely with an imaging device alone. Some embodiments comprise an infrastructure and set of interfaces that allow applications on a network to programmatically control imaging device functions and interact with a user through an imaging device input panel. Software functions that are not practical within the imaging device can be performed on the server but are accessible from the imaging device.

For the purposes of this specification and claims an imaging device IDev may be described as a device that performs an imaging function. Imaging functions comprise scanning printing copying image transmission sending and receiving image conversion and other functions. Exemplary imaging devices comprise printers copiers facsimile machines scanners computing devices that transmit convert or process images and other devices. An IDev may also perform multiple imaging functions. For example and not by way of limitation a multi function peripheral device MFP which typically has the capability to perform a plurality of functions comprising a printer scanner copier and or a facsimile machine or image transmitter receiver is a type of imaging device. Other MFP imaging devices may comprise other combinations of functions and still qualify as an IDev.

For the purposes of this specification and claims a remote computing device RCD is a device capable of processing data and communicating with other devices through a communications link. An RCD is a remote device because it requires a communications link such as a network connection a telephone line a serial cable or some other wired or wireless link to communicate with other devices such as an imaging device. Some exemplary RCDs are network servers networked computers and other processing and storage devices that have communications links.

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . These embodiments comprise an imaging device IDev that may be a multi function peripheral device MFP or a single function device. The imaging device further comprises a user interface UI panel which may comprise input buttons and a display device or may comprise a touch panel system with or without buttons . User input and display may also be performed through a separate UI device which may be connected to the imaging device by a communication link such as a USB connection a network cable a wireless connection or some other communications link. UI device may comprise an input device such as a keyboard or buttons as well as a display device which may also be a touch screen panel. UI device may also comprise an interface for transfer of instructions that are input to the device from a remote input device. This form of UI device may comprise memory sticks USB memory cards and other storage devices that may be configured to store input for transfer to an imaging device.

These embodiments further comprise a remote computing device RCD that is linked to the imaging device via a communications link such as a network connection. This network connection may be a typical wired connection or a wireless link.

Embodiments of the present invention may provide menu data from the RCD to the imaging device UI panel or remote panel via the network connection . Once this menu data is fed to the imaging device an UI panel on the imaging device may be used to interact with applications that run on the remote computing device . User input received from UI panels may be returned directly to the remote computing device .

A Web Service is a software application identified by a Uniform Resource Identifier URI whose interfaces and binding are capable of being defined described and discovered by Extensible Markup Language XML artifacts and supports direct interactions with other software applications using XML based messages via Internet based protocols.

An application on the remote computing device may use one or more Web Services to control various features in the imaging device such as enabling disabling or setting device values or controlling device functions.

Embodiments of the present invention allow network applications running on remote computing devices to interact with the user of the imaging device through the imaging device I O panel. These embodiments allow imaging device user interface UI control i.e. touch panel button display by applications. Some embodiments may also integrate custom display screens or menus with the native imaging device UI. Embodiments may hand off control of imaging device functions between standard operation modes performed on the imaging device in response to user input to an imaging device UI and open systems modes that utilize network resources such as applications on RCDs through user input at the imaging device UI.

Embodiments of the present invention comprise network based applications that have full control over the imaging device UI to display text and graphics in any format. In these embodiments the application can programmatically display buttons textboxes graphics etc. in any layout desired.

In some embodiments the UI layout is easy to program using a standard language such as a markup language. These languages comprise Hypertext Markup Language HTML Extensible Markup Language XML Wireless Markup Language WML Extensible Hypertext Markup Language XHTML and other languages.

In some embodiments of the present invention a remote computing device application or server application is able to request a keyboard UI to be displayed on the imaging device display . In some embodiments this functionality is available on the imaging device and does not need to be recreated by remote computing device applications. In some embodiments the remote computing device may define the keyboard prompt and default values. These embodiments may comprise a remote computing device that is able to rename imaging device UI buttons such as the OK and Cancel buttons as well as define additional buttons.

In some embodiments menu templates may be served to the imaging device UI by the imaging device itself or from a remote computing device .

Some embodiments of the present invention may comprise a remote computing device application that is registered as the External Authorization server. The External Authorization application may control access to the imaging device and may have top level control of the UI. UI control may be given to this application in the same manner that control is given to an internal auditor.

In these embodiments when an imaging device system boots it checks to see if an External Authorization application is registered. If so the imaging device is placed in disabled mode and the application is contacted to take control of the UI. If the External Authorization server is not available an error message may be displayed and the device may remain disabled. The imaging device may periodically try to contact the External Authorization server until it is available. Table 1 below describes what entity has control of the UI in an exemplary embodiment when the device is in a disabled state.

In embodiments of the present invention access to the custom UI panels of imaging devices may vary from application to application. Some solutions such as Document Management integration may wish to leverage the native Image Send screens but display some custom UI s to gather additional information about a scan job. Other solutions like custom printing applications may be accessed from a separate mode than the native functions.

In order to accommodate the diversified needs of these solutions applications embodiments may support multiple integration points for UI control. These integration points are based on a user action trigger for which applications may register. In some embodiments applications may be registered with target devices so that the device knows that when trigger A occurs on the front panel to contact remote computing device B for instructions. In exemplary embodiments applications may be integrated with an imaging device at any of several trigger points.

Remote computing devices may be registered to a specific function and contacted when that function s hardware key is pressed e.g. Image Send on the imaging device UI. Any UI information provided by the remote computing device may be displayed instead of the standard function screens native to the imaging device. This trigger may be used for applications that wish to replace the existing functions with completely custom UI s such as an alternative scan solution or a specialized display such as a Section 508 compatible screen or other specialized need interface that may have large buttons or other accommodations.

In some embodiments each function on the imaging device may have a menu on the touch screen that remote computing devices such as servers can register. This enables solutions applications to provide custom content and still use some of the standard functionality provided by the imaging device. When a button assigned to a custom application is selected a menu will be displayed with the solutions registered to that function. Users may select the desired solution and the remote computing device will be contacted for instructions.

In some embodiments a stand alone RCD mode that provides remote computing device application access can be accessed from the job queue portion of the UI that is displayed on every screen. This trigger point may be used for applications that do not fit within one of the standard device functions such as custom printing solutions on an imaging device. When the RCD menu is selected a menu will be displayed with the solutions applications registered to the generic RCD mode. Users will select the desired solution and the remote computing device will be contacted for instructions.

In some embodiments of the present invention when an imaging device is enabled additional hardware keys may be used to manage the device. Hardware key assignments for an exemplary embodiment are shown in table 2.

In some embodiments in addition to the key for logout a timeout period may be implemented. Some embodiments also comprise an auto clear setting that can be configured for a given period of time such as 10 to 240 seconds or disabled . In these embodiments when there is no activity for the time configured in auto clear the device may automatically return to disabled mode and attempt to contact a remote computing device to retake control of the UI.

Depending on a particular solution a remote computing device application may have full or only partial control of the imaging device UI and a particular imaging job. In some embodiments partial control may include cases where a remote computing device is monitoring clicks but native modes are responsible for the UI interaction and controlling the job. Partial control may also include cases where the remote computing device application is integrated with a native mode UI trigger function custom menu . In these embodiments the imaging device may handle all error and jam notifications with only a notification sent to the relevant remote computing device application.

For some embodiments in cases where the remote computing device application has full control over the UI and the job error and jam notifications may be handled differently depending on the type of error. For recoverable errors a notification may be sent to the remote computing device application and the application may be responsible for displaying messages and resolving the error. For non recoverable errors the imaging device and RCD mode may interact to gracefully handle the error condition e.g. provide user with instructions for clearing jam .

In some embodiments at different points throughout an imaging job several applications may need control over an imaging device including but not limited to an External Authorization application a standard RCD application an imaging device native mode and other applications. The following section describes for an exemplary embodiment the various steps in an exemplary job the entities that may have control during each step and what type of control may be allowed.

Step 1 User provides credentials to access the device at the device UI. This step may be controlled by a remote computing device such as an External Authorization application or by Internal Accounting native mode in the imaging device itself. At the end of this step the device is enabled. The External Authorization application may also specify default parameters or disable specific job parameters e.g. default file format is PDF but user may change color mode is set to B W and user may not change .

Step 2 User sets parameters for the job using one of the native imaging device modes or a standard RCD application. At the end of this step the user makes an input to initiate the job. When the input is made an optional notification may be sent to the standard RCD application which can then change job parameters if desired. An e mail application is one example of an application that may request notification when the user input is made. A user may use native Image Send screens or other input to select scan options and choose e mail recipients. A user may then select a custom application button and choose the scan to e mail option from the menu. The e mail application may then display custom screens for the user to set permissions for the file. Once a user places the original document s on the scanner and initiates the process the e mail application may capture the destination parameters set by the user and change the target destination to the e mail application FTP server. The e mail application may then receive the file apply the appropriate permissions and send to the e mail recipients selected by the user. A remote computing device application may also want to retake control of the UI at this point if as in some embodiments the application generates thumbnails of the scanned images and displays them to the user for verification.

Step 3 Once the job is initiated the imaging device is responsible for scanning or RIPing the job and spooling it to the HDD. If the imaging device is configured to authorize jobs with an external authorization application it may send a click report to the application and wait for instructions. The external authorization application may enable the job for sending printing cancel the job or change job parameters and then enable . As an example a rules based printing application may wish to change job parameters after it receives a click report. Some rules based printing applications support rules based printing and scanning that can limit what each user is allowed to do based on the time of day the destination or many other parameters. For example only users in the marketing group may be able to scan high quality color images. If a user from another group selects color and 600 dpi a rules based application may change the parameters to color and 200 dpi. At the end of this step the job should either be authorized or canceled.

Step 4 In some embodiments this may be an optional step where the standard RCD application in step 2 may have specified the destination as a HDD for temporary storage. This step may also be used in some embodiments by a Java application running on the imaging device. For example a government office may have a custom encryption application running on the device that takes the scanned document encrypts it and then requests the imaging device to send it to the target destination selected by the user in step 2. In some embodiments it may be beneficial to send a notification to the external authorization application after this step because the imaging device does not know how long the file will be on the HDD or what the application is going to do with it and after the send print step.

Step 5 In the final step the file is actually output. In typical embodiments the file is either sent over the network or printed locally. At the end of this step a notification that the job was successfully completed should be sent to the external authorization application and optionally to the standard RCD application.

The API s may be used to allow a remote computing device application to control access to an imaging device for vend applications and to manage the device from a remote location.

In some embodiments of the present invention a Device Control and Vend API allows applications to enable and disable access to the device and track click counts. The Device Control and Vend API may provide an RCD with the following controls 

Enable disable device of function this may allow an RCD to enable or disable access to the device as a whole or by function to enforce individual user privileges. In some exemplary embodiments the functions listed in Table 3 may be selectively enabled or disabled by an application.

Report clicks used at the end of a successful job the clicks used may be reported back to an RCD including 

Debit mode in these embodiments when an application enables the device it may specify if the current job requires authorization. If so the job will be spooled to memory and click information e.g. as defined in Table 4 will be sent to an RCD. An RCD will then notify the device if the job should be deleted or output sent. At this point the application also has the option of changing job parameters. If the application does not require authorization the job will continue as normal and a click report will be sent at the end of the job.

Print job accounting in these embodiments an RCD may wish to monitor print jobs along with walk up functions. For print job accounting an IDev may monitor all incoming print jobs and send accounting data in the PJL header to an RCD for verification before printing the job. The RCD will evaluate the accounting data or lack thereof and inform the IDev to continue with or cancel the job.

Report on unidentified jobs in these embodiments an RCD may also wish to monitor print jobs that it cannot associate to a specific user such as device reports and incoming fax jobs. The RCD can register to receive click counts for all unidentified jobs so that it may bill them to a general account.

In some embodiments of the present invention a Device Management API allows a network application to remotely setup and manage the imaging device. In exemplary embodiments the Device Management API may provide an RCD with the following controls 

The above groupings are provided only as an exemplary embodiment detailing which settings should be included. In some embodiments actual API s should be grouped by functional areas since there may be overlap between Key Operator settings and web page settings.

In some embodiments an Internal Accounting API may allow a remote computing device application to configure internal accounting and report click counts. In some exemplary embodiments an Internal Accounting API may include 

Some embodiments of the present invention may comprise a Font and Form Management API which allows an RCD application to remotely download and manage fonts and forms in mass storage. In some exemplary embodiments a Font and Form Management API may provide a remote computing device with the following controls 

In some embodiments of the present invention a Firmware Management API may allow a remote computing device or network application to remotely download and manage the imaging device firmware. In some exemplary embodiments a Firmware Management API may provide a remote computing device e.g. a server with the following controls 

In some embodiments of the present invention device function API s allow a remote computing device application to use existing imaging device functionality to provide new custom solutions.

In some embodiments an Image Send API may provide the remote computing device application with the following controls 

In some embodiments a remote computing device can change the default values on the imaging device or the values for the current job. For the current job the remote computing device may also specify if scan parameters may be modified by the user or not. If one remote computing device application e.g. Access Control specifies that a parameter cannot be changed and then a second application e.g. Document Management tries to set the parameter a notification may be sent to the second application and the setting will not be changed.

In some embodiments print jobs may be submitted by remote computing device applications using standard printing channels. In some exemplary embodiments a Print API may provide a remote computing device with the following additional control 

In some embodiments of the present invention a Copy API may provide a remote computing device with the following exemplary controls 

In some embodiments a remote computing device can change the default values on the imaging device or the values for the current job. For the current job the remote computing device may also specify if copy parameters may be modified by the user or not.

In some embodiments of the present invention a Document Filing API may provide a remote computing device with the following exemplary controls 

Allowing external applications to control an imaging device opens up the imaging device to new security vulnerabilities. In embodiments of the present invention that provide some security measures the following exemplary items are security concerns that may be addressed by the remote computing device interface.

Access to remote computing device interfaces may be limited to valid applications. Embodiments provide extensive access and control of the imaging device which poses a significant security risk. The interface of these embodiments may be protected from access by attackers while maintaining ease of setup and use for valid solutions.

Confidential data user credentials and job data may be protected during network transfer. User credentials and job data may be secured during network transfer to ensure that it cannot be stolen an intruder cannot monitor device activity and a man in the middle attack cannot change messages. Imaging devices may support Secure Sockets Layer SSL and other connections to ensure data is safe while being communicated between the imaging device and remote computing device applications.

Administrators may have the ability to lock down imaging device access. For users with strict security policies administrators may have the ability to disable access by remote computing devices or limit access to specific applications. Administrators may have an option to register the limited applications that they wish to access the imaging device interfaces.

Remote computing device applications may ensure the imaging device is not being spoofed. The remote computing device may be able to authenticate an imaging device that it is contract with it to ensure an intruder cannot imitate the imaging device to collect network configuration and password information monitor file folder structures of a document management system or spoof security settings and DSK status of the imaging device.

A remote computing device may ensure that the server is not being spoofed. The imaging device must be able to authenticate all remote computing devices that it is in contact with to ensure that an intruder is not spoofing the remote computing device s IP address. By pretending to be the remote computing device an intruder could steal user credentials redirect scanned documents change device settings or firmware or bring down the access control system either to provide access to unauthorized users or initiate a denial of service attack for valid users .

Access control vend applications may not be compromised when a remote computing device is unavailable. When the remote computing device is unavailable it may not be acceptable to provide open access to the device. If the remote computing device is unavailable at startup or becomes unavailable at anytime e.g. someone disconnects network cable the imaging device may immediately be disabled and an error message displayed.

An administrator may be able to adjust a security level based on company and application requirements. Security requirements can have a large impact on the time it takes to develop a remote computing device application and the resources required to implement the solution. Users using some embodiments may range from a small business with one imaging device no IT staff and a simple scan or print application to a large government office using access control and audit trails to track all device activity. The security measures used to protect imaging device interfaces may be adjustable by the administrator to match the target environment.

The imaging device and remote computing device applications may be able to hand off user credentials. Users may be prompted to login at multiple points throughout a job. For example an access control application or accounting application may control total device access the imaging device may have user authentication enabled for Image Send and a document management application may require user login before showing a folder list. In many environments all of these applications will use a common user database. In some embodiments it is therefore desirable for the applications to pass user credentials to each other so that each one does not have to repeat the authentication process.

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . These embodiments comprise an imaging device only which is configured to interact with a remote computing device such as a server through a communications link. The imaging device comprises a user interface which comprises a user input device such as a keypad one or more buttons knobs or switches or a touch screen panel and a display which may comprise user input device in the form of a touch screen panel.

Imaging device will typically be capable of performing one or more imaging functions including but not limited to scanning printing copying facsimile transmission sending and receiving and others.

These embodiments further comprise a communications link which may be a wired connection as shown in comprising a network cable a Universal Serial Bus USB cable a serial cable a parallel cable a powerline communication connection such as a HomePlug connection or other wired connections. Alternatively the communications link may comprise a wireless connection such as an IEEE 802.11 b compliant connection a Bluetooth connection an Infrared Data Association IrDA connection or some other wireless connection.

The operation of some imaging device embodiments may be explained with reference to . In these embodiments menu data is received from a remote computing device not shown in which is connected to the imaging device via the communication link through a wired or wireless connection. This menu data is then displayed on the imaging device user interface display . This display of remote menu data is intended to prompt a user to make an input on the user interface input device .

Imaging devices of these embodiments are further configured to accept input from a user in response to a display of remote menu data and communicate that user input to a remote computing device. In some embodiments this user input data will be processed by a remote computing device. This may comprise running an application on the remote computing device. This processing may also comprise accessing and communicating data that is stored on the remote computing device.

The imaging devices of these embodiments are further configured to receive data resulting from processing the user input data. This may comprise data generated by an application running on the remote computing device in response to the user input. The imaging device may also receive data that was stored on a remote computing device such as a file server in response to processing the user input.

Once the imaging device has received the processed data the imaging device may perform a native function in response to the data or using the data. For example and not be way of limitation the imaging device may print a document that was stored on the remote computing device and modified on the remote computing device according to the user input. As another non limiting example the imaging device may active or enable functions i.e. scanning copying printing fax transmission on the imaging device in response to the receipt of processed data.

Some more specific imaging device embodiments may be explained with reference to . In these embodiments the imaging device is configured to receive menu data formatted in a markup language from a remote computing device. The communication link by which the menu data is communicated may be established and maintained using a Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP . The markup language may comprise terms from Hypertext Markup Language HTML Extensible Markup Language XML Wireless Markup Language WML Extensible Hypertext Markup Language XHTML and or other languages.

Once the menu data is received it may be displayed on the imaging device user interface display . As in previously described embodiments the menu data is typically intended to prompt user input on imaging device user interface . Display of the remotely stored menu data may be accomplished with a browser application that is native to the imaging device .

In these embodiments the imaging device is further configured to route user input received though its user interface to a remote computing device. The remote computing device that receives the user input may then run an application or otherwise process the user input and return the results of the processing to the imaging device . Accordingly the imaging device is further configured to receive processed data from a remote computing device. In some embodiments the imaging device may perform one or more functions in response to the receipt of processed data.

Some embodiments of the present invention may be explained with reference to . These embodiments comprise a remote computing device RCD which has a communications link . Communications link may be a wired connection as shown in comprising a network cable a Universal Serial Bus USB cable a serial cable a parallel cable a powerline communication connection such as a HomePlug connection or other wired connections. Alternatively the communications link may comprise a wireless connection such as an IEEE 802.11 b compliant connection a Bluetooth connection an Infrared connection such as those defined in the Infrared Data Association IrDA standard or some other wireless connection. In some embodiments RCD may further comprise a data storage device which is typically a hard drive but may also be an optical drive device such as an array of compact disk drives flash memory or some other storage device.

Embodiments of RCD may be further described with reference to . In these embodiments RCD comprises a processor for processing data and running programs such as operating systems and applications. RCD may further comprise memory which may be in the form of Random Access Memory RAM and Read Only Memory ROM . Generally any applications processed by processor will be loaded into memory . RCD may further comprise a network interface which allows RCD to communicate with other devices such as an imaging device . In some embodiments RCD may also comprise a user interface but this is not required in many embodiments. Storage may be used to store applications and data that may be accessed by an imaging device of embodiments of the present invention. Processor memory storage network interface and optionally user interface are typically linked by a system bus to enable data transfer between each component. Communications link may couple the RCD to other devices via network interface .

In some embodiments described with reference to an RCD may comprise menu data stored on storage device or in memory . This menu data may be configured for display on an imaging device user interface . Menu data may be stored in many formats and configurations. In some embodiments menu data may take the form of terms expressed with a markup language. The markup language may comprise terms from Hypertext Markup Language HTML Extensible Markup Language XML Wireless Markup Language WML Extensible Hypertext Markup Language XHTML and or other languages. In these embodiments menu data may be sent through a communications link to an imaging device . Accordingly menu data configured for display on an imaging device is stored on RCD .

An RCD of some embodiments will be further configured to receive user input obtained through the user interface of an imaging device and transferred to the RCD over communications links . Once this input data is received at an RCD the input data may be processed . This processing may comprise conversion of the data to a new format execution of commands contained within the data or some other process. Once the input data has been processed the processed output may be sent back to the imaging device where the processed output may be used in an imaging device process or function.

In some embodiments as described with reference to an RCD may send menu data configured for an imaging device display using a markup language. The markup language menu data is then received at the imaging device and displayed to a user. Typically this will prompt the user to enter an input on the imaging device user interface . This user input will then be sent by the imaging device to the RCD . The RCD will then receive the input data prompted by the display of the menu data on the imaging device . Once received the input data may be processed on the RCD . Processing may comprise the selection recordation and or modification of a form document or other data stored on RCD the authorization of a user identified by the user input the translation of a document input by the user generation of a map or other directions related to user input or some other process or function. After this processing the RCD may send the results of the processing to the imaging device .

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . These embodiments comprise at least one RCD and a plurality of imaging devices . In these embodiments at least one of the imaging devices comprises a user interface with a display and user input panel that is integral with the display i.e. touch screen or a separate input unit. RCD is connected to imaging devices by a communications link and network to enable data transmission between RCD and imaging devices 

In these embodiments menu data is stored on RCD and sent to at least one of the imaging devices where the menu data is displayed on a user interface. Any of Imaging devices that receive the menu data are configured to accept and transmit user input to an RCD . Once the user input data is received at the RCD the data may be processed as discussed in previously described embodiments. The result of processing may then be sent back to any combination of the imaging devices 

In these embodiments a single RCD may be used to provide processing power resources and functionality to a plurality of imaging devices without reproducing these resources in each imaging device. In some embodiments data generated by input on one imaging device may be directed to another imaging device for processed data output or final processing.

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . In these embodiments an imaging device IDev comprises a user interface which is capable of receiving user input and displaying data to a user. The user interface will typically comprise a display often in the form of a touch panel. The display may be used to display data to a user. This data may comprise menu data to prompt for a user selection or data entry such as a user ID and password form selection or some other input. The imaging device has a communication link which may comprise a typical computer network connection a serial cable or some other wired or wireless communication link as described in other embodiments. The communication link may connect the imaging device to a remote computing device RCD such as a server. The RCD may be used to store documents such as forms and other data and make that data accessible from the imaging device . The RCD may also execute applications that interact with or receive input from the imaging device and its user interface . In some embodiments a database may be linked to the imaging device and or an RCD . In some embodiments an RCD or database may be connected to an IDev over a wide area network such as the internet .

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise imaging job configuration capabilities that define elements of an imaging job. A typical multi function peripheral MFP imaging device has the capability to scan print fax and copy documents. Some MFPs may also have e mail functions as well. Many MFPs allow a job to be configured in great detail. Scan or copy jobs may allow a user to zoom or magnify an image crop the image sharpen the image modify color characteristics and select many other features. Print and copy jobs may allow a user to select color options darkness levels N Up formatting paper size and many other features. Imaging jobs may be configured to comprise many functions and elements.

Generally an imaging job can be broken down into elemental functions and processes that are accomplished by different parts of the imaging device. For example a simple copy job can be broken down into a scan process and a print process. More complex copy jobs may comprise zooming cropping rotating sharpening page formatting and other elemental functions. These elemental functions and their attributes may be referred to as detailed job parameters. Detailed job parameters comprise media type media size media quantity quantity of impressions per page pixel count data image resolution finishing operations stapling requirements punching requirements collating requirements color attributes color depth color quantity ink consumption toner consumption contrast media consumption monochrome attributes grey scale attributes double sided characteristics single sided characteristics N Up formatting paper tray selection scan destination print destination power consumption job type i.e. print copy scan facsimile and document management and many other parameters.

In known imaging systems for commercial applications fees may be charged for the use of the system. Typically these fees are based on higher level system functions. For example a fixed fee may be charged for each copy of a document page or for each page of a scan job. Known systems lack the ability to determine detailed job parameters and calculate a cost based on those parameters. A system with the ability to determine detailed job parameters and use them in fee calculations can more accurately track system costs and ensure that the system is operating profitably.

Some embodiments of the present invention may comprise a stand alone imaging device IDev with internal processing capabilities. Other embodiments may comprise an imaging device IDev in communication with one or more remote computing devices RCDs .

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described in relation to . In these embodiments a user may configure an imaging job through input on an imaging device user interface. This configuration data is accepted by the imaging device. The IDev may then derive detailed job parameters from the job configuration data. These detailed job parameters may then be used to calculate job costs or fees which may be charged to the user.

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . In these embodiments an IDev UI is configured to accept job configuration data. Prompts may be displayed to a user from a UI display device to indicate configuration options. Prompts may take the form of active display content that is displayed to a user passive text or graphics on the input device or some other form of prompt. Once a user is prompted to configure an imaging job the configuration data input by the user may be accepted at the IDev for further processing. In these embodiments the IDev may derive detailed job parameters from the job configuration data. Job costs and or user fees may then be calculated by the IDev using these detailed job parameters. In some embodiments an account verification process may be employed whereby the fees for the current job are compared to a user s account to verify that there is sufficient account capacity. Account capacity may represent an amount of funds available in a debit account an amount of credit available on a credit account or some other metric in an accounting system. If the calculated job costs fees meet account restrictions a job may be approved by the accounting system and executed by the imaging device. If the calculated job costs fees do not meet account restrictions the job will be denied and the user will not be allowed to execute the job.

In an exemplary embodiment related to those depicted in a user may read prompts in the form of text and graphics displayed on an imaging device UI display. In response to these prompts the user may input job configuration data using the IDev UI. For example a user may select a high resolution color copy function that blows up the image increase size by 100 and applies a filter to sharpen the image finally printing the image on photographic media paper. This input is accepted by the IDev and stored for processing. The IDev may then process this job configuration data and derive detailed job parameters from the data. These detailed job parameters may comprise high resolution processing color toner consumption final media size media type and other parameters related to the imaging job. A cost or fee may be associated with each of these parameters and a total fee may be calculated for the job as configured by the user. In a debit account scenario the user s account may be checked to verify that funds have been deposited to cover the cost of the imaging job. If the account has sufficient funds the job will be approved and the imaging device will proceed with execution of the job as configured. If the account does not have sufficient funds the job will be denied and will not be allowed to execute on the imaging device.

Some embodiments of the present invention illustrated in comprise receiving job configuration data at the IDev UI. Job configuration data may be received as user input at an IDev UI or as instructions received over a communication link. In these embodiments the IDev receives this job configuration information and derives detailed job parameters from the job configuration data. These detailed parameters may then be used by the IDev to calculate a specific cost or fee for the configured job. This cost or fee may then be related to a user s account status to determine whether the job can be completed within accounting restrictions. For example a user s account may be checked to see if sufficient credit is available to cover the fees associated with the imaging job. If the account status will allow the job the IDev may complete the job . If the account status will not allow the job the IDev may modify the job by limiting a job parameter or by some other means until the job costs or fees fall within accounting restrictions. For example and not by way of limitation a job that has been configured for 50 copies may be limited to 30 copies when a user s account only has sufficient funds to cover 30 copies. As another non limiting example a job may be changed from color copies on photo paper to color copies on bond paper when this change will bring the job into compliance with accounting restrictions.

Some embodiments of the present invention illustrated in comprise receiving job configuration data at an IDev. In these embodiments the IDev derives detailed job parameters from the job configuration data. Job costs or fees may then be calculated using these detailed job parameters as explained for other embodiments above. When account restrictions are met the job request may be executed as configured. In these embodiments if account restrictions are not met a user may be prompted to modify the job configuration. This may be accomplished by input on an imaging device user interface. In some embodiments the IDev may prompt the user with data indicating which configuration characteristics may be changed to make the job comply with accounting restrictions.

Some embodiments of the present invention may be described with reference to . In these embodiments user input may be entered on the user interface of an imaging device . Job configuration data may also be received from other devices via a communication link such as a network connection . User input data received on an IDev may be sent over a communication link to a RCD . In some of these embodiments a user may be prompted to configure a job by input on an imaging device user interface . In other embodiments job configuration data may be received directly from another device. Once the job configuration data is received at the IDev this data may be sent to an RCD . At the RCD the configuration data may be processed and detailed job parameters may be derived therefrom. Job costs and fees may then be calculated from the detailed job parameters at the RCD . These job costs and fees may then be compared or related to a user s account to determine whether account restrictions will allow the job to be executed. If the account restrictions allow the job the RCD may send an authorization to the IDev to execute the job as configured. If the account restrictions do not allow the job the RCD may send a job denial notice to the IDev to notify the user that the job cannot be executed as configured under current accounting restrictions.

In further embodiments illustrated in job configuration data may be received by an IDev . The IDev may then send the job configuration data to an RCD for processing. As in some other embodiments an application running on the RCD may then derive detailed job parameters from the configuration data. An RCD application may also calculate Job costs and fees from the detailed job parameters. Once costs and fees are calculated for the job account status may be checked to see if accounting restrictions will allow the job to be authorized . When accounting restrictions are met a job authorization message may be sent to the IDev to authorize execution of the job as configured . When accounting restrictions are not met the job may be reconfigured to a configuration that meets accounting restrictions and sent to the IDev for execution. In some embodiments a user prompt may be displayed to obtain user approval of the reconfiguration. Job reconfiguration may comprise limiting aspects of the job. In some embodiments the quantity of job iterations may be limited such as the number of pages of a copy job. In other embodiments the quality of a job aspect may be reduced such as the size of an image until accounting restrictions are met.

In still other embodiments of the present invention illustrated in job configuration data may be received by an IDev . The IDev may then send the job configuration data to an RCD for processing. As in some other embodiments an application running on the RCD may then derive detailed job parameters from the configuration data. An RCD application may also calculate job costs and fees from the detailed job parameters. Once costs and fees are calculated for the job account status or accounting restrictions may be checked to see if accounting restrictions will allow the job to be authorized . When accounting restrictions are met a job authorization message may be sent to the IDev to authorize execution of the job as configured . When accounting restrictions are not met the user may be notified of the lack of authorization and prompted to reconfigure the job to comply with accounting restrictions. The modified job configuration may then be sent to the IDev for processing and account restriction compliance checking similar to the original configuration processing.

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise a remote computing device configured to work in conjunction with an imaging device in a system such as those described above in relation to . Some of these embodiments illustrated in comprise a remote computing device RCD capable of receiving print job or imaging job configuration data from an IDev . The RCD of these embodiments is also configured to derive detailed job parameters from the job configuration data. Job costs and fees may then be calculated using these detailed job parameters. Once job costs and fees have been calculated these values may be compared with user account restrictions. Upon accounting approval of a job a job authorization message is sent from the RCD to an IDev to authorize the IDev to execute the job as configured. In these embodiments when a job does not meet accounting restrictions no authorization message is sent to the IDev . Alternatively a job denied message may be sent to deny authority to execute the job as configured.

Further embodiments illustrated in comprise a remote computing device RCD capable of receiving print job or imaging job configuration data from an IDev . The RCD of these embodiments is also configured to derive detailed job parameters from the job configuration data. Job costs and fees may then be calculated using these detailed job parameters. Once job costs and fees have been calculated these values may be compared with user account restrictions. Upon accounting approval of a job a job authorization message may be sent from the RCD to an IDev to authorize the IDev to execute the job as configured. In these embodiments when a job does not meet accounting restrictions the RCD sends output to the IDev to modify the job to meet accounting restrictions and execute the modified job. Alternatively the RCD may modify the job to meet accounting restrictions and send the modified job along with an accounting authorization to the IDev for execution of the modified job.

Further embodiments illustrated in comprise a remote computing device RCD capable of receiving print job or imaging job configuration data from an IDev . The RCD of these embodiments is also configured to derive detailed job parameters from the job configuration data. Job costs and fees may then be calculated using these detailed job parameters. Once job costs and fees have been calculated these values may be compared with user account restrictions. Upon accounting approval of a job a job authorization message may be sent from the RCD to an IDev to authorize the IDev to execute the job as configured. In these embodiments when a job does not meet accounting restrictions the RCD may send UI content to the IDev to prompt a user to modify the job configuration at the IDev UI. Once a user has modified the imaging job the reconfigured or modified job may be sent to the RCD and processed to verify accounting restriction compliance as was done for the original job. A plurality of modification iterations may be performed until accounting restriction compliance is resolved.

Some embodiments of the present invention comprise imaging devices configured to work in conjunction with remote computing devices in exemplary systems such as those described above in relation to .

Some embodiments of the present invention illustrated in comprise an IDev that is capable of receiving job configuration data from a user. This job configuration data may be received directly from a user through an UI on the IDev . Job configuration data may also be transmitted from a remote device that has received user input directly. Job configuration data may also be received as a set of commands from another device in an automated system or from other sources. Once this job configuration data is received it may be sent to an RCD for processing. The RCD may process the data and determine whether the job complies with accounting restrictions as described above. When this determination has been made and the job configuration receives accounting approval the IDev may execute the job as configured. If the job configuration does not receive accounting approval or if a job denial message is received the job will not be executed.

Some embodiments of the present invention illustrated in comprise an IDev that is capable of receiving job configuration data from a user. This job configuration data may be received directly from a user through an UI on the IDev . Job configuration data may also be transmitted from a remote device that has received user input directly. Job configuration data may also be received as a set of commands from another device in an automated system or from other sources. Once this job configuration data is received it may be sent to an RCD for processing. The RCD may process the data and determine whether the job complies with accounting restrictions as described above. When this determination has been made and the job configuration receives accounting approval the IDev may execute the job as configured. If the job configuration does not receive accounting approval or if a job denial message is received the job may be reconfigured to comply with accounting restrictions. In some embodiments the IDev may reconfigure the job configuration to meet accounting restrictions and execute the job. In some embodiments a user may be prompted to approve the reconfigured job before execution. In other embodiments the RCD may send a reconfigured job to the IDev for execution when the original job does not meet accounting restrictions.

Some embodiments of the present invention illustrated in comprise an IDev that is capable of receiving job configuration data from a user. This job configuration data may be received directly from a user through an UI on the IDev . Job configuration data may also be transmitted from a remote device that has received user input directly. Job configuration data may also be received as a set of commands from another device in an automated system or from other sources. Once this job configuration data is received it may be sent to an RCD for processing. The RCD may process the data and determine whether the job complies with accounting restrictions as described above. When this determination has been made and the job configuration receives accounting approval the IDev may execute the job as configured. If the job configuration does not receive accounting approval or if a job denial message is received the IDev may prompt a user to modify the job configuration to meet accounting restrictions. In some embodiments UI content may be sent to the IDev UI for display to a user. User input may then be received and the newly configured job may be sent back to the RCD for accounting approval.

The terms and expressions which have been employed in the forgoing specification are used therein as terms of description and not of limitation and there is no intention in the use of such terms and expressions of excluding equivalence of the features shown and described or portions thereof it being recognized that the scope of the invention is defined and limited only by the claims which follow.

