---

title: Alanine transaminase enzymes and methods of use
abstract: Novel alanine transaminase (ALT) polypeptides and the use thereof as a diagnostic marker to predict and monitor tissue damage and/or tissue malfunction. The ALT polypeptides are murine and/or ALT polypeptides and said ALT polypeptides are used to detect, predict and/or determine hepatic processes of an animal, particularly mice and/or rats.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07914985&OS=07914985&RS=07914985
owner: University of Maryland, Baltimore
number: 07914985
owner_city: Baltimore
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050419
---
This work was supported in part by grant R03 DK60563 01 from the National Institutes of Health. The U.S. Government has certain rights to this invention.

This application claims priority from U.S. provisional patent application Ser. No. 60 563 389 filed on 19 Apr. 2004 and U.S. provisional patent application Ser. No. 60 588 126 filed on 15 Jul. 2004. The priority provisional patent applications are hereby incorporated by reference herein in their entirety and are made a part hereof including but not limited to those portions which specifically appear hereinafter.

This invention relates to alanine transaminase ALT polypeptides and the use thereof as a diagnostic marker to predict and monitor tissue damage and or tissue malfunction. More specifically the ALT polypeptides are murine and or ALT polypeptides and said ALT polypeptides are used to detect predict and or determine hepatic processes of an animal particularly mice and or rats. The present invention additionally relates to assays for the ALT polypeptides to diagnose tissue damage and or tissue malfunction having a range of etiologies that include but are not limited to hepatitis nonalcoholic steatohepatitis NASH fatty liver cirrhosis and drug hepatotoxicity and other disorders in muscle brain kidney and adipose tissue particularly in mice and or rats.

Alanine transaminase ALT EC 2.6.1.2. also known as glutamate pyruvate transaminase GPT and alanine aminotransferase is a pyridoxal enzyme catalyzing reversible transamination between alanine and 2 oxoglutarate to form pyruvate and glutamate. By mediating the conversion of these four major intermediate metabolites ALT plays an important role in gluconeogenesis and amino acid metabolism. In muscle and certain other tissues ALT degrades amino acids for fuel and amino groups are collected from glutamate by transamination. ALT transfers the amino group from glutamate to pyruvate to form alanine which is a major amino acid in blood during fasting. Alanine is taken up by the liver for generating glucose from pyruvate in a reverse ALT reaction constituting the so called alanine glucose cycle. This cycle is also important during intensive exercise when skeletal muscles operate anaerobically producing not only ammonia groups from protein breakdown but also large amounts of pyruvate from glycolysis.

ALT activities exist in many tissues including liver muscle heart kidney and brain. Molecular cloning of the complementary DNAs cDNAs of two human ALT isoenzymes hALT1 and hALT2 have been disclosed in International Publication WO 02 092768 herein fully incorporated by reference in its entirety. The independent DNA encoding for the two human ALT isoenzymes gpt1 and gpt2 respectively has been shown to be localized to separate chromosomes in humans and that they have distinctive tissue distribution patterns suggesting a tissue dependent role for ALT isoenzymes.

Perhaps the most well known aspect of ALT is that it is used clinically as an index of liver integrity or hepatocellular damage. Serum ALT activity is significantly elevated in a variety of liver damage conditions including viral infection alcoholic steatosis nonalcoholic steatohepatitis NASH and drug toxicity although the underlying mechanism is generally not well understood. While low level of ALT is present in peripheral circulation because of normal cell turnover or release from nonvascular sources the liver has been shown to contain the highest levels of ALT. The difference between ALT levels in liver and in blood has been shown to be about 2 000 3 000 fold. Hence the increased ALT in serum plasma or blood is regarded as a marker of liver injury because of the leakage of hepatic ALT into the circulation. Usually the nature of liver injury causes the blood ALT levels to vary greatly. Extremely high transaminase levels greater than 8 to 10 fold normal can indicate acute viral hepatitis and or drug induced hepatotoxicity. A mild chronic increase of serum ALT 2 to 8 fold is generally a characteristic of chronic hepatitis fatty liver and or steatosis. However many details of the mechanism for the correlation of ALT levels with the etiology of liver damage remain to be understood.

Even though serum ALT is one of the most widely used assays in clinical chemistry there are serious deficiencies with the assay because it is an inadequate predictor in some cases. Recent studies have cast doubt on serum ALT assay s specificity for liver disease. Higher than normal ALT levels are frequently associated with other clinical conditions such as obesity muscle disease heart failure hemochromatosis Wilson s disease 1 antitrypsin deficiency.

There is a need for improved ALT immunoassays that more accurately indicate and or diagnose tissue injury and or disease. There is a need for an ALT animal model for research and testing purposes. There is also a need for improved animal ALT immunoassays for use in for example drug testing and toxicology studies.

As discussed above alanine aminotransferase ALT is a widely used index of liver integrity or hepatocellular damage in clinics as well as a key enzyme in intermediatary metabolism. Complementary DNAs of murine homologues of human alanine aminotransferase 1 and 2 mALT1 and mALT2 and of rat homologues of human alanine aminotransferase 1 and 2 rALT1 and rALT2 have been cloned.

The polypeptides of murine ALT1 mALT1 and ALT2 mALT2 of this invention share 87 and 93 identity respectively with their human counterparts at the amino acid level. The murine ALT genes of the two murine ALT isoenzymes localize to separate chromosomes with the murine ALT1 gene gpt1 on chromosome 15 and the murine ALT2 gene gpt2 on chromosome 8. The murine gpt1 and gpt2 also differ in messenger RNA expression. The murine gpt1 is mainly expressed in liver bowel and white adipose tissue WAT and the murine gpt2 is highly expressed in muscle liver and white adipose tissue. Expression of recombinant murine ALT1 and murine ALT2 proteins in produced functional enzymes that catalyze alanine transamination.

Rat ALT1 polypeptide consists of 496 amino acids and shares 97 and 88 identity to murine and human ALT1 respectively at the amino acid level. Rat ALT2 polypeptide is composed of 522 amino acids and share 98 and 95 identity to murine and human ALT2 respectively at the amino acid level. Rat ALT1 and rat ALT2 polypeptides have 68 sequence identity and 77 similarity. The genes of rat ALT1 and ALT2 reside on the chromosome 7 and 19 respectively. A sequence alignment of murine ALT1 and ALT2 human ALT1 and ALT2 and rat ALT1 and ALT2 is provided in .

The diagnostic value of murine ALT isoenzymes in liver disease was determined by an obese animal model. In fatty livers of obese mice murine ALT2 gene expression is induced 2 fold but murine ALT1 remains the same. Furthermore in fatty liver total hepatic murine ALT activity is elevated significantly by 30 whereas aspartate aminotransferase AST activity remains unchanged. Thus murine ALT2 is responsible for the increased ALT activity in hepatic steatosis and allows for a murine ALT isoenzyme specific assay having more diagnostic value than total ALT activity assays currently in clinical use. As many pharmaceutical companies do preclinical toxicology experiments in mice by measuring ALT as an indicator of liver toxicity the murine isoenzyme specific assays of this invention provide improved assays for assessing preclinical toxicity of new medications.

Another embodiment of the present invention is directed to antibodies particularly anti ALT1 antibodies and anti ALT2 antibodies. In a specific embodiment the antibody specifically binds to murine ALT1. In another specific embodiment the antibody specifically binds to murine ALT2. In yet another specific embodiment the antibody specifically binds to rat ALT1. In still yet another specific embodiment the antibody specifically binds to rat ALT2.

It is an object of this invention to have a murine ALT polypeptide which has the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 1 murine ALT1 or an amino acid having about 95 homology thereto. In certain specific embodiments the amino acid having about 95 homology to SEQ ID NO 1 is SEQ ID NO 6.

It is another object of this invention to have a murine ALT polypeptide which has an amino acid of SEQ ID NO 2 murine ALT2 or an amino acid having about 95 homology thereto. In certain specific embodiments the amino acid having about 95 homology to SEQ ID NO 2 is SEQ ID NO 5.

It is another object of this invention to have a polynucleotide which encodes for each of the murine ALT isoenzymes. It is a further object of this invention that the polynucleotide encodes the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 1 and or SEQ ID NO 2 or an amino acid sequence having about 95 homology to SEQ ID NO 1 and or SEQ ID NO 2.

It is also further object of this invention that the polynucleotide sequence be the sequence of SEQ ID NO 3 or SEQ ID NO 4. In one embodiment in which the polynucleotide sequence is the polynucleotide sequence encoding for the homolog of SEQ ID NO 1 or SEQ ID NO 2 the polynucleotide sequences are SEQ ID NO 7 rat ALT1 or SEQ ID NO 8 rat ALT2 .

It is another object of this invention to have a polynucleotide which encodes for each of the rat ALT isoenzymes. It is a further object of this invention that the polynucleotide encodes the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 5 and or SEQ ID NO 6 or an amino acid sequence having about 95 homology to SEQ ID NO 5 and or SEQ ID NO 6. It is a further object of this invention that the polynucleotide sequence be the sequence of SEQ ID NO 7 or SEQ ID NO 8.

It is another object of this invention to have an antibody which binds specifically to one of the isoenzymes of ALT and not the other isoenzyme. For example an antibody of one embodiment of this invention is specific for murine ALT2 and does not bind to murine ALT1. In an alternative embodiment an antibody of the present invention is specific for rat ALT2 polypeptide and not rat ALT1 polypeptide. In embodiments where a mouse animal model is employed the antibody of the present invention binds to the murine ALT2 sequence of SEQ ID NO 2 or an ALT2 specific fragment thereof or a homolog of SEQ ID NO 2 or alternatively to the protein encoded by the DNA sequence of SEQ ID NO 4 or a murine ALT2 specific fragment thereof.

In an alternative embodiment such as for use in a rat animal model an antibody of the present invention specifically binds a rat ALT2 amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 5 or a fragment or homolog thereof. In another embodiment the antibody of the present invention specifically binds a rat ALT1 amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 6 or a fragment or homolog thereof.

It is an object of this invention to have an expression vector for each of the ALT isoenzymes. The expression vector can be a plasmid cosmid or other type of vector where the DNA sequence encoding for the ALT is operatively linked to expression sequences such as a promoter. The DNA sequence for murine ALT can be the sequence of SEQ ID NO 3 and or SEQ ID NO 4 or can be a sequence which encodes for the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 1 and or SEQ ID NO 2 or a homolog of SEQ ID NO 1 and or SEQ ID NO 2. The DNA sequence for rat ALT can be the sequence of SEQ ID NO 7 rALT1 and or SEQ ID NO 8 rALT2 or can be a sequence which encodes for the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 5 and or SEQ ID NO 6 or a homolog of SEQ ID NO 5 and or SEQ ID NO 6.

It is an object of this invention to have a method for detecting the presence of ALT1 mRNA and or ALT2 mRNA in a sample. It is a further object of this invention that the sample can be tissue or bodily fluids from a mouse and or rat. It is a further object of this invention that a polynucleotide probe be used to detect the presence of the ALT1 mRNA and or the ALT2 mRNA in a sample.

It is an object of this invention to have a method to detect the presence of ALT1 protein and or ALT2 protein in a sample. It is a further object of this invention that the sample can be tissue or bodily fluids from a mouse and or a rat. It is another object of this invention that one uses antibodies monoclonal or polyclonal that bind specifically to ALT1 or that bind specifically to ALT2 to detect the respective protein. It is another object of this invention that the bodily fluids can be blood serum lymph urine sweat mucus sputum saliva semen spinal fluid interstitial fluid synovial fluid cerebrospinal fluid gingival fluid vaginal fluid and pleural fluid. It is also an object of this invention that the tissue can be liver brain muscle adipose tissue and kidney.

It is another object of this invention to have a method for diagnosing or detecting injury or disease involving tissue which contains ALT2. It is a further object of this invention that the method involves using antibodies polyclonal or monoclonal that specifically bind to a ALT2 polypeptide of the present invention to measure the level of ALT2 in bodily fluids from the animal. It is another object of this invention to use antibodies polyclonal or monoclonal that specifically bind to ALT1 to measure the level of ALT1 in bodily fluids from the animal and then to compare the level of ALT2 to ALT1. When the level of ALT2 is sufficiently higher than the level of ALT1 or the level of ALT2 falls within a pre determined range then the animal is diagnosed with a specific disease or injury. It is another object of this invention that the bodily fluids can be blood serum lymph urine sweat mucus sputum saliva semen spinal fluid interstitial fluid synovial fluid cerebrospinal fluid gingival fluid vaginal fluid and pleural fluid. Furthermore the tissue can be liver brain muscle adipose tissue white adipose tissue WAT or brown adipose tissue BAT and kidney.

It is an object of this invention to have a kit useful in diagnosing damage or disease in tissue containing ALT. This kit has a measurer of ALT either ALT1 or ALT2 levels in a sample of bodily fluids and an indicator for determining if amount of ALT measured by the ALT measurer falls in a range associated with damage or a specific disease in the ALT containing tissue. It is further object of this invention that the kit may also contain a measurer for both ALT1 and ALT2 levels in a sample of bodily fluids and an indicator for determining if amount of each of ALT1 and ALT2 measured by the measurer s falls in a range associated with damage or a specific disease in the ALT containing tissue. The ALT1 measurer and the ALT2 measurer can be a biologic assay an antibody based assay an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay a Western blot a rapid immunoassay a radioimmunoassay and combinations thereof.

It is another object of this invention to have a diagnostic kit useful for diagnosing damage or disease to ALT1 containing tissue and or ALT2 containing tissue. This diagnostic kit can contain ALT1 specific antibodies polyclonal or monoclonal immunoassay reagents and a positive and negative control. This kit can also have ALT2 specific antibodies polyclonal or monoclonal . This kit includes a means for determining if a measurement of ALT1 and or ALT2 indicates a diagnosis of damage or disease in ALT1 containing tissue and or ALT2 containing tissue. The kit can also have instructions indicating when a level of ALT1 and or ALT2 is indicative for diagnosis of damage or disease in tissue containing ALT1 or ALT2.

It is still another object of this invention to have a kit useful in determining when there are altered levels of ALT2 in bodily fluids altered can be higher than normal or lower than normal . This kit can have a measurer of ALT2 levels in a bodily fluids sample and an indicator for determining if the ALT2 level measured falls in a range associated with a specific condition. It is a further object of this invention that the kit can determine when there are altered levels of ALT1 in bodily fluids altered can be higher than normal or lower than normal . This kit can also have a measurer of ALT1 levels in a bodily fluids sample and another indicator for determining if the ALT1 level measured falls in a range associated with a specific condition. Furthermore this kit can have a third indicator for comparing the values of ALT1 and ALT2 and determining if the levels of ALT1 and ALT2 fall in a range associated with a specific condition. The measurer of this kit can be selected from one or more of the following a biologic assay an antibody based assay an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay a Western blot a rapid immunoassay a radioimmunoassay and combinations thereof.

It is an object of this invention to have a method for producing a ALT polypeptide of the present invention. The ALT produced can be the same as the amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NO 1 or SEQ ID NO 2 or SEQ ID NO 5 or SEQ ID NO 6 or a homolog fragment or variant thereof. This method involves cloning the DNA encoding for ALT in an expression vector introducing the expression vector into a host cell to produce a recombinant host cell and subjecting to the recombinant host cell to conditions such that ALT is expressed. It is a further object of this invention that the ALT expressed can be isolated and purified. The DNA sequence placed in the plasmid can be the nucleic acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 3 or SEQ ID NO 4 or SEQ ID NO 7 or SEQ ID NO 8 or a nucleic acid sequence which encodes for a variant homolog or fragment of murine ALT1 or murine ALT2. Alternatively the DNA sequence inserted into the plasmid may be a nucleic acid sequence which hybridizes such as for example under conditions of high stringency to a nucleic acid encoding a polypeptide of SEQ ID NO 1 or SEQ ID NO 2 or SEQ ID NO 5 or SEQ ID NO 6. In a specific embodiment the high stringency conditions include 0.1 SSC with 0.1 SDS wash buffer at hybridization temperature such as for example at about 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 or 68 degrees C.

It is another object of this invention to have a method for diagnosing a condition associated by altered levels of ALT2 and or ALT1 in bodily fluids in an animal particularly a mouse and or a rat. This method involves contacting a sample of bodily fluids with at least one antibody which specifically binds to an ALT2 of the present invention detecting the ALT2 antibody which is bound to ALT2 and comparing the amount of detected ALT2 antibody to a known quantity for an animal without the condition. In this method when the quantity of detected ALT2 antibody differs sufficiently from the known quantity from an animal without the condition then it indicates that the animal has the condition. In addition the method also can involve contacting the sample of bodily fluids with at least one antibody which specifically binds to ALT1 detecting the ALT1 antibody which is bound to ALT1 and comparing said amount of detected ALT 1 antibody to a known quantity for an animal without the condition. In this method when the quantity of detected ALT1 antibody differs sufficiently from the known quantity from an animal without the condition then it indicates that the animal has the condition. Furthermore this method can also involve comparing the amount of ALT2 antibody detected to the total amount of antibody detected and or to the amount of ALT1 antibody detect and or the amount of ALT1 antibody detected to the total amount of antibody detected and or to the amount of ALT2 antibody detected. Again the condition is indicated if the amount of ALT2 antibody detected when compared to the amount of ALT 1 antibody detected or the total amount of antibody detected falls within a certain range.

Again the condition is indicated if the amount of ALT1 antibody detected when compared to the amount of ALT2 antibody detected or the total amount of antibody detected falls within a certain range. It is a further object of this invention that the bodily fluids for this method can be selected from the following group blood serum lymph urine sweat mucus sputum saliva semen spinal fluid interstitial fluid synovial fluid cerebrospinal fluid gingival fluid vaginal fluid and pleural fluid.

One embodiment of the invention is an isolated and purified murine ALT polypeptide comprising the amino acid sequence selected from a group including SEQ ID NO 1 and SEQ ID NO 2. Another embodiment of the invention is an isolated and purified polynucleotide encoding for the murine ALT polypeptide. The isolated and purified polynucleotide of one embodiment comprises a polynucleotide sequence selected from a group including SEQ ID NO 3 and SEQ ID NO 4. The invention also includes an isolated and purified antibody which binds specifically to the murine ALT polypeptides of the present invention. The invention further includes an expression vector for murine ALT comprising the murine ALT polynucleotide sequence operatively linked to an expression sequence.

Another embodiment of the invention is an isolated and purified rat ALT polypeptide comprising the amino acid sequence selected from a group including SEQ ID NO 5 and SEQ ID NO 6. Another embodiment of the invention is an isolated and purified polynucleotide encoding for the rat ALT polypeptide. The isolated and purified polynucleotide of one embodiment comprises a polynucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO 7 or SEQ ID NO 8. The invention also includes an isolated and purified antibody which binds specifically to the rat ALT polypeptides of the present invention. The invention further includes an expression vector for rat ALT comprising the rat ALT polynucleotide sequence operatively linked to an expression sequence.

Another embodiment of the invention is a method of detecting in a sample the presence of mRNA wherein the mRNA encodes for an ALT polypeptide of the present invention. The method comprises contacting the sample with a polynucleotide probe wherein the polynucleotide probe is sufficient to specifically detect under stringent hybridization conditions the presence of the mRNA and detecting the formation of a hybrid of the polynucleotide probe and the mRNA.

Another embodiment of the invention is a method of detecting an ALT polypeptide of the present invention in a sample wherein the sample comprises a bodily fluid the method comprising contacting a sample of the bodily fluids with at least one antibody that specifically binds to the ALT polypeptide and detecting the antibody which is bound to the ALT polypeptide in the sample.

Yet another embodiment of the invention is a method of diagnosing or detecting injury or disease involving tissue which contains an ALT polypeptide of the present invention in an animal suspected of having the injury or disease. The method comprises contacting a sample of bodily fluids from the animal with at least one first antibody wherein the first antibody specifically binds to an ALT1 polypeptide detecting the first antibody which is bound to the ALT1 polypeptide in the sample contacting the sample of bodily fluids with at least one second antibody wherein the second antibody specifically binds to an ALT2 polypeptide detecting the second antibody which is bound to the ALT2 polypeptide in the sample and comparing the amount of the ALT1 polypeptide bound to the first antibody and the amount of the ALT2 polypeptide bound to the second antibody wherein when the amount of the bound ALT2 polypeptide is sufficiently higher than the amount of the bound ALT1 polypeptide it indicates that the animal has a disease or injury affecting tissue containing ALT2. The sample of bodily fluids can comprise a fluid selected from a group comprising blood serum lymph urine sweat mucus sputum saliva semen spinal fluid interstitial fluid synovial fluid cerebrospinal fluid gingival fluid vaginal fluid and pleural fluid. The tissue can be selected from a group comprising liver brain muscle adipose tissue and kidney.

Another embodiment of the invention is a method of diagnosing or detecting injury or disease involving tissue which contains an ALT polypeptide in an animal suspected of having the injury or disease. The method comprises contacting a sample of bodily fluids from the animal suspected of having the injury or disease with at least one first antibody wherein the first antibody specifically binds to an ALT polypeptide detecting the first antibody which is bound to the ALT polypeptide in the sample and comparing the amount of the ALT polypeptide in the sample of bodily fluids to an amount of ALT in the bodily fluids of an animal known not to have injury or disease involving tissue which contains ALT polypeptide wherein when the amount of ALT in the bodily fluids of the sample is higher than the amount of ALT polypeptide in the bodily fluids of the animal known not to have injury or disease it indicates that the animal suspected has a disease or injury affecting tissue containing ALT. The sample of bodily fluids can comprise a fluid selected from a group including blood serum lymph urine sweat mucus sputum saliva semen spinal fluid interstitial fluid synovial fluid cerebrospinal fluid gingival fluid vaginal fluid and pleural fluid. The tissue can be selected from a group comprising liver brain muscle adipose tissue and kidney.

A further embodiment of the invention is a diagnostic kit for use in diagnosing damage or disease in tissue containing an ALT polypeptide of the present invention. The kit comprises a measurer for determining a measurement of an ALT polypeptide in a sample of bodily fluids and an indicator for determining if the measurement falls in a range associated with damage or disease in the tissue containing the ALT of the present invention. In one embodiment the ALT polypeptide is murine ALT2 of SEQ ID NO 2 or an amino acid sequence having about 95 homology thereto. In certain embodiments the homolog is an amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO 5. In another embodiment the ALT polypeptide is rat ALT2 of SEQ ID NO 5 or an amino acid sequence having about 95 homology thereto. The measurer can be selected from a group comprising a biologic assay an antibody based assay an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay a Western blot a rapid immunoassay a radioimmunoassay and combinations thereof.

Another embodiment of the invention is a diagnostic kit for use in diagnosing damage or disease in tissue containing an ALT polypeptide of the present invention. The kit comprises an aliquot of antibodies that bind specifically to an ALT polypeptide of the present invention immunoassay reagents and a control for determining if a measurement of an ALT polypeptide of the present invention indicates a diagnosis of damage or disease in tissue containing an ALT polypeptide of the present invention. The control comprises instructions indicating that an increase or decrease in the amount of the ALT polypeptide indicates a diagnosis for damage or disease in tissue containing the ALT polypeptide. In a further embodiment the kit further comprises an aliquot of antibodies that bind specifically to ALT2 polypeptides of the present invention and a control for determining if a measurement of said ALT2 polypeptide indicates a diagnosis of damage or disease in tissue containing said ALT2 polypeptide. The control comprises instructions indicating that an increase or decrease in the amount of ALT2 indicates a diagnosis for damage or disease in tissue containing the ALT polypeptide.

Another embodiment of the invention is a diagnostic kit for use in a condition associated with altered levels of an ALT polypeptide 1 in bodily fluids. The kit comprises a measurer for determining a measurement of an ALT 1 polypeptide in a sample of bodily fluids and an indicator for determining if the measurement falls in a range associated with the condition.

Another embodiment of the invention is a diagnostic kit for use in a condition associated with altered levels of an ALT 2 in bodily fluids. The kit comprises a measurer for determining a measurement of an ALT 2 polypeptide in a sample of bodily fluids and an indicator for determining if the measurement falls in a range associated with the condition.

Another embodiment of the invention is a diagnostic kit for use in a condition associated with altered levels of at least one of an ALT 1 and an ALT2 in bodily fluids. The kit comprises a measurer for determining a first measurement of an ALT 1 polypeptide in a sample of bodily fluids a measurer for determining a second measurement of ALT2 polypeptide in the sample of bodily fluids and an indicator for determining if the first and second measurements fall in a range associated with the condition.

Still another embodiment of the invention is method of diagnosing a condition associated by altered levels of an ALT 1 in bodily fluids in an animal suspected of having the condition. The method comprises contacting a sample of bodily fluids from the animal with at least one antibody wherein the antibody specifically binds to an ALT 1 polypeptide detecting the antibody which is bound to the ALT 1 polypeptide in the sample and comparing the amount of the detected antibody to a known quantity for an animal without the condition wherein if the quantity of the detected antibody differs sufficiently from the known quantity from an animal without the condition indicates that the animal has the condition.

Another embodiment of the invention is a method of diagnosing a condition associated by altered levels of an ALT 2 in bodily fluids in an animal suspected of having the condition. The method comprises contacting a sample of bodily fluids from the animal with at least one antibody wherein the antibody specifically binds to an ALT 2 polypeptide detecting the antibody which is bound to the ALT 2 polypeptide in the sample and comparing the amount of the detected antibody to a known quantity for an animal without the condition wherein if the quantity of the detected antibody differs sufficiently from the known quantity from an animal without the condition indicates that the animal has the condition.

The sample of bodily fluids for the above methods and or kits can comprise a fluid selected from a group comprising of blood serum lymph urine sweat mucus sputum saliva semen spinal fluid interstitial fluid synovial fluid cerebrospinal fluid gingival fluid vaginal fluid and pleural fluid.

The measurer for above methods and or kits can be selected from the group comprising a biologic assay an antibody based assay an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay a Western blot a rapid immunoassay a radioimmunoassay and combinations thereof.

Another embodiment of the invention is a method of producing an ALT polypeptide. The method comprises providing an ALT polynucleotide sequence in an expression vector introducing the expression vector into a host cell such that a recombinant host cell is produced and subjecting to the recombinant host cell to conditions such that the ALT polypeptide is expressed. In one embodiment the ALT polynucleotide sequence is selected from a group including SEQ ID NO 3 and SEQ ID NO 4. In another embodiment the ALT polynucleotide sequence is selected from a group including SEQ ID NO 7 and SEQ ID NO 8.

Within the context of this specification each term or phrase below will include the following meaning or meanings.

The terms murine ALT polypeptide murine ALT protein murine ALT and mALT are interchangeable and generally refer to or include any and or all murine ALT polypeptides or isoenzymes including murine ALT1 murine ALT2 and any variant homolog or fragment of murine ALT1 or murine ALT2.

The terms rat ALT polypeptide rat ALT protein rat ALT and rALT are interchangeable and generally refer to or include any and or all rat ALT polypeptides or isoenzymes including rat ALT1 rat ALT2 and any variant homolog or fragment of rat ALT1 or rat ALT2.

The terms protein and polypeptide are used interchangeably in both singular and plural forms as are the terms nucleic acid and polynucleotide. 

These and additional terms may be defined with additional language in the remaining portions of the specification.

The present invention covers the nucleotide and amino acid sequences of murine ALT antibodies specific to murine ALT and the use of these polypeptides polynucleotides and antibodies to diagnose various diseases and conditions in tissue that produce murine ALT such as fatty liver and to differentially diagnose liver injury caused by fatty liver liver steatosis and by alcohol trauma infection toxicity and other causes of liver damage.

This invention also includes homologs and functional fragments of murine ALT polypeptides as well as expression vectors containing murine ALT polynucleotide sequences and recombinant host cells which contain an expression vector containing murine ALT polynucleotide sequences.

This invention also includes homologs and functional fragments of rat ALT polypeptides as well as expression vectors containing rat ALT polynucleotide sequences and recombinant host cells which contain an expression vector containing rat ALT polynucleotide sequences.

For this application homology is often measured using sequence analysis software e.g. Sequence Analysis Software Package of the Genetics Computer Group University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center 1710 University Avenue Madison Wis. 53705 or the NCBI BLAST program . Such software matches similar sequences by assigning degrees of homology to various substitutions deletions substitutions and other modifications.

The term functional fragments include those fragments of SEQ ID NO 1 and or SEQ ID NO 2 and or SEQ ID NO 5 and or SEQ ID NO 6 and or a polypeptide having about 95 sequence identity to that of the SEQ ID NO 1 and or SEQ ID NO 2 and or SEQ ID NO 5 and or SEQ ID NO 6 and that retains the function activity or immunobiological properties of said ALT polypeptide. One of skill in the art can screen for the functionality of a fragment by using the examples provided herein where full length ALT1 and ALT2 are described. By substantially identical is also meant an amino acid sequence which differs only by conservative amino acid substitutions for example substitution of one amino acid for another of the same class e.g. valine for glycine arginine for lysine etc. or by one or more non conservative substitutions deletions or insertions located at positions of the amino acid sequence which do not destroy the function of the protein assayed e.g. as described herein . Preferably such a sequence is at least 85 and more preferably from 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 to 100 homologous at the amino acid level to SEQ ID NO 1 or SEQ ID NO 2 or SEQ ID NO 5 or SEQ ID NO 6.

Modification and changes may be made in the structure of the peptides of the present invention and DNA segments which encode them and still obtain a functional molecule that encodes a protein or peptide with desirable characteristics. The following is a discussion based upon changing the amino acids of a protein to create an equivalent or even an improved second generation molecule. The amino acid changes may be achieved by changing the codons of the RNA sequence according to the following codon table 

For example certain amino acids may be substituted for other amino acids in a protein structure without appreciable loss of interactive binding capacity with structures such as for example antigen binding regions of antibodies or binding sites on substrate molecules. Since it is the interactive capacity and nature of a protein that defines that protein s biological functional activity certain amino acid sequence substitutions can be made in a protein sequence and of course its underlying DNA coding sequence and messenger RNA sequence and nevertheless obtain a protein with like properties. It is thus contemplated by the inventors that various changes may be made in the peptide sequences of the disclosed compositions or corresponding DNA or RNA sequences which encode said peptides without appreciable loss of their biological utility or activity.

In making such changes the hydropathic index of amino acids may be considered. The importance of the hydropathic amino acid index in conferring interactive biologic function on a protein is generally understood in the art Kyte and Doolittle 1982 incorporate herein by reference . It is accepted that the relative hydropathic character of the amino acid contributes to the secondary structure of the resultant protein which in turn defines the interaction of the protein with other molecules for example enzymes substrates receptors DNA antibodies antigens and the like.

Each amino acid has been assigned a hydropathic index on the basis of their hydrophobicity and charge characteristics Kyte and Doolittle 1982 these are isoleucine 4.5 valine 4.2 leucine 3.8 phenylalanine 2.8 cysteine cystine 2.5 methionine 1.9 alanine 1.8 glycine 0.4 threonine 0.7 serine 0.8 tryptophan 0.9 tyrosine 1.3 proline 1.6 histidine 3.2 glutamate 3.5 glutamine 3.5 aspartate 3.5 asparagine 3.5 lysine 3.9 and arginine 4.5 .

It is known in the art that certain amino acids may be substituted by other amino acids having a similar hydropathic index or score and still result in a protein with similar biological activity i.e. still obtain a biological functionally equivalent protein. In making such changes the substitution of amino acids whose hydropathic indices are within . .2 is preferred those which are within . .1 are particularly preferred and those within . 0.05 are even more particularly preferred.

It is also understood in the art that the substitution of like amino acids can be made effectively on the basis of hydrophilicity. U.S. Pat. No. 4 554 101 incorporated herein by reference states that the greatest local average hydrophilicity of a protein as governed by the hydrophilicity of its adjacent amino acids correlates with a biological property of the protein. As detailed in U.S. Pat. No. 4 554 101 the following hydrophilicity values have been assigned to amino acid residues arginine 3.0 lysine 3.0 aspartate 3.0. .1 glutamate 3.0. .1 serine 0.3 asparagine 0.2 glutamine 0.2 glycine 0 threonine 0.4 proline 0.5. .1 alanine 0.5 histidine 0.5 cysteine 1.0 methionine 1.3 valine 1.5 leucine 1.8 isoleucine 1.8 tyrosine 2.3 phenylalanine 2.5 tryptophan 3.4 .

It is understood that an amino acid can be substituted for another having a similar hydrophilicity value and still obtain a biologically equivalent and in particular an immunologically equivalent protein. In such changes the substitution of amino acids whose hydrophilicity values are within . .2 is preferred those which are within . .1 are particularly preferred and those within . .0.5 are even more particularly preferred.

As outlined above amino acid substitutions are generally therefore based on the relative similarity of the amino acid side chain substituents for example their hydrophobicity hydrophilicity charge size and the like. Exemplary substitutions which take various of the foregoing characteristics into consideration are well known to those of skill in the art and include arginine and lysine glutamate and aspartate serine and threonine glutamine and asparagine and valine leucine and isoleucine.

It will also be understood that amino acid sequences may include additional residues such as additional N or C terminal amino acids and yet still be essentially as set forth in one of the sequences disclosed herein so long as the sequence meets the criteria set forth above including the maintenance of biological protein activity where protein expression is concerned. The addition of terminal sequences particularly applies to sequences which may for example include various unnaturally occurring amino acid sequences flanking either of the N or C termini to allow for facile covalent linkage to another molecule i.e. a reporter molecule.

In non limiting examples the homolog may include a substitution in SEQ ID NO 1 of C56R F109L D126N R133K I152V P158L Q165R A200S R204H A05T A222T D227G R249H C253G R258H V263A E291K G293R M297L A328S V339T E352A M387L T393A S395T K400A R406K E408A R421S Q434R L439P K440R Q443E D447E C459R Q477R M491L V496L R502S H503R H510L or a combination thereof.

In a non limiting example the homolog may include a substitution in SEQ ID NO 6 of C56R F109L D126N R133K I152V P158L Q165R S200A R204H A205T A222T D227G R249H C253G R258H V263A K291E G293R M297L S328A V339T E352A M387L T393A S395T K400A R406K E408A R421S Q434R L439P K440R Q443E E447D C459R Q477R M491L L496V S502R H503R H510L or a combination thereof.

In a non limiting example the homolog may include a substitution in SEQ ID NO 5 of H24Q D45E M77L H99Q N123D L1961 1228V D245N L251V R252Q Q253E Q321E P326H V392E S407F Q430H L445F S456A K458Q E501D H508Q L515I K516N K520Q S522A or a combination thereof.

In a non limiting example the homolog may include a substitution in SEQ ID NO 2 of H24Q D45E M77L H99Q N123D L196I V2281 D245N L251V R252Q Q253E Q321E H326P E392V F407S Q430H L445F S456A K458Q D501E H508Q L515I K516N Q520K S522A or a combination thereof.

By a substantially pure polypeptide is meant a ALT polypeptide that has been separated from components that naturally accompany it. Typically the polypeptide is substantially pure when it is at least 60 by weight free from the proteins and other naturally occurring molecules with which it is typically associated. Preferably the preparation is at least 75 80 90 95 and most preferably at least 99 by weight an ALT polypeptide. A substantially pure ALT polypeptide can be obtained for example by extraction from a natural source by expression of a recombinant nucleic acid encoding the desired ALT polypeptide or by chemically synthesizing the protein. Purity can be measured by any appropriate method e.g. column chromatography polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis or by HPLC analysis.

A protein is substantially free of naturally associated components when it is separated from those contaminants that accompany it in its natural state. Thus a protein that is chemically synthesized or produced in a cellular system different from the cell from which it naturally originates is substantially free from its naturally associated components. Accordingly substantially pure polypeptides include those derived from eukaryotic organisms but synthesized in or other prokaryotes. As will be appreciated by one skilled in the art following the teachings herein provided the polynucleotide molecules of the present disclosure can be expressed in a variety of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells using regulatory sequences vectors and methods well established in the literature.

An ALT polypeptide produced according to the present description can be purified using a number of established methods such as affinity chromatography using anti mALT antibodies coupled to a solid support. Fusion proteins of an antigenic tag and an ALT polypeptide can be purified using antibodies to the tag. Optionally additional purification is achieved using conventional purification means such as liquid chromatography gradient centrifugation and gel electrophoresis among others. Methods of protein purification are known in the art and can be applied to the purification of recombinant ALT polypeptide described herein.

Construction of ALT encoded fusion proteins is also contemplated. Fusion proteins typically contain additions substitutions or replacements of one or more contiguous amino acids of the native ALT polypeptide with amino acid s from a suitable fusion protein partner. Such fusion proteins are obtained using recombinant DNA techniques generally well known by one of skill in the art. Briefly DNA molecules encoding the hybrid ALT protein of interest are prepared using generally available methods such as PCR mutagenesis site directed mutagenesis and or restriction digestion and ligation. The hybrid DNA is then inserted into expression vectors and introduced into suitable host cells.

Recombinant gene expression vectors comprising a nucleic acid encoding an ALT protein of interest or portions thereof can be constructed in a variety of forms well known in the art. Preferred expression vectors include plasmids and cosmids. Expression vectors include one or more fragments of murine ALT. In one embodiment of this invention an expression vector comprises a nucleic acid encoding an ALT polynucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO 1 or SEQ ID NO 2 or SEQ ID NO 5 or SEQ ID NO 6. As used herein the phrase operatively encode refers to one or more protein coding regions associated with those regulatory sequences required for expression of the polypeptide encoded by the coding region. Examples of such regulatory regions including promoter binding sites enhancer elements ribosome binding sites and the like. Those of ordinary skill in the art following the teachings herein provided will be able to select regulatory sequences and incorporate them into the recombinant expression vectors described herein without undue experimentation. For example suitable regulatory sequences for use in various eukaryotic and prokaryotic systems are described in Ausubel et al. 3rd ed. John Wiley Sons Inc New York 1997 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

Expression vectors for use with ALT typically contain regulatory sequences derived from a compatible species for expression in the desired host cell. For example when is the host cell the host cell population can be typically transformed using pBR322 a plasmid derived from an species. Bolivar et al. Gene 2 95 1977 . pBR322 contains genes for ampicillin AMPR and tetracycline resistance and thus provides easy means for identifying transformed cells.

Promoters suitable for use with prokaryotic hosts illustratively include the betalactamase and lactose promoter systems Chang et al. Nature 275 615 1978 and Goeddel et al. Nature 281 544 1979 alkaline phosphatase the tryptophan trp promoter system Goeddel Nucleic Acids Res. 8 4057 1980 and hybrid promoters such as the taq promoter de Boer et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80 21 25 1983 . Other functional bacterial promoters are also suitable. Their nucleotide sequences are generally known in the art thereby enabling a skilled worker to ligate them to a polynucleotide which encodes the peptide of interest Siebenlist et al. Cell 20 269 1980 using linkers or adapters to supply any required restriction sites.

In addition to prokaryotes eukaryotic microbes such as yeast cultures can also be used as source for the regulatory sequences. is a commonly used eukaryotic host microorganism. Suitable promoting sequences for use with yeast hosts include the promoters for 3 phosphoglycerate kinase Hitzeman et al. J. Biol. Chem. 255 2073 1980 or other glycolytic enzymes Hess et al. J. Adv. Enzyme Reg. 7 149 1968 and Holland Biochemistry 17 4900 1978 such as enolase glyceraldehyde 3 phosphate dehydrogenase hexokinase pyruvate decarboxylase phosphofructokinase glucose 6phosphate isomerase 3 phosphoglycerate mutase pyruvate kinase triosephosphate isomerase phosphoglucose isomerase and glucokinase.

Other yeast promoters which are inducible promoters having the additional advantage of transcription controlled by growth conditions are the promoter regions for alcohol dehydrogenase 2 isocytochrome C acid phosphatase degraded enzymes associated with nitrogen metabolism metallothionine glyceraldehyde 3 phosphate dehydrogenase and enzymes responsible for maltose and galactose utilization. Yeast enhancers also are advantageously used with yeast promoters.

In another embodiment a recombinant virus is used as the expression vector. Exemplary viruses include the adenoviruses adeno associated viruses herpes viruses vaccinia or an RNA virus such as a retrovirus or an alphavirus. Preferably the retroviral vector is a derivative of a murine or avian retrovirus. Preferably the alphavirus vector is derived from Sindbis or Semliki Forest Virus. All of these vectors can transfer or incorporate a gene for a selectable marker so that transduced cells can be identified and generated.

By inserting one or more sequences of interest into the viral vector along with another gene which encodes the ligand for a receptor on a specific target cell for example the vector is now target specific. Retroviral vectors can be made target specific by inserting for example a polynucleotide encoding a sugar a glycolipid or a protein. Preferred targeting is accomplished by using an antibody to target the retroviral vector such as to the vicinity of a mucosal inductor site using for example a mALT specific antibody. Those of skill in the art know of or can readily ascertain without undue experimentation specific polynucleotide sequences which can be inserted into the retroviral genome to allow target specific delivery of the retroviral vector containing the polynucleotides of interest.

Construction of suitable vectors containing desired coding non coding and control sequences employ standard ligation techniques. Isolated plasmids or DNA fragments are cleaved tailored and re ligated in the form desired to construct the plasmids required.

For example for analysis to confirm correct sequences in plasmids constructed the ligation mixtures can be used to transform a host cell and successful transformants selected by antibiotic resistance where appropriate. Plasmids from the transformants are prepared analyzed by restriction and or sequenced by for example the method of Messing et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 9 309 1981 the method of Maxam et al. Methods in Enzymology 65 499 1980 or other suitable methods which are known to those skilled in the art. Size separation of cleaved fragments is performed using conventional gel electrophoresis as described for example by Maniatis et al. Molecular Cloning pp. 133 134 1982 .

Host cells can be transformed with the expression vectors described herein and cultured in conventional nutrient media modified as is appropriate for inducing promoters selecting transformants or amplifying genes. The culture conditions such as temperature pH and the like are those previously used with the host cell selected for expression and will be apparent to the ordinarily skilled artisan following the teachings herein provided.

In cloning murine ALT1 and murine ALT2 peptide sequences of human ALT1 and ALT2 were used as probes to search the mouse murine expressed sequence tag EST database using tBLASTn. A search of the mouse EST database using human ALT1 and human ALT2 peptide sequences as probes yielded several highly homologous EST clones. Of them IMAGE clones 4195300 and 5065322 were fully sequenced and revealed the highest homology to human ALT1 and ALT2 respectively in the entire protein coding region. The DNA nucleotide sequences of these two clones were confirmed by sequencing analysis and are predicted to encode proteins of 496 clone 4195300 and 522 clone 5065322 amino acids. As shown in comparison of the mouse and human peptide sequences revealed that IMAGE clone 4195300 shares about 87 identity and about 89 similarity to human ALT1 but about 70 identity and about 72 similarity to human ALT2 whereas clone 5065322 shares about 93 identity and about 95 similarity with human ALT2 but about 69 identity to human ALT1. The cDNA clone 4195300 and the clone 5065322 were thus determined to be murine ALT1 and murine ALT2 respectively. Sixty seven percent of amino acids are identical in murine ALT1 and murine ALT2 a similar degree of conservation about 68 is found between human ALT1 and ALT2.

Cloning of rat ALT1 and ALT2 was achieved through bioinformatics by interrogating the closest homolog in GenBank with murine and human ALT1 and ALT2 protein sequences. The rat IMAGE clone 7113147 encodes a protein that shares 95 and 98 identity to human and murine ALT2 respectively but 68 and 67 identity to human and murine ALT1 respectively. Thus the cDNA clone 7113147 was determined as rat ALT2. Rat ALT1 cDNA was cloned from rat liver first strand cDNA by PCR amplification with high fidelity DNA polymerase using primers based rat expressed sequence tags ESTs which shares highest identity to murine and human ALT1 sequences. The resultant PCR fragment was cloned into TOPO cloning vector Invitrogen and sequenced in full. The translated protein sequence shares high identities of 88 and 97 to human and murine ALT1 respectively but low identities of 70 and 68 to human and murine ALT2 respectively. Thus this clone was determined as rat ALT1.

The gene expression of murine ALT1 and murine ALT2 was examined in mouse tissues by Northern analysis. Male obese mice ob ob littermate control and C57BL 6J 6 to 8 weeks old were obtained from Jackson Laboratory and euthanized with COaccording to protocol approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Tissues were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen until use for RNA extraction or enzyme activity assay. Total RNA was prepared with Trizol available from Life Technologies Inc. Gaithersburg Md. from the snap frozen tissues. For the tissue distribution study pooled 15 g of total RNA from 3 to 4 mice were electrophoresed on a 1.2 agarose gel and blotted to a Nitro plus membrane available from Schleicher Schuell Dassel Germany. The DNA probes of murine ALT1 1.4 kb and murine ALT2 2.4 kb were derived from restriction enzyme digestion of IMAGE clone 4195300 Sal I Not I and clone 5065322 Sal I Not I respectively. Probes were random labeled with P dCTP hybridization was carried out at 65 C. in Rapid hyb buffer available from Amersham Biosciences Piscataway N.J. and blots were washed twice with 0.5 SSC 1 SDS at 65 C. stringent wash and visualized by PhosphorImager available from Amersham Biosciences or x ray film.

As shown in the 3.3 kb murine ALT2 messenger RNA mRNA was expressed at high levels in muscle liver and white adipose tissue WAT at moderate levels in brain and kidney and at a low level in heart. By contrast the 1.8 kb murine ALT1 mRNA was highly expressed in liver and considerably in WAT intestine and colon tissue. As shown in particular tissues selectively express one ALT isoenzyme over the other. For instance murine ALT2 was significantly expressed and murine ALT1 barely expressed in muscle and brain tissue. In contrast bowel tissue generally expressed only murine ALT1 and not murine ALT2.

To determine the chromosomal localization of DNA encoding murine ALT1 and murine ALT2 gpt1 and gpt2 the corresponding cDNAs were searched against the mouse genome and localized gpt1 to murine chromosome 15D3 and gpt2 to chromosome 8C2. Both of these regions are syntenic to the chromosomal regions where human gpt1 chromosome 8q24.3 and gpt2 chromosome 16q12.2 reside. Full length cDNAs of mALT1 BC022625 and mALT2 BC34219 were searched against the mouse genome sequence database with BLASTn and their chromosomal localizations were determined by MapViewer.

The coding region of mALT1 cDNA was amplified by polymerase chain reaction PCR at 28 cycles at 94 C. for 30 seconds 56 C. for 30 seconds and 72 C. for 1.5 minutes with a final extension of 7 minutes at 72 C. using the Turbo Pfu PCR system Stratagene with an NdeI linked primer p1408 5 GGAAGATCTCATATGGCCTCACAAAGGAATGAC 3 nt

To express mALT1 and mALT2 proteins plasmid pET28 mALT1 pET28 mALT2 or empty vector pET28 were used to transform competent . Tuner DE3 available from Novagen . A fresh colony of the transformants was grown in 50 ml LB media containing 30 g ml kanamycin to an ODof 0.7 at which time isopropyl beta D thiogalactopyranoside IPTG was added 1 mmol final concentration to induce expression of the recombinant proteins. Cell pellets were harvested from 20 ml cultures before and after 4 hours of induction and were resuspended in 5 ml of TE buffer 10 mmol Tris HCl pH 7.4 0.1 mmol ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid followed by a brief sonication 3 10 seconds setting 3 using a Fisher 550 Sonic Dismembrator. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 10 000 g for 15 minutes at 4 C. and supernatants were analyzed immediately for enzyme activity and protein analysis.

Soluble fractions of cell lysates were assayed for ALT activity and subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis SDS PAGE analysis. As shown in under induction of IPTG significant ALT activity was observed in cell lysates from bacteria transformed with pET28 mALT1 2.62 units mg protein and pET28 mALT2 0.72 units mg protein compared to empty vector control 0.19 units mg protein . Accordingly as shown in protein bands at approximate molecular weights MW of 58 kd and 62 kd were clearly visible in bacterial cell pellets after IPTG induction corresponding to murine ALT1 calculated MW 55 kd and murine ALT2 calculated MW 58 kd . It should be noted that murine ALT activities detected in the above cell lysates do not reflect the specific activity of the murine ALT isoenzymes as most of the recombinant proteins were expressed in insoluble fraction of inclusion body and therefore the actual amount of ALT in the cell lysates was not known. Nevertheless these data confirm that murine ALT1 and ALT2 cDNAs encode functional murine ALT.

The ALT activity of the bacterially expressed recombinant murine ALT proteins was confirmed using a GPT Optimized Alanine Aminotransferase kit available from Sigma Diagnostics catalog no. DG159 K St. Louis Mo. according to manufacturer instructions. Briefly 0.5 ml of cell lysate was incubated with a 2.5 ml mixture of reagent A and B containing L alanine nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide Lactate Dehydrogenase and 2 oxoglutarate at 25 C. Absorbance at 340 nm was recorded at 1 2 and 3 minutes after incubation. The slope of absorbance decrease is proportional to ALT activity. Protein concentration of cell lysates were determined by Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 BioRad using bovine serum albumin as a standard. Final ALT activities were corrected by protein concentration of cell lysates. One unit of ALT activity was defined as the amount of enzyme that catalyzes the formation of 1 mol liter of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide per minute at 25 C.

To demonstrate hepatic ALT and aspartate aminotransferase AST activity a piece of snap frozen liver 50 60 mg was thawed on ice and then minced and homogenized in 19 volumes of TE buffer wt vol with Dounce homogenizer 40 times . The resulting homogenate was further sonicated 3 10 seconds setting 4 using a Fisher 550 Sonic Dismembrator followed by centrifugation at 10 000 rpm for 15 minutes at 4 C. The supernatant was assayed for hepatic ALT using an L type GPT J2 kit available from Wako Chemicals Osaka Japan according to the manufacturer s instructions. AST activity was measured with an AST GOT Liqui UV kit available from Stanbio Laboratories Boerne Tex. according to the manufacturer s instructions.

Murine ALT2 gene expression is specifically induced in fatty liver. The distinctive tissue distribution patterns of murine ALT1 and ALT2 mRNAs are likely due to a difference in their gene regulation. Gene expression differences were examined in fatty livers of obese mice ob ob . demonstrate the increased mALT2 gene expression in fatty liver. are duplicate blots containing 15 g of total RNA extracted from fatty liver of obese ob ob and lean mice blotted with P labeled mALT1 or mALT2 DNA probe. Hybridization signals were visualized and quantitated by PhosphorImager. In RNA loading from one of the duplicate gels is shown in lower blot. shows data expressed as mean SD n 3 . P

Thus the invention provides molecular cloning of animal homologues of human ALT1 and ALT2. ALT is an important intermediary enzyme involved in the metabolism of amino acids glucose and possibly fatty acids and is well known for its use as a surrogate marker for liver damage in clinical diagnostics. In addition to the dissimilarity of the peptide sequences of murine ALT1 and murine ALT2 the mouse genes reside on separate chromosomes and have distinct tissue distributions and possibly cellular localizations. The murine ALT isoenzymes behave discordantly in various clinical conditions. In other words under certain clinical conditions one isoenzyme may be elevated but not the other or vice versa. By virtue of this feature individual murine ALT isoenzymes can be better diagnostic markers than a total murine ALT activity. Similarly individual rat ALT isoenzymes can be better diagnostic markers than a total rat ALT activity.

ALT activities are present in many tissues including liver heart kidney muscle brain and adipose tissue in rodents. Northern blot data indicate one or both of the murine ALT genes are expressed in the tissues where ALT activity has been observed. Murine ALT1 is mainly expressed in liver and bowels whereas murine ALT2 is highly expressed in muscle liver fat and kidney a tissue pattern reminiscent of human ALT1 and ALT2 tissue distribution. The conservation among rat murine and human ALT isoenzymes in protein sequence gene localization and tissue distribution forms a basis for using the rat and or mouse as a model for exploring the diagnostic value of ALT isoenzymes.

ALT and AST activity levels have been used in clinic diagnostics for many years. Elevation of these two enzyme activities in serum are regarded as evidence of liver damage as in viral hepatitis NASH or drug hepatotoxicity. However the mechanism for the serum ALT increase has not been well understood and has been thought to be caused by leakage of the cellular enzyme into the systemic circulation. Moreover which ALT isoenzyme is responsible for the serum elevation has not been known because the current ALT assay measures total catalytic activity of ALT presumably the combined activity of ALT1 and ALT2.

Molecular cloning of ALT isoenzymes in rat and mice provides a means to study the underlying mechanism s as well as an interpretation of clinical ALT observations. For example ALT elevation in muscle disease may be due to a leak of ALT presumably ALT2 from muscle where ALT2 but not ALT1 is abundantly expressed. Similarly a specific ALT isoenzyme may be induced in a given clinical condition.

The hepatic murine ALT1 and murine ALT2 gene expression were examined in obese mice because hepatic steatosis is associated with this genetically obese model. Indeed murine ALT2 but not murine ALT1 gene expression is specifically induced. Furthermore total murine ALT enzymatic activity is increased by 30 in fatty liver over nonfatty liver suggesting that murine ALT2 may be primarily responsible for the increased serum ALT activity in liver steatosis. Interestingly AST activity remains unchanged in the same condition. These animal findings are in agreement with clinical observations in which serum ALT is generally increased to a greater extent than AST in patients with liver steatosis.

Additionally the ALT isoenzymes may be present in different cellular compartments which can also be utilized for diagnostic purposes the release of a given ALT isoenzyme into circulation reflects the nature of the liver damage. It has been shown that serum mitochondrial AST content is specifically increased in patients treated with halothane and suggested that this AST isoenzyme is a sensitive marker for halothane induced hepatic injury. Both cytosolic and mitochondrial murine and rat ALT activities were found in liver kidney and skeletal and cardiac muscles. At present which ALT isoenzyme is cytosolic or mitochondrial is not certainly clear. ALT isoenzyme specific antibodies help to elucidate the cellular localization of ALT isoenzymes and their changes in disease states.

In certain embodiments of the present invention ALT isoform specific antibody is required for establishment of isoform specific detection such as by enzyme linked immunoabsorbant assay ELISA . For this purpose a recombinant ALT1 polypeptide and or a recombinant ALT2 polypeptide is generated in bacteria and purified to homogeniety. About 2 mg of the purified protein is used to immunize mice for generating antibody specific for murine ALT or alternatively to immunize rats for generating antibody specific for rat ALT. As a result a monoclonal hybridoma against a isoform of an ALT polypeptide of the present invention is determined by determining binding specificity to said ALT polypeptide. One such method is Western blot analysis in which about 20 ng of ALT2 of ALT1 and of bovine serum albumin are load onto an SDS PAGE gel electrophoresised and blotted to PVDF membrane which is incubated with cell culture media of the indicated hybridoma cells 1 100 dilution and visualized by chemiluminescence. Cross reaction of the antibody produced by the hyridoma cell identified above to the other isoform is also determined. The identified isoform specific antibody is employed in the methods of the present invention such as an ALT isoform specific ELISA.

Differences in ALT isoenzyme in tissue distribution gene regulation and possible cellular localization suggest that the ability to measure ALT isoenzyme specific activity levels is a significant improvement over measurement of total ALT activity in clinical diagnostics. The cloning of murine and homologues of human ALT isoenzymes provides a novel tool for clinical applications of ALT isoenzymes as molecular markers for nonalcoholic fatty liver diseases as well as other clinical conditions.

Data herein are generally presented as mean standard deviation SD . Statistical significance was determined by Student unpaired t test. P value less than 0.05 was considered significant.

While the embodiments of the invention described herein are presently preferred various modifications and improvements can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. The scope of the invention is indicated by the appended claims and all changes that fall within the meaning and range of equivalents are intended to be embraced therein.

