---

title: Gaming device having resultant wild symbols
abstract: A gaming device including a plurality of reels or cards having several symbols. The symbols include at least two complimentary symbols that form resultant symbols on related reels or cards. In one embodiment, the resultant symbol is similar to a symbol and acts as a substitute for other symbols on the reels or cards. In another embodiment, the resultant symbol transforms adjacent symbols into symbols or other symbols on the reels or cards. In a further embodiment, the resultant symbol transforms a predetermined or random number of symbols on the reels or cards into symbols or other symbols.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09159192&OS=09159192&RS=09159192
owner: IGT
number: 09159192
owner_city: Las Vegas
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050609
---
This application is a continuation of and claims the benefit of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 191 154 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 905 406 filed Jul. 9 2002 which claims priority to and the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 376 920 filed Apr. 30 2002 the entire contents of which are incorporated herein.

This application relates to the following commonly owned patent applications GAMING DEVICE HAVING DUAL EVALUATION SCHEME Ser. No. 09 687 689 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 070 502 GAMING DEVICE HAVING A VARIED WILD SYMBOL IN A BONUS GAME Ser. No. 10 243 512 now abandoned GAMING DEVICE HAVING SYMBOLS WITH TRANSFORMATION PROBABILITIES Ser. No. 10 255 880 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 921 335 GAMING DEVICE HAVING EXTENDER SYMBOLS Ser. No. 10 191 197 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 169 042 GAMING DEVICE HAVING TRANSFORMABLE WILD SYMBOLS OR CARDS WITH WILD SIGNAL INDICATORS Ser. No. 10 920 798 GAMING DEVICE HAVING WILD INDICATORS Ser. No. 11 015 842 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 137 888 GAMING DEVICE HAVING WILD INDICATORS Ser. No. 10 982 096 GAMING DEVICE WITH WILD ACTIVATION SYMBOLS AND WILD TERMINATION SYMBOLS Ser. No. 10 966 223 GAMING DEVICE HAVING GAME WITH SYMBOLS AND ADJACENTLY DISPLAYED COMPLIMENTARY SUB SYMBOLS Ser. No. 11 558 304 GAMING DEVICE HAVING A GAME WITH PRIMARY SYMBOLS SECONDARY SYMBOLS ASSOCIATED WITH THE PRIMARY SYMBOLS AND INDEPENDENTLY GENERATED SECONDARY SYMBOLS Ser. No. 10 957 013 and GAMING DEVICE AND METHOD HAVING MULTIPLE PROGRESSIVE AWARD LEVELS AND A SECONDARY GAME FOR ADVANCING THROUGH THE PROGRESSIVE AWARD LEVELS Ser. No. 11 462 285.

Gaming devices are well known. Many known gaming devices provide wild symbols or wild cards. Wild symbols provide a player with an additional opportunity to obtain winning combinations. Wild symbols wild cards and wild indicators in gaming devices also provide additional excitement and entertainment for players.

In a slot machine having reels a wild symbol can enable the matching of symbols along a payline to achieve a combination. For example in a three reel slot machine the symbols along a payline on the first second and third reels may be respectively a heart a heart and a wild symbol. If in the gaming scheme the gaming device awards a player for a three heart combination the wild symbol substitutes for a heart and provides the player with that combination.

In another example the gaming scheme is a video poker game. The gaming device displays five cards. The cards are a ten Jack Queen King and wild card. The wild card substitutes as an Ace and provides the player with a winning combination.

Wild cards have been employed in gaming devices in other manners. For example U.S. Pat. No. 5 431 408 discloses a gaming device having a video poker gaming scheme. A player is dealt a hand consisting of five cards. The player is also given a wild card. The wild card is separate from the dealt hand. The player can reserve the wild card for use with a subsequent hand. Thus the player can use the wild card in a hand in which it is most advantageous to do so.

In another example U.S. Pat. No. 6 089 977 discloses a gaming device having a set of virtual reels. The reels display a set of symbols. Certain symbol combinations serve as triggering events. When one of these combinations occur on the reels a wild card symbol appears on the reels in the form of a graphical image and appears at different locations on the reels. When the wild card symbol appears at each location the symbol at that location transforms into the wild card symbol. After each activation of the wild symbol the gaming device determines and pays the player for any winning combination which is the result of the transformation. When the wild symbol appears at the next symbol the symbol previously transformed is in its original state.

To increase player enjoyment and excitement it is desirable to provide gaming devices having new and different wild symbols wild indicators and wild card schemes.

In one embodiment a gaming device includes resultant wild symbols on a set of reels on a set of cards or on another set of symbols. The resultant wild symbols are formed from at least two complimentary wild symbols on adjacent or related reels cards or symbols. The resultant wild symbols act as wild symbols or transform other symbols or cards into wild symbols or wild cards.

In one embodiment the gaming device includes a set of reels having a plurality of symbols displayed within a display device. The plurality of symbols includes at least one resultant wild symbol. The resultant wild symbol includes first and second complimentary wild symbols on adjacent reels. The complimentary wild symbols are positioned on different reels adjacent to one or more symbols on the reels. The complimentary wild symbols are displayed on either side of such symbols. Each complimentary wild symbol is in this embodiment represented by a portion of an image. In one example of this embodiment the complimentary wild symbols are in the form of left and right halves of a star. In another example of this embodiment the complimentary wild symbols are in the form of left and right halves of a square. It should be appreciated that any indicia or image could be used to represent the complimentary wild symbols.

In this embodiment when the complimentary wild symbols are in alignment along a payline of the display device they combine to create the resultant wild symbol. For example when a first reel displays a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a left half of a star on the payline and the adjacent or second reel displays a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a right half of a star on the payline the processor of the gaming device combines the complimentary wild symbols to create the resultant wild symbol. In this case the resultant wild symbol is in the form of a complete star. The resultant wild symbol functions as a wild symbol which substitutes for any symbol or a limited group of symbols used in the game to maximize the award.

In one embodiment when the resultant wild symbol is created within the display device the processor transforms one or more of the symbols on the reels adjacent to the complimentary wild symbols into a wild symbol. These wild symbols can then substitute for any other symbols or a limited group of symbols used by the gaming device.

In one embodiment the display device displays a set of cards in a video poker game. At least two cards include a resultant wild symbol. The resultant wild symbol includes a first and second complimentary wild symbol displayed on a first and second card respectively which are adjacent or related to each other. In one example a first card displays a first complimentary wild symbol which is represented by a left half of a square. An adjacent or second card displays a second complimentary wild symbol which is represented by a right half of a square. Because the left half and the right half of the square are complimentary the processor combines the complimentary wild symbols to create a resultant wild symbol. The resultant wild symbol is played with the rest of the cards or one or both cards displaying the resultant wild symbol are transformed into wild cards.

In one embodiment there is a plurality of resultant wild symbols on a set of reels within a display device. In this embodiment the processor can substitute each resultant wild symbol for symbols or a limited group of symbols used by the gaming device. This can be performed simultaneously successively or in any combination thereof. In an alternative embodiment there is a plurality of resultant wild symbols displayed within the display device and the processor transforms symbols adjacent to the resultant wild symbols into wild symbols. The processor transforms the adjacent symbols into wild symbols simultaneously successively or in any combination thereof.

In one embodiment there is a plurality of resultant wild symbols on a set of cards displayed on the display device. The processor transforms those cards displaying the resultant wild symbols into wild cards either simultaneously successively or in any combination thereof.

In an alternative embodiment at least one extender symbol is included on one or more of the reels displayed to a player. The extender symbol extends one or more symbols horizontally vertically diagonally or in any other manner across the reels when the extender symbol occurs on one or more reels. The extender symbol may extend a symbol or symbols across a predetermined number of cells or a random number of cells. In one embodiment the extender symbol acts as a wild symbol. In another embodiment the extender symbol is included on one or more cards in a set of cards. In this embodiment the extender symbol extends one or more of the card symbols across at least one card in the set.

It is therefore an advantage to provide a gaming device having resultant wild symbols that provide a player with an additional opportunity to obtain a winning combination in a game.

It is another advantage to provide a gaming device having at least one extender symbol that extends symbols and provides a player with an additional opportunity to obtain a winning combination in a game.

Other objects features and advantages of the present disclosure will be apparent from the following detailed disclosure taken in conjunction with the accompanying sheets of drawings wherein like numerals refer to like parts elements components steps and processes.

Referring now to the drawings and in particular to gaming device and gaming device illustrate two possible cabinet styles and display arrangements and are collectively referred to herein as gaming device . The present disclosure includes the game described below being a primary game or a bonus or secondary game that coordinates with a base game. When the game is a bonus game gaming device in one base game can be a slot machine having the controls displays and features of a conventional slot machine or a video card game such as poker blackjack etc. The player can operate the gaming device while standing or sitting. The gaming device may be a pub style or table top game not shown which a player operates while sitting.

The base games of the gaming device may include slot poker or blackjack among others. The gaming device may also include any bonus triggering events bonus games as well as any progressive game coordinating with these games. The symbols and indicia used for any of the base bonus and progressive games include mechanical electrical electronic or video symbols and indicia.

In a stand alone or a bonus embodiment the gaming device includes monetary input devices. illustrate a coin slot for coins or tokens and or a payment acceptor for cash money. The payment acceptor may also includes other devices for accepting payment such as readers or validators for credit cards debit cards or smart cards tickets notes etc. When a player inserts money in gaming device a number of credits corresponding to the amount deposited is shown in a credit display . After depositing the appropriate amount of money a player can begin the game by pulling arm or pushing play button . Play button can be any play activator used by the player which starts any game or sequence of events in the gaming device.

As shown in gaming device also includes a bet display and a bet one button . The player places a bet by pushing the bet one button . The player can increase the bet by one credit each time the player pushes the bet one button . When the player pushes the bet one button the number of credits shown in the credit display decreases by one and the number of credits shown in the bet display increases by one. A player may cash out by pushing a cash out button to receive coins or tokens in the coin payout tray or other forms of payment such as an amount printed on a ticket or credited to a credit card debit card or smart card.

Gaming device also includes one or more display devices. The embodiment shown in includes a central display device and the alternative embodiment shown in includes a central display device as well as an upper display device . The display devices display any visual representation or exhibition including but not limited to movement of physical objects such as mechanical reels and wheels dynamic lighting and video images. The display device includes any viewing surface such as glass a video monitor or screen a liquid crystal display or any other static or dynamic display mechanism. In a video poker blackjack or other card gaming machine embodiment the display device includes displaying one or more cards.

The slot machine base game of gaming device displays a plurality of reels such as three to five reels in mechanical or video form on one or more of the display devices. Each reel displays a plurality of indicia such as bells hearts fruits numbers letters bars or other images which preferably correspond to a theme associated with the gaming device . If the reels are in video form the display device displaying the video reels is preferably a video monitor. Each base game especially in the slot machine base game of the gaming device includes speakers for making sounds or playing music.

Referring now to a general electronic configuration of the gaming device for the stand alone and bonus embodiments described above preferably includes a processor a memory device for storing program code or other data a central display device an upper display device a sound card a plurality of speakers and one or more input devices . The processor is preferably a microprocessor or microcontroller based platform which is capable of displaying images symbols and other indicia such as images of people characters places things and faces of cards. The memory device includes random access memory RAM for storing event data or other data generated or used during a particular game. The memory device also includes read only memory ROM for storing program code which controls the gaming device so that it plays a particular game in accordance with applicable game rules and pay tables.

As illustrated in the player preferably uses the input devices to input signals into gaming device . In the slot machine base game the input devices include the pull arm play button the bet one button and the cash out button . In certain instances it is preferable to use a touch screen and an associated touch screen controller instead of a conventional video monitor display device. The touch screen enables a player to input decisions into the gaming device by sending a discrete signal based on the area of the touch screen that the player touches or presses. A touch screen and touch screen controller are connected to a video controller and processor . The terms computer or controller are used herein to refer collectively to the processor the memory device the sound card the touch screen controller and the video controller . As further seen in the processor connects to the coin slot or payment acceptor whereby the processor requires a player to deposit a certain amount of money in to start the game.

It should be appreciated that although a processor and memory device are preferable implementations the present disclosure also includes being implemented via one or more application specific integrated circuits ASIC s one or more hard wired devices or one or more mechanical devices collectively or alternatively referred to herein as a processor . Furthermore although the processor and memory device preferably reside in each gaming device unit the gaming device disclosed herein includes providing some or all of their functions at a central location such as a network server for communication to a playing station such as over a local area network LAN wide area network WAN Internet connection microwave link and the like.

With reference to the slot machine base game of to operate the gaming device the player inserts the appropriate amount of tokens or money in the coin slot or the payment acceptor and then pulls the arm or pushes the play button . The reels then begin to spin. Eventually the reels come to a stop. As long as the player has credits remaining the player can spin the reels again. Depending upon where the reels stop the player may or may not win additional credits.

In one embodiment the display device displays three reels and as illustrated in . The reels contain a set of symbols such as hearts cherries numbers or any other suitable symbols. The reels include at least one resultant wild symbol . The resultant wild symbol includes at least two complimentary wild symbols and on adjacent or related reels and . The complimentary wild symbols are for example represented by portions of an image. In one embodiment each complimentary wild symbol is in the form of a portion of a word design picture or the like. In one embodiment each complimentary wild symbol is in the form of a portion of a symbol used by the gaming device. Preferably the complimentary wild symbols are displayed on either side of the symbols. It should be appreciated that the resultant wild symbol may be associated with one or more awards including but not limited to multipliers free games and free spins.

In the illustrated embodiment of a player uses the control features of the gaming device to cause the reels to spin. When the reels stop spinning the first reel includes the 7 symbol and a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a left half of a star along a payline as illustrated in . The second reel includes a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a right half of a star and the 7 symbol . The third reel includes the BAR symbol . The processor combines the complimentary wild symbols and to create the resultant wild symbol . The resultant wild symbol functions as a wild symbol that combines with the adjacent symbols and to form a winning combination of three 7 s as illustrated in . The processor awards the player for the winning by displaying the player s new credit total in the credit display .

In one embodiment the gaming device provides a signal to the player that the complimentary wild symbols and have combined to create a resultant wild symbol . In this embodiment the signal is the displaying of the word WILD through symbols and . The signal may also be a sound or message emitted by a speaker. Other suitable audio or visual methods of notifying a player are contemplated.

In another example a first reel includes a BAR symbol and a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a left half of a star along a payline as illustrated in . The first reel also includes the 7 symbol and a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a left half of a star. The second reel includes a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a right half of a square and a BAR symbol in the upper portion of the display device. The second reel also includes a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a right half of a star and a cherry symbol . No resultant wild symbol is created with respect to symbols and . However the processor combines the complimentary wild symbols and to create a resultant wild symbol as illustrated in . According to the paytable of the gaming device the player is not awarded any credits for obtaining two 7 s two cherry symbols or two BAR symbols. If the third reel had included a cherry symbol along payline the player would have been awarded for having three cherries. This embodiment illustrates multiple resultant wild symbols as well as multiple complimentary wild symbols which are the same on one reel and are both adapted to match a single complimentary wild symbol on another reel.

In one embodiment the processor transforms one or more symbols adjacent to resultant wild symbol into wild symbols. For example within the display device a first reel includes the 7 symbol and a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a left half of a star along payline as illustrated in . The second reel includes a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a right half of a star along payline as well as the 7 symbol . The third reel includes a BAR symbol . The processor combines the complimentary wild symbols to create a resultant wild symbol . As a result the 7 symbol displayed on the first reel and the 7 symbol on the second reel become wild symbols and as illustrated in . The wild symbols combine with the BAR symbol on the third reel to provide three BAR symbols along the payline .

In one embodiment the processor creates a resultant wild symbol by combining complimentary wild symbols on non adjacent reels. For example in a gaming device having three reels complimentary wild symbols and are present along a payline on the first and third reels respectively as illustrated in . The first reel includes a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a right half of a star and a BAR symbol . The third reel includes a BAR symbol and a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a left half of a star. The complimentary wild symbols and on the first and third reels respectively are combined by the processor to create a resultant wild symbol. The processor then combines the BAR symbol on the first reel with the resultant wild symbol and the BAR symbol on the third reel to produce three BAR symbols as illustrated in . The processor awards the player for the winning combination. It should be appreciated that this type of combination of complimentary wild symbols is not limited to embodiments having three reels and can include any number of reels where complimentary wild symbols are present on two related or adjacent reels.

In an alternative embodiment the symbols adjacent to the resultant symbol become wild symbols as a result of the complimentary wild symbol combination. The BAR symbols and on the payline of the first and third reels become wild symbols and respectively as illustrated in . The second reel includes a heart symbol as a result the wild symbols each substitute for a heart symbol. The player obtains three heart symbols and is provided any associated award.

In a further embodiment the gaming device provides the player with a plurality of spins at the beginning of the game. The player or the processor spins the reels until there are no spins remaining in the game.

In still a further embodiment a probability of occurring on the reels is associated with each resultant wild symbol such that the probability of one resultant wild symbol occurring on the reels is greater than the probability of two or more resultant wild symbols occurring on the reels.

In one alternative embodiment the resultant wild symbols are displayed within a display device on a set of cards such as in a video poker game. The resultant wild symbols include complimentary wild symbols displayed on separate cards. For example a player uses the control features of the gaming device to have the processor deal a set of cards through as illustrated in . The first card includes a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a left half of a star. The second card includes a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a right half of a star. The processor combines the complimentary wild symbols to create a resultant wild symbol . For one embodiment the processor transforms the first and second cards into wild cards and respectively as illustrated in . These cards substitute for any other cards used in the game. In another embodiment the processor transforms one of such cards into a wild symbol. In another embodiment the processor sequentially transforms each card into wild symbol and makes a determination of any winning hand after each transformation. In another embodiment the resultant wild symbol is an extra wild symbol used with the other displayed cards.

In another embodiment a resultant wild symbol is formed from the combination of complimentary wild symbols on related but non adjacent cards. In one example five cards through are displayed within a display device as illustrated in . The first and fifth cards have complimentary wild symbols and respectively. The processor combines the complimentary wild symbols to create a resultant wild symbol. In one embodiment the processor transforms the first and fifth cards and into wild cards and respectively as illustrated in . It is appreciated that this type of combination of complimentary wild symbols is not limited to embodiments having five cards and can include any plurality of cards. It should also be appreciated that alternative suitable wild card transformations as described above may be preformed by the processor.

The resultant wild symbols can function as wild symbols either simultaneously or successively. In one example a display device displays four reels as illustrated in . The first reel includes along payline a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a right half of a star a 7 symbol and another complimentary symbol in the form of a left half of a star. The second reel includes along payline a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a right half of a star a heart symbol and a complimentary symbol in the form of a left half of a square. The third reel includes along payline a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a right half of a square the 7 symbol and another complimentary wild symbol in the form of a left half of a star. The fourth reel includes along payline complimentary wild symbol in the form of a right half of a square a BAR symbol and a complimentary wild symbol in the form of a left half of a square.

In this example the processor combines complimentary wild symbols and to create resultant wild symbol . In addition the processor combines complimentary wild symbols and to create resultant wild symbol . If the processor transforms the symbols along the payline adjacent to the resultant wild symbols into wild symbols and simultaneously as illustrated in the player receives four BAR symbols.

However if the processor transforms the symbols adjacent to the resultant wild symbols into wild symbols successively as illustrated in then the player obtains a first combination of three 7 symbols or three BAR symbols. Next the second resultant wild symbol causes the adjacent symbols to become wild. The player receives three 7 symbols or three BAR symbols a second time.

If the processor transforms the resultant wild symbols and into wild symbols the player obtains four 7 symbols as illustrated in . If the processor transforms the resultant wild symbols and into wild symbols successively as illustrated in the player first receives a combination of three 7 symbols. Next the processor combines complimentary wild symbols and to create a resultant wild symbol . The player again obtains three 7 symbols.

In one alternative embodiment a plurality of resultant wild symbols and are included on a set of five cards through displayed in a video poker game as shown in . The resultant wild symbols are included on the first and second cards and as well as the fourth and fifth cards and . The processor transforms the cards into wild cards simultaneously successively or in any combination thereof.

If the cards including the resultant wild symbols are transformed into wild cards and simultaneously as illustrated in the player receives five Queens. If the cards including the resultant wild symbols are transformed successively the first and second cards and are transformed into wild cards and respectively as illustrated in . The player receives three Aces. Next the fourth and fifth cards and are transformed into wild cards and as illustrated in . The player then receives a straight.

Other alternative embodiments are illustrated in . In these embodiments the resultant wild symbol extends or transforms one or more symbols on the reels either horizontally vertically and in any combination desired by the game implementor.

Referring now specifically to a resultant wild symbol is formed from a complimentary wild symbol which is in the form of a left side of a star and complimentary symbol which is in the form of a right side of a star. In one embodiment the resultant wild symbol extends one or more symbols horizontally across the reels. The resultant wild symbol may extend a symbol across any number of reels such as one reel two reels or all of the reels. As illustrated in the resultant wild symbol extends the 7 symbol to the second reel . The resultant wild symbol may extend a symbol and or it may act as a substitute or wild symbol. In the resultant wild symbol performs both functions by acting like a wild symbol and forms a three 7 symbols on payline . It should be appreciated that the resultant wild symbol may extend a symbol that is adjacent to it diagonal to it or in any other related position or randomly picked position on the reels as desired by the game implementor. It should also be appreciated that the resultant wild symbol may extend a symbol across one or more reels i.e. skipping or not skipping certain symbols or symbol positions . A resultant wild symbol can also extend a symbol across a predetermined number of reels or a random number of reels. Accordingly it should be appreciated that the resultant wild symbol can also function as an extender symbol.

Referring now to and two resultant wild symbols and are formed on the reels by complimentary symbols and and and respectively. A first resultant wild symbol is formed from a left side of a star and a right side of a star . The resultant wild symbol is formed from a left side of a star and a right side of star . In this alternative embodiment the 7 symbol on the left side of the resultant wild symbol is extended across the reels to those reels that are adjacent to a resultant wild symbol and . As illustrated in the 7 symbol is extended across reels and . Note that the cherry symbol is not transformed into a 7 symbol because the cherry symbol was not adjacent to one of the resultant wild symbols or . The final symbol combination is four 7 symbols and in a row. In another embodiment the resultant wild symbols and also functions like a wild symbol and are substituted for the symbol that is extended across the reels. In this case the symbol combination includes six 7 symbols aligned across the reels.

In another alternative embodiment illustrated in and the resultant wild symbol extends a symbol across a predetermined number of reels. In this embodiment the resultant wild symbol is formed from the left side of a star and from the right side of a star . A resultant wild symbol extends the symbol to the left of the resultant wild symbol which is the 7 symbol across a predetermined number of reels. In this case the resultant wild symbol extends the 7 symbol across all of the reels . As shown in the 7 symbol is extended across or to reels and . The final symbol combination becomes five 7 symbols on the payline . In another embodiment the resultant wild symbol acts like a wild symbol and is substituted with the 7 symbol . Thus the final symbol combination is six 7 symbols across payline . It should be appreciated that the resultant wild symbol may extend a symbol across a predetermined or random number of reels.

Referring now to and the resultant wild symbol extends the symbols that are vertically adjacent to the resultant wild symbol on the reels. In this example there are five reels to and a resultant wild symbol is formed from a two complimentary wild symbols and . The resultant wild symbol is a star which is formed from a left side of a star on reel and from a right side of a star on reel . As illustrated in the resultant wild symbol extends the adjacent 7 symbol to the adjacent reel and thereby transforms the heart symbol shown in to a 7 symbol in . Then the 7 symbol and are extended vertically on reels and . The BAR symbols and and the cherry symbol are transformed into the 7 symbol. As shown in all of the symbols on reels and have been transformed into 7 symbols as a result of the resultant wild symbol .

In this example the resultant combination on payline does not provide a winning combination of three or more symbols unless the resultant wild symbol acts like a wild symbol. If the resultant wild symbol acts as a wild symbol the resultant wild symbol forms the combination of three 7 symbols on the payline . In another embodiment the processor employs a scatter pay combination where any three symbols across the paylines provides a winning combination. Therefore any of the three 7 symbols on reels and provides a winning combination. It should be appreciated that vertically extending one or more symbols on the reels may create a winning combination of symbols or may eliminate a winning combination of symbols depending on which symbol or symbols are being extended on the reels.

In an alternative embodiment the extender symbol only extends a symbol on the reels to improve the award or payout to the player in a particular activation of the reels. If an award is eliminated decreased or remains the same based on the extension of a symbol on the reels by the extender symbol the symbol is not extended on the reels. For example in a particular game the extender symbol extends a symbol across one reel and also acts as a wild symbol. In addition three BAR symbols provide a larger award to the player than three cherry symbols in the game. The player activates the reels and obtains a cherry symbol an extender symbol and three BAR symbols on a payline associated with the reels. If the cherry symbol is extended by the extender symbol there will be three cherry symbols instead of three BAR symbols indicated on the payline which decreases the award in that activation. Therefore the extender symbol does not extend the cherry symbol across the reels because extending the cherry symbol decreases the award provided to the player.

Referring now to and another alternative embodiment is shown where the resultant wild symbols and are adjacent to each other on payline . In this embodiment when one or more resultant wild symbols are formed by two complimentary wild symbols and are adjacent to each other on the reels the symbols adjacent to the resultant wild symbol are upgraded to the highest symbol on the reels. In this example the highest or most valuable symbol is the BAR symbol . Therefore the symbols adjacent to the resultant wild symbols and which in this case are symbols and are upgraded to the BAR symbol. The resultant winning combination on payline is four BAR symbols or six BAR symbols if the resultant wild symbols and act as wild symbols. The adjacent resultant wild symbols and may also provide one or more multipliers to the player which multiplies the award for the winning combination by a predetermined or random amount or value. Also the adjacent resultant wild symbols may extend the symbols across the reels horizontally or vertically or perform any other function desired by the game implementor. It should also be appreciated that the resultant wild symbol in this alternative embodiment may act as a wild symbol and thereby substitute for or transform into a symbol on the reels or simply extend one or more symbols on the reels.

Referring to B C and D in a further alternative embodiment the gaming device includes at least one extender symbol on the reels. In one embodiment the extender symbol horizontally extends one of the symbols which is adjacent to the extender symbol on the reels to one or more other reels. It should be appreciated that the extender symbol may extend one or more symbols across the reels. It should also be appreciated that the extender symbol may extend a symbol horizontally vertically diagonally or in any manner desired by the game implementor.

Referring to the gaming device displays five reels to the player having one payline . The player spins the reels. After the reels stop spinning a BAR symbol an extender symbol a cherry symbol a cherry symbol and a heart symbol occur on payline . In this example the extender symbol horizontally extends the bar symbol from reel to reel . This transforms the cherry symbol to a BAR symbol as illustrated in . In one embodiment the extender symbol does not act as a wild symbol and therefore there are only two BAR symbols and on payline . In another embodiment the extender symbol acts as a wild symbol and as a result there are three BAR symbols on payline . The player receives the award or awards associated with the resultant combination of symbols on the reels.

Referring to another aspect of this embodiment is illustrated where the extender symbol extends the adjacent symbols bar symbol and complimentary wild symbol which is in the form of the left side of a star diagonally across the reels from reel to reel . As a result the heart symbol at the bottom of the reel shown in transforms into the BAR symbol and the complimentary wild symbol . The extended complimentary wild symbol combines with the complimentary wild symbol which is in the form of the right side of a star on reel to form resultant wild symbol . As a result three BAR symbols occur on the bottom payline . Therefore the extender symbol can create additional winning combinations on the reels which adds excitement and enjoyment to the player.

Referring to a further aspect of this embodiment is illustrated where the extender symbol vertically extends bar symbol on reel from the top to the bottom of reel . As a result there are two bar symbols on reel . It should be appreciated that the extender symbol may extend one or more symbols on the reels. Additionally the extender symbol can extend a symbol across a predetermined number of reels or a random number of reels.

Referring to a further alternative embodiment is illustrated where the extender symbol is included on one or more playing cards. The gaming device displays or deals five playing cards to a player as shown in . In this example the cards and include the King of diamonds Queen of hearts Ace of clubs two of clubs and three of diamonds respectively. The extender symbol appears on card and extends one or more of the symbols on the cards. In one embodiment the extender symbol extends one of the adjacent card symbols across the cards such as the King symbol. In another embodiment the extender extends both symbols across the cards such as the King symbol and the suit symbol i.e. hearts clubs . Moreover the extender may extend a symbol across one or more cards as desired. In another embodiment the extender symbols acts as a wild symbol as described above.

Referring to the extender symbol extends both symbols of card the King symbol and the diamond symbol across card to card . Now card is also a King of diamonds. In this example the extender symbol does not act as a wild symbol. Therefore the player obtains two pair i.e. two king of diamond cards resulting as a result from the extension function performed by the extender symbol .

While the present invention is described in connection with what is presently considered to be the most practical and preferred embodiments it should be appreciated that the invention is not limited to the disclosed embodiments and is intended to cover various modifications and equivalent arrangements included within the spirit and scope of the claims. Modifications and variations in the present invention may be made without departing from the novel aspects of the invention as defined in the claims and this application is limited only by the scope of the claims.

