---

title: Method for wireless internet communication in mobile communication terminal
abstract: A method for a wireless Internet communication in a mobile communication terminal is provided. In an operation of starting a wireless Internet function, it is determined if a data call is being serviced and, if a data call is not serviced, the wireless Internet function is started by setting the wireless Internet function as a data call. In an operation of originating or terminating a voice call, it is determined if a wireless Internet function is being performed and, if the wireless Internet function is being performed, the wireless Internet function and a voice call service are substantially simultaneously started. Accordingly, in the wireless Internet communication method of the mobile communication terminal, a W-LAN function is set in the same manner as that in which a CDMA data call is set through modification of the SVD scheme, so that a W-LAN data protocol such as the DHCP (which can be used when the W-LAN function is set) and a voice call service can be provided at the same time. Herein, when software that does not support data concurrency is employed, it is possible to prevent the origination of a CDMA data call capable of causing an erroneous operation during the W-LAN operation.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08139561&OS=08139561&RS=08139561
owner: Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.
number: 08139561
owner_city: Suwon-si
owner_country: KR
publication_date: 20051026
---
This application claims the benefit under 35 U.S.C. 119 a of Korean Patent Application entitled Method for Wireless Internet Communication in Mobile Communication Terminal filed in the Korean Intellectual Property Office on Nov. 1 2004 and assigned Serial No. 2004 87796 the entire contents of which are hereby incorporated by reference.

The present invention relates to a mobile communication terminal. More particularly the present invention relates to a method for accessing a wireless local area network W LAN and performing wireless internet communications in a mobile communication terminal.

Generally the term mobile communication terminal refers to a device for performing voice communication by communicating with a base station linked with a Public Switched Telephone Network PSTN through a specific wireless frequency band allocated to a communication provider. This mobile communication terminal increasingly expands the coverage thereof as a terminal capable of processing multimedia data by performing a satellite broadcast or terrestrial broadcast listening function a Moving Picture Experts Group MPEG audio layer 3 MP3 music file reproducing function and so on in addition to its original function such as a voice communication function.

Particularly as Internet becomes popular research and development in mobile communication technologies for enabling the mobile communication terminal to receive Internet services are actively being pursued. These Internet services are usually provided by connecting a mobile communication terminal based on a code division multiple access CDMA scheme to the Internet linked with a base station. Accordingly connection to the Internet through a base station in a CDMA scheme costs as much as voice communication.

The construction of a network through a wireless LAN W LAN has been popularly used in order to support information sharing between information terminals such as personal computers PCs personal digital assistants PDAs and notebook computers. Such a W LAN which is used in restricted space such as a department store an office and a school is constructed to be connected to the Internet through a router having a wire wireless link with an access point AP prepared for transmitting receiving radio data to from the information terminal. Although this W LAN can have access to the Internet only in such restricted spaces the W LAN enables economical Internet services due to allowing access to wired Internet through the router. Therefore recently a mobile communication terminal for receiving Internet services through a connection to such a W LAN is being developed and implemented.

The mobile communication terminal for receiving Internet services through such a W LAN comprises an additional W LAN module for making communication by wirelessly connecting to the W LAN. In other words this mobile communication terminal comprises a CDMA system using a CDMA frequency band such as a frequency band of 800 MHz in a case of cellular CDMA and a W LAN system using a W LAN frequency band such as a frequency band of 2.4 GHz in the case of the IEEE 801.11b standard realized in one terminal. Hereinafter the mobile communication terminal capable of receiving such a W LAN service will be referred to as a dual band dual mode DBDM terminal. Currently many communication providers are developing a CDMA service and a W LAN service using a CDMA mobile station modem MSM chip in order to implement the DMDM terminal by simple modification without changing an existing design and existing parts. Herein the W LAN module may be mounted externally such as on the outside of the CDMA MSM chip and a CDMA and W LAN software is installed internally such as in the CDMA MSM chip.

However when functions for receiving the CDMA service and the W LAN service using such the CDMA MSM chip are implemented CDMA voice calls data calls and W LAN data are not processed at the same time. In other words the W LAN service is not received while receiving the CDMA service and in reverse the CDMA service is not received while receiving the W LAN service.

Accordingly a need exists for a method for accessing a wireless local area network W LAN and performing wireless internet communications in a mobile communication terminal without the inconvenience caused when the W LAN service is not received while receiving the CDMA service.

Accordingly the present invention has been made to solve the above mentioned problems occurring in the prior art and an object of the present invention is to provide a method for wireless LAN W LAN communication in a mobile communication terminal capable of simultaneously performing a code division multiple access CDMA service and a W LAN service.

To accomplish the above objects a method for wireless Internet communication in a mobile communication terminal is provided. The method comprises the steps of in an operation of starting a wireless Internet function determining if a data call is being serviced and if a data call is not being serviced starting the wireless Internet function by setting the wireless Internet function as a data call.

Preferably the method further comprises the steps of in an operation of originating or terminating a voice call determining if a wireless Internet function is being performed and if the wireless Internet function is being performed simultaneously starting the wireless Internet function and a voice call service.

Throughout the drawings like reference numerals will be understood to refer to like parts components and structures.

Hereinafter exemplary embodiments of the present invention will be described in greater detail with reference to the accompanying drawings. In the following description of the present invention a detailed description of known functions and configurations incorporated herein will be omitted for clarity and conciseness.

The CDMA RF unit up converts and amplifies output data of the CDMA modem in order to wirelessly transmit the output data to a base station not shown . In addition the CDMA RF unit down converts and amplifies data wirelessly received from the base station so as to provide the data to the CDMA modem . Similarly the W LAN RF unit performs a radio processing operation with respect to output data of the W LAN module in order to wirelessly transmit the output data to an access point AP . In addition the W LAN RF unit receives a signal transmitted from the AP in a W LAN so as to transmit the signal to the W LAN module . The W LAN module processes Internet data in connection with the W LAN under the control of the CDMA modem .

The CDMA modem generally controls the overall operation of the DBDM terminal and comprises a microprocessor and a modulation demodulation codec embedded therein and a function of controlling the display unit and the peripheral elements in addition to original functions of a mobile communication terminal such as a function of Pulse Code Modulation PCM modulating demodulating a voice signal to be output. Specifically the CDMA modem preferably simultaneously or substantially simultaneously performs a CDMA function and a W LAN function in connection with the W LAN module according to an exemplary embodiment of the present invention. According to an exemplary embodiment of the present invention a W LAN function or a W LAN service connection is established in the same manner as that in which a CDMA data call is established so that a CDMA voice call and a W LAN function can be serviced at the same time. In other words the setting for the W LAN is achieved from a time point to establish the W LAN function and not from a time point to establish the W LAN service connection in the same manner as that in which the CDMA data call is established so that a W LAN data protocol such as a dynamic host configuration protocol DHCP which can be used while setting the W LAN function and a voice call can be serviced at the same time. In the following description this scheme will be described as an example. In addition a scheme in which the W LAN service is processed from a time point to establish the W LAN service connection in the same manner as that in which the CDMA data call is established may be employed. However this scheme is identical to a scheme in which the W LAN service is processed from a time point to establish the W LAN function in the same manner as that in which the CDMA data call is established except for only a difference between setting time points. Hereinafter an operation of substantially simultaneously performing this CDMA service and this W LAN function will be described in greater detail with reference to the accompanying drawings. It is to be understood that the establishment of the W LAN function and the CDMA service can occur with a time delay. In either case at least part of the W LAN service and CDMA service are concurrent.

In the CDMA protocol stack L3 and L2 CDMA protocols are positioned at one side of the stack and the Transmission Control Protocol TCP User Datagram Protocol UDP is positioned at the other side of the stack . The Internet protocol IP the Point to Point Protocol PPP and the Radio Link Protocol RLP are sequentially positioned at the lower part of the TCP UDP. The Physical PHY layer protocol is positioned at the lowermost part of the protocol stack . The W LAN protocol stack comprises the TCP UDP and the IP positioned at the lower part of the TCP UDP which are protocols commonly used with the CDMA protocol stack . The W LAN protocol stack comprises the Logical Link Control LLC protocol the Medium Access Control MAC protocol and the PHY layer protocol sequentially positioned at the lower part of the IP.

Referring to if the W LAN function is established the W LAN application reports the application program interface API such as a Call Manager CM to obtain a W LAN function and set the W LAN function in the same manner as that in which a CDMA data call is set in step . Accordingly the API performs processes necessary for setting the W LAN function in step and then reports the W LAN management program to set the W LAN function in order to drive the W LAN function so that the W LAN management program can connect with a W LAN AP through the LLC protocol the MAC protocol and the PHY protocol lower protocols . If the W LAN management program is successfully connected to the W LAN AP so that the setting of the W LAN function may be completed the completion of the W LAN function setting is reported to the API and the W LAN application.

In this state if the CDMA application performs a function of transmitting receiving a voice call in step the CDMA application requests the API to execute the function of transmitting receiving the voice call so that the CDMA protocol can be performed thereby setting the function of transmitting receiving the voice call. If the voice call is successfully established the successful establishment of the voice call is reported to the API and the CDMA application in step so that a Simultaneous Voice and Data SVD function can be performed.

As described above although one of the voice call function and the W LAN function is terminated while the voice call function and the W LAN function are being performed at the same time the remaining function is continuous. In other words if the W LAN application is terminated the CDMA application maintains the SVD function as shown in step of . In the meantime if the termination of the W LAN function starts in step the termination of the W LAN function is reported to the API such that the W LAN function is terminated in the same manner as that in which the CDMA data call is terminated. Thereafter only the voice call function is performed. In contrast if the voice call is terminated only the W LAN function is performed as shown in step . is a diagram illustrating a protocol stack which is employed for realizing functions of the CDMA modem and the W LAN module shown in used for explaining a procedure of performing a W LAN function while performing a voice call function first set according to an exemplary embodiment of the present invention. If a function of terminating receiving a voice call is set the CDMA application reports the API to set the function of terminating receiving the voice call so that the CDMA protocol is performed in step . In step if the voice call is successfully set the successful setting of the voice call is indicated to the API and the CDMA application thereby completing a voice call setting operation.

In this state if a W LAN function is set in step the API is requested to obtain a W LAN and set a W LAN function in the same manner as that in which a CDMA data call is set. Accordingly the API performs processes necessary for setting the W LAN function in step and then reports the setting of the W LAN function to the W LAN management program in order to drive the W LAN function so that the W LAN management program can connect with a W LAN AP. If the W LAN management program is successfully connected to the W LAN AP so that the setting of the W LAN function is completed the completion of the W LAN function setting is reported to the API and the W LAN application in step .

As described above although one of the voice call functions and the W LAN functions is terminated while the voice call function and the W LAN function are being performed at essentially the same time the remaining function is continuous. In other words if the W LAN application is terminated the CDMA application maintains the SVD function as shown in step of . In the meantime if the termination of the W LAN function starts in step the termination of the W LAN function is reported to the API such that the API terminates the W LAN function in the same manner as that in which the CDMA data call is terminated. Thereafter only the voice call function is performed. In contrast if the voice call is terminated only the W LAN function is performed as shown in step .

Hereinafter a procedure of performing the voice call function and the W LAN function at essentially the same time will be described with reference to the accompanying drawings. The accompanying drawings have a plurality of variables are disclosed therein. The meanings of the variables are as follows 

Referring to in step it is determined if the number of calls currently under the service NumOf call id is 0 . If the number of calls currently under the service is 0 as the determination result the W LAN function is performed in step . If the number of calls currently under the service is not 0 as the determination result it is determined in step if the number of calls currently under the service is 2 . If the number of calls currently under the service is 2 as the determination result the procedure of starting the W LAN function is stopped at step . If the number of calls currently under the service is not 2 as the determination result it is determined in step if the number of calls currently under the service is 1 . If the number of calls currently under the service is 1 as the determination result step is performed.

It is determined in step if the flag Data Call Connected indicating whether or not the data call is connected corresponds to true 1 . In other words it is determined if the data call is in a connection state. If the data call is connected the operation of starting the W LAN function is stopped at step . If the data call is not connected it is determined in step if the flag Voice Call Connected indicating whether or not a voice call is connected corresponds to true 1 . In other words it is determined in step if the current voice call is in a connection state. If the current voice call is in a connection state the W LAN function is simultaneously started with the voice call service in step by setting the W LAN function in the same manner as that in which the CDMA data call is set and then the operation of starting the W LAN function is performed in step . At this time the flag Wlan Enable indicating whether or not it is possible to service the W LAN function and the flag indicating whether or not a data call is connected are set to true 1 and the number of calls currently under the service increases by 1 .

In step it is determined if connection for the W LAN is correctly achieved. If connection for the W LAN is correctly achieved the W LAN function is performed thereafter at step . If connection for the W LAN is not correctly achieved the operation of starting the W LAN service is processed as an erroneous operation at step . At this time the number of calls currently under the service decreases by 1 and the flag indicating whether or not it is possible to service the W LAN function and the flag indicating whether or not the data call is connected are set to false 0 .

The operation of starting the W LAN service can be performed as described above with reference to . Herein in step of in which it is determined if the number of calls currently under the service is 1 it is determined that the number of calls currently under the service be 1 because the number of calls currently under the service is neither 0 nor 2 in steps and . However if the number of calls currently under the service is not 1 as the determination result in step the operation of starting the W LAN service is regarded as an erroneous operation so that an additional error processing operation may be performed or the procedure of starting the W LAN service may return to step so as to repeat the steps. Also in step in which it is determined if a current voice call is in a connection state it is determined that the current voice call should be connected because the number of calls currently under the service is 1 at step and the data call is not connected at step . However if the current voice call at step is not connected as the determination result the operation of starting the W LAN service is regarded as an erroneous operation at step so that an additional error processing operation may be performed or the procedure of starting the W LAN service may be aborted at step .

In step it is determined if connection for originating a voice call is correctly achieved. If the connection for originating the voice call is correctly achieved the operation of originating the voice call is performed thereafter at step . If the connection for originating the voice call is not correctly achieved the operation of originating the voice call is processed as an erroneous operation in step . At this time the number of calls currently under the service decreases by 1 and the flag indicating whether or not the voice call is connected is set to false 0 .

In step it is determined if connection for receiving the voice call is correctly achieved. If the connection for receiving the voice call is correctly achieved the operation of receiving the voice call is performed thereafter at step . If the connection for receiving the voice call is not correctly achieved the operation of receiving the voice call is processed as an erroneous operation in step . At this time the number of calls currently under the service decreases by 1 and the flag indicating whether or not the voice call is connected is set to false 0 and the incoming call is aborted at step .

As described above in a wireless Internet communication method of a mobile communication terminal according to exemplary embodiments of the present invention a W LAN function is set in the same manner as that in which a CDMA data call is set through modification of the SVD scheme so that a W LAN data protocol such as the DHCP which can be used when the W LAN function is set and a voice call service can be provided at the same time. Herein when a software which does not support data concurrency is employed it is possible to prevent the origination of a CDMA data call capable of causing an erroneous operation during the W LAN operation.

Wireless Internet communication can be performed in a mobile communication terminal according to exemplary embodiments of the present invention as described above. While the invention has been shown and described with reference to certain embodiments thereof it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes in form and details may be made therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. For example although the present invention is applied to a CDMA system the present invention is adaptable for the global system for mobile communication GSM the universal mobile telecommunication system UMTS and so on. Also although the present invention is applied to a wireless local area network W LAN the present invention is adaptable for other wireless access technique such as a wireless metropolitan area network WMAN or a portable Internet. In addition according to exemplary embodiments of the present invention access to an Ad Hoc network can be achieved by using a W LAN or Bluetooth and a CDMA voice call can be serviced during access to the Ad Hoc network. Consequently the scope of the invention should not be limited to the embodiments but should be defined by the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

Further the operations mentioned in this disclosure can be in the form of a program code embodied on a computer readable medium for wireless Internet communication in a mobile communication terminal.

