---

title: System and method for electronic presentations with annotation of preview material
abstract: An electronic presentation system and method provides multiple display screens for presentation materials as well as permits dynamic annotations to presentation materials that do not permanently alter the presentation materials. In a multi-windowed display interface, a currently displayed slide or the next-to-display slide can be easily annotated or otherwise modified. Thus, the presentation materials can easily be directed to any one of the display screens and any annotations can be saved for future use or simply deleted.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07454708&OS=07454708&RS=07454708
owner: Learning Tree International
number: 07454708
owner_city: Los Angeles
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050722
---
This application relies on provisional patent application Ser. No. 60 590 340 filed Jul. 23 2004 and is a continuation in part of the U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 448 429 filed May 30 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 058 891 which itself is a continuation in part of the U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 445 322 filed May 27 2003 which itself is a continuation in part of the U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 153 859 filed May 24 2002 entitled SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR ELECTRONIC PRESENTATIONS which relates to and claims priority from U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 293 179 filed May 25 2001 entitled ELECTRONIC INSTRUCTIONAL DELIVERY SYSTEM AND METHOD the disclosures of which are hereby incorporated in their entirety by reference.

The present invention relates to group presentations systems and methods and more particularly to an electronic presentation system and method having multiple screens.

One traditional method for making presentations to relatively small groups such as in an educational or training environment includes the use of an overhead projector and view foils or transparencies. According to this familiar method the presenter has a series of view foils that are manually placed on and then removed from an overhead projector in a predetermined order. While blank view foils are sometimes inserted to allow the presenter to dynamically present material during the presentation the presenter is unlikely to annotate a previously prepared view foil because such an annotation would likely ruin the foil for future use.

Recent advances in automation have addressed some of the shortcomings of this traditional presentation method. In one instance a computer s video output can now be connected to a projector so that a computer generated slide show can be shown on a screen sometimes with animation. However this introduction of automation does not change the limited and static nature of the presentation materials and methods.

Accordingly there remains a need for a dynamic presentation system and method that allows a presenter to effectively and dynamically present material that can easily be modified and augmented according to each environment in which the presentation is made.

The present invention addresses these and other needs with a system and method that provides multiple display screens for presentation materials as well as permits dynamic annotations to presentation materials that do not permanently alter the presentation materials. The presentation materials can easily be directed to any one of the display screens and any annotations can be saved for future use or simply deleted.

One aspect of the present invention relates to a system for providing electronic presentations in which the system includes for example a plurality of presentation slides stored in a first memory accessible by a programmable computer a first display screen coupled with the programmable computer and having a first video input signal a second display screen coupled with the programmable computer and having a second video input signal and a third display screen coupled with the programmable computer and having a third video input signal. The presentation system also includes a presentation control software application that is stored in a second memory accessible by the programmable computer wherein the programmable computer is configured to execute the presentation control application to provide an interface displayed on the third display screen by which each of the plurality of slides is dispatched for display to either one of the first or second display screens. The third display screen includes a multi windowed display interface that simultaneously depicts the current right side image the current left side image and an image of the next slide to be dispatched. Using the presentation control system a presenter can selected either the right side or left side image and perform real time annotation of that image.

Another aspect of the present invention relates to a software application and method for providing an electronic presentation of a plurality of slides using multiple display screens that provides a presentation control interface on a center display screen displays a slide from among the plurality of slides in a preview window within the presentation control interface receives input via the presentation control interface indicating whether to direct the slide to a right display screen or a left display screen dispatches the slide for display on the indicated display screen and retrieves a next slide for display in the preview window. In addition to the display on the separate screens the presentation control interface simultaneously displays in separate sub windows on the center display screen the slide from the right side the slide from the left side and the next presentation slide to be dispatched. From this center display screen either slide can be selected and annotated so as to modify the presentation in real time.

Further aspects of the present invention relate to providing annotations and modifications to slides before dispatching the slides for display Thus a slide may be marked or otherwise annotated before being presented to an audience.

In the following description for purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the present invention. It will be apparent however to one schooled in the art that the present invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known structures and devices are shown in block diagram form in order to avoid unnecessarily obscuring the present invention.

Various embodiments of the present invention are presented and discussed below. In particular many embodiments are described in reference to the specific environment of instructional or training presentations. This specific environment is helpful in describing many of the aspects of the present invention. However the present invention is not limited to only this specific environment but rather contemplates within its scope other presentation environments in which multiple screens and dynamic annotation capability are beneficial.

The computer system also includes separate video outputs that respectively provide video output to the left hand projector and right hand projector . The video output can be SVGA formatted video signals as well as other conventional video formats. Within the present description the left right hand convention is from the perspective of the presenter. The video data that is output over each of the video outputs is determined by the presenter using the interface . Using the interface the presenter retrieves presentation material from storage not shown accessible by the computer system and then directs that material to one or both of the video outputs . The projectors then display the respective presentation materials on a respective screen 

The video outputs in addition to being directed to projectors also are directed via respective paths to touch screen monitors . In practice the monitors would be located near the presenter while the screens would be located for convenient viewing by an audience receiving the presentation. Each of the touch screen monitors are connected to the computer system . In these connections are depicted as serial connections but other functionally equivalent feedback connection paths are contemplated by the present invention as well. These connection paths can be other types of input output protocols and hardware and are not limited to RS 232 serial communication paths. The connections are used to provide feedback from a respective touch screen monitor that indicates any tactile interaction that may be taking place with the monitors . While depicts an exemplary stylus for each monitor tactile interaction with the monitors can occur using the same stylus or even no stylus at all.

The interface can be controlled using a keyboard mouse or other input device connected to the computer . However to provide the presenter some flexibility in movement and location around a room a remote control device is also connected to the computer system to control the interface as well. This remote control device could include a transmitter and receiver on the computer that utilizes USB FireWire IrDA serial or many other types of input output conventions to connect with the computer . Additionally the display device can also be a touch screen device that allows the presenter to control the presentation using tactile initiated commands and such a device will need its own feedback path .

Within the exemplary presentation system of the computer system controls the operation of the presentation by concurrently executing a a presentation interface that is used to retrieve and direct or dispatch presentation materials to one of two video outputs an annotation tool for the left hand screen that receives tactile feedback from a touch screen monitor and adjusts the video output accordingly and c an annotation tool for the right hand screen that receives tactile feedback from a touch screen monitor and adjusts the video output accordingly.

Within the embodiment just described as well as other embodiments described herein the exemplary components are not intended to limit the scope of the present invention. For example the touch screen monitors can include LCD display panels or other types of displays and the computer does not necessarily have to be physically located with the other components but can be connected through network or other longer range cabling techniques to the various other components of the presentation system .

Within this embodiment as compared to system additional video displays are possible and a video switch is used to provide additional functionality. However because many aspects of the system are similar to those of the system of detailed explanation of some features are not repeated when describing .

The system includes a computer used by a presenter to provide a multi screen presentation to an audience using left and right projectors. The presenter has available three monitors a left screen monitor which shows the material being presented from the left projector a right screen monitor which shows the material being presented from the right projector and the center monitor which provides a graphical user interface to the presentation software application running on the computer .

In the exemplary system there is also a demonstration computer demonstration monitor and video splitter . The video splitter provides the video output from the demonstration computer to both the demonstration monitor and the video switch . The demonstration computer is typically under the control of the presenter and can be used to create simulations and other demonstrations that further augment or explain the presentation materials being viewed by an audience. Consequently the graphical user interface also allows the presenter to direct the video output of the demonstration computer to one of the projectors so that the audience has the benefit of the simulations and demonstrations.

The video switch is a conventional video switch as is known to one of ordinary skill and can be controlled to direct a data signal received at one of its inputs to one or more of its data outputs. As shown the video switch receives at least three video signals a from the computer b from the computer and c from the demonstration computer via the video splitter . Depending on the settings of the video switch these various input signals are then directed to one or more of the following outputs a the left projector b the left monitor c the right projector and d the right monitor .

Similar to the system described before the system of provides a presentation system that allows a presenter to use a graphical user interface that executes on computer and displays on the center monitor . This user interface permits the presenter to retrieve presentation materials preview them on the center monitor and then dispatch the materials to either the left projector the right projector or both. To control what is presented to the audience the presenter uses the interface to send materials out of one of two video outputs and to configure the video switch to direct its different video inputs to appropriate video outputs.

As shown in the serial path is one exemplary method for the computer to selectably configure the video switch . In particular using the communications link the presenter interacts with the presentation system software to send a command from the computer to the video switch . Based on this command the video switch controls the coupling between video inputs and outputs.

The right monitor left monitor and the center monitor in a preferred embodiment are all touch screen monitors. In addition the computer is executing three instances of an annotation tool e.g. a software application wherein each instance of the annotation tool allows modification or augmentation of the video data displayed on a respective one of the monitors . This augmented video data is overlaid onto any presentation slides that are currently being displayed. As shown in these monitors are connected to respective inputs of the computer . The exemplary feedback paths of are shown as serial communication paths that provide responses to the computer that are dependent on tactile interaction with a respective touch screen monitor. The feedback data is routed to the appropriate instance of the annotation tools in order to appropriately adjust the video data displayed on the appropriate monitor.

In operation the presenter will touch one monitor for example right monitor which brings the focus of the operating system to the instance of the annotation tool associated with the right monitor . Using the annotation tool and the touch screen monitor along with its driver software the presenter is able to draw such things as text boxes free hand diagrams and other annotations that can be overlaid onto the video data that is being output by the computer for display on the right presentation screen. Accordingly the audience has the benefit of static presentation material that can be easily augmented in real time in response to the individual needs of that particular audience.

In step a list of available presentations are presented to a presenter to allow the presenter to make a selection. Once a presentation file is selected the method continues in step by providing a list of the slides that comprise the selected presentation. Once the presentation file is selected the presentation system can proceed with the later steps of displaying images under the control of the presenter. However a preloader is one useful tool that preloads images and the accompanying data files so that they are cached prior to the start of the presentation. In operation the preloader tool may or may not be used at the discretion of the presenter however use of the cached images will allow faster display of different screens as compared to performing the presentation with uncached images.

The first slide among the slides is automatically presented in a preview window in step so that the presenter can see what the next slide is and decide how it can best be displayed. At this point the presenter might determine that the slide should be annotated in step before being displayed.

Next in step the method determines which of many possible alternatives the presenter selects for the display of the preview slide. For example the presenter might select in step to send the preview slide to the left screen or in step to send the preview slide to the right screen. Alternatively the method can include an automatic dispatch feature that refers to a preference file to determine in step which screen to automatically forward the preview slide to. Other display options can be selected in step these options can include such things as blanking the left or right screen going back one slide in the presentation skipping the current preview slide without displaying it jumping to a slide out of order jumping to a slide from another presentation file or sending a blank template to one of the display screens. The presenter can also select in step to display the output of a demonstration computer on either the left screen step or the right screen step . The presenter can also elect in step to annotate the slide that is displayed on either the left screen in step or the right screen in step . By annotating a slide the presenter is able to interactively augment the presentation in a customized manner appropriate for the audience at hand. As the annotations may be useful in later slide presentations and in order to preserve annotations to more than one displayed slide step of the method saves any annotations for future use. Based on the presenter s selection for displaying or annotating a presentation slide step results in the next slide being retrieved and displayed in the preview window. Step represents that the method then repeats itself from step until the last slide of the presentation file is displayed. The details of this method are presented below in relation to a specific interface and software application for controlling a slide presentation.

The foundation for a presentation can consist of for example a number of PowerPoint slides arranged together in what can be referred to as a presentation file. Other slide formats are also contemplated within the present invention. The PowerPoint files or slide shows and their individual frames can be stored on the hard disk drive of the computer . For example the presentation software can be set to look for a presentation files in a default directory such as D courses . Within that directory would be a number of different presentation files that the presentation software automatically scans and displays to the presenter for selection thereof.

In one embodiment the presentation system also permits user defined preference data to be associated with any one of the presentation files. This preference data can take the form of preference files using a predetermined extension e.g. .ipf so that the presentation software can easily associate a preference file with its similarly named presentation file. In a preferred embodiment the preference file can contain a number of entries having three fields 

As shown there is no need for the slide numbers to be in numerical order although following such a convention may prove helpful under certain circumstances. Furthermore there is no requirement that each slide have an entry nor that each entry have data in every field.

Alternatively the preference information can be included in slides of the presentation file itself. Using the notes section of a PowerPoint slide or similar features for other presentation file formats the preference information does not need to be stored in a separate preference file but can be included within the presentation file.

The presentation software interface provides a drop down box that assists the presenter in selecting a presentation. In for example the presenter has selected a file named 503 CH00US which in one embodiment can be meaningful and indicate that the presentation pertains to chapter 00 of lesson 503. On the hard drive this file could be stored as a PowerPoint file 503 Ch00US.ppt . In a preferred embodiment the first slide of a selected presentation is automatically displayed in the preview window .

The window shows the 13 slides within the selected presentation file and their respective titles. One slide title is shown as selected as indicated by the reverse video and this slide is displayed in the preview window . From this window the presenter can direct or dispatch the slide to one of the video outputs of the computer .

The monitor on which the screen is displayed can be a touch screen monitor but the presenter can also interact with the presentation software s interface using a keyboard or mouse in addition to tactile input.

There are three icons in screen that determine the destination of the preview slide . The term destination refers to which video output of computer the slide is sent so that it is displayed on either the left or right screen. According to one embodiment the set up and cable connections of the video switch are configured in a predetermined manner such as that shown in . The presentation software knows of this predetermined configuration and is itself configured to provide slide to the appropriate video output based on which icon is selected by the presenter. The specific cabling connections can be different than that shown in as long as the presentation software is configured to direct video output accordingly.

The icon causes the presentation software to send the preview slide to the left screen while the icon causes the presentation software to send the preview slide to the right screen. If the preview slide has a direction preference specified in an associated preferences file then the icon becomes active and by selecting that icon the presenter can send the slide to the preferred screen based on the direction preference found in the preference file. Once the preview slide is sent to its appropriate screen for display the presentation software automatically displays the next slide in the sequence of slides within the window . The preference tag can be overridden by using either icon or instead of the automatic icon . The window is used for displaying any memory jogger text from the preference file to assist the presenter with the presentation.

According to one embodiment of the present invention a slide s entry in the preference file can have a direction entry such as LR . This double entry will have the effect of automatically displaying the one slide on the left screen and then displaying the next slide on the right screen so that both slides appear to be displayed substantially simultaneously. As a result the eventual new preview slide is two removed from the initial preview slide.

Slides can be selected out of sequence from the display window and then displayed in the preview window .

The interface screen also provides a go back icon and a go forward icon . The icon allows the presenter to proceed in a reverse direction in the preview window and the icon allows the current preview slide to be skipped and the next slide in the presentation to be displayed in the preview window .

The icons and respectively provide a left screen and right screen slide jog feature that allows a slide to appear to be slid up the display screen. This activity mimics the traditional action of a presenter who slides a view foil up on the projector so that the bottom half of the foil is emphasized. These icons act as toggles such that successive selection of the icon flips between normal presentation of a slide and jogged presentation of the slide.

In order to focus students on one screen or the other and for additional reasons within a presentation the presentation software interface provides icon to blank the left display and icon to blank the right display. Selecting either of these icons again will result in the appropriate display being unblanked .

As shown in the environment of the video output from the demonstration computer is provided to the video switch . The presentation software can effect the display of this video output to one of the display projectors by appropriate control of the video switch via the communications link . When the presenter wants to direct the output from the demonstration computer to the left projector the icon is selected. This selection causes the presentation software to control the video switch to display the video signal on the left screen. Similar functionality with the right projector is accomplished using the icon . A second selection of either of the icons will restore the displayed slides to the respective screen instead of the output from the demonstration computer . A second demonstration computer can be included that takes advantage of the unused fourth input of video switch . In such an alternative manual control of the video switch can prove useful in selecting appropriate video signal routing.

Using the buttons respectively the current slide displayed on the left or right display screen can be added to a favorites list displayed in window . This list can be named something meaningful such as favorites.fvt and located in the default directory D courses . Other file names and locations could also be used.

In a preferred embodiment the format of the file is Accordingly one entry may resemble 409 Ch05 14 Free Threading which refers to the fourteenth slide of the presentation file 409 Ch05.ppt for example if PowerPoint slides are being used . The descriptive text can be any text but the slide title is one useful example.

By selecting either of the buttons or a new entry is appended to or otherwise inserted into the favorites file. In a preferred embodiment this file is useful among different presentation files and is not specific to a particular presentation file. The presenter selects a slide from the window similar to the manner in which a slide is selected from the window . One difference is that the presentation software must open the referenced presentation file extract the appropriate slide and display that in the preview window . The slide can then be dispatched to the left or right screen using the icons and respectively. Once the slide is dispatched the presentation reverts back to the slide location within the original presentation file in order to select the next slide to place in the preview window .

The presentation software cooperates with three different instances of a slide annotation application i.e. an annotation tool . The slide annotation tool can be a vector based drawing tool that generates graphics that can be overlaid onto a presentation slide. Each of these instances of the annotation tool correspond to a different one of the monitors . The execution of an annotation tool instance results in an annotation toolbar being displayed on each of the different monitors . The annotation toolbar associated with the annotation tool for the center monitor is depicted at the bottom of the preview window . Using this toolbar the presenter can annotate the slide before it is dispatched to either the left or right display screens. Each of the left and right monitors and have their own associated annotation tools and similar toolbars.

The clock icon opens a timer window that allows a presenter to select a time period and display a countdown screen that indicates remaining time within that period. This time period can reflect the time left to complete an exercise or the time left until the end of a break in the presentation.

In a preferred embodiment both the rectangle and ellipse tools automatically activate a text entry function so that the created shape can have text entered without requiring the selection of any additional icons.

Annotations can be taking place on the left right and center monitors in any particular order therefore in a preferred embodiment annotations are saved every time a presenter navigates away from a presentation slide. For example slide can be displayed on the left monitor and be annotated while slide is displayed on the right monitor . If the presenter touches the right monitor then the operating system of computer detects that focus has now shifted to the right monitor and any further input will be interpreted by the annotation tool associated with that monitor . The presentation software also saves any current annotations for slide before proceeding. If the presenter then navigates back to slide the current annotations for slide are saved and further input is interpreted by the annotation tool associated with the left monitor .

In a preferred embodiment the vector graphics files created by each annotation tool are stored in the C courses directory. For example as annotations are made to the slides within presentation file 409 Ch05.ppt a directory 409 Ch05and can be created and populated with a file xxx wherein the xxx refers to the slide within that presentation file.

When the presentation software presents a slide in the preview window it can automatically search for the existence of any annotation files and automatically augment the slide accordingly. As a result annotation files can be saved and moved to another computer to augment a presentation from that computer while still utilizing the presentation slides that reside on the second computer. Also the re display of an annotated slide is not dependent on the display screen on which the slide was originally annotated. For example a slide displayed and annotated while on the right display screen can be later recalled for display and dispatched to the left display screen and any previous annotations will be displayed on the left display screen without any need for modification.

Returning briefly to the interface screen of there are two complementary icons and . These icons respectively start a blank slide on the left and right display screens. This blank slide can then be annotated as desired. In a preferred embodiment a dialog box appears that asks for a name for the blank slide and can provide a suggested default name as well. If the newly named slide is not saved as a favorite then it will be deleted upon ending the current presentation. If it is saved then it will be available for recall later. In a similar manner individual slides may be created and copied into the C courses directory and manually added to the favorites file. In this manner additional extrinsic slides that augment a presentation file can easily be made available for selection and display during a pre scripted presentation.

The presentation system is not limited to presenting viewable content from only a single document file format. The presentation system for example can work with two or more different document file formats such as PowerPoint presentations and Adobe Acrobat PDF files. In a preferred embodiment the PowerPoint presentations are used to deliver screens of information in landscape layout while Acrobat files display information from portrait layout paginated documents.

According to this embodiment both the PowerPoint and Acrobat presentations can be treated in exactly the same way by the presentation system including the incorporation of any annotation files associated with each screen of the document being displayed. Because of the aspect ratio difference between landscape and portrait documents there may be instances in which only two thirds of a portrait mode page e.g. an Acrobat page is displayed on each screen and projector. The nudge up buttons on the interface are used to make the lower two thirds of an Acrobat page visible.

The functionality and benefits of the favorites mechanism remain the same for either PowerPoint or Acrobat pages as both formats can be saved and then recalled for display on any display screen .

An exemplary remote control of is shown in more detail in as element . For example the remote control can connect to the computer using an input output port that is not being used by another component of the system . The remote control does not need to have the entire tool suite that is shown in but rather can include a button for automatically advancing a slide a button for skipping the current preview slide a button for sending the preview slide to the right screen a button for blanking unblanking the right screen a button for blanking unblanking the left screen and a button for sending the preview slide to the left screen.

In the computer controls the data flows and presentation materials used by the other components This computer includes a communications port for interfacing with input devices such as trackball keyboards standard or miniature and mice. The computer provides a graphical user interface via the video port on the touch screen to assist a presenter or instructor in controlling a presentation. The communications port receives feedback from the touch screen such as provided by a stylus.

While any conventional touch screen terminal can be used an exemplary touch screen is the 18 inch Wacom Cintiq computer aided design terminal. This particular terminal includes a tailored stylus that allows a user to rest their hand on the display screen while writing. This functionality improves the accuracy of annotation.

Video ports and provide the video output for display on the right and left projectors . As described earlier the presentation system alternates or otherwise controls the electronic display of information by directing display screens to a particular projector under the control of a presenter using the graphical user interface provided on touch screen .

As other video sources may be occasionally displayed on either projector or the video outputs from the ports and are routed through a video switch that is controlled via signals from a port on the computer . Thus using the graphical user interface to produce control signals from the port the presenter can control the directing of slides from video ports and as well as control the selection and deselection of alternate video signals from sources .

Although the video switch is depicted as a single n 2 video switch i.e. having n inputs and 2 outputs other configurations such as a pair of 2 1 switches could also be used. Alternatively the switch can be omitted if the projectors and have multiple input ports. In this alternative the control signal from port would directly control the appropriate projector to display a selected input.

One significant difference between the system of and the earlier described systems is that a single touch screen is used instead of a center display and left and right displays . To accommodate this simplification the presentation control software running on the computer uses a multi windowed tabbed interface on the single touch screen .

The interface includes the icon tool bar across the top as well as respective left and right toolbars and along each side. These toolbars provide functionality as described previously that permit a presenter to for example direct pages to one screen or the other skip pages send blank pages scroll pages jump between pages select an alternative video source e.g. a demo computer and save or select favorites . Along the top of the interface is the memory jogger bar that displays a brief note about the current instructor screen .

Along the bottom of the interface are three tabs corresponding to a respective one of the sub windows in the display area . Using the left screen tab a user can select the left projector screen for annotation and using the right screen tab the user can select the right projector screen for annotation. Using the center tab the user can return to the composite multi windowed screen shown in .

The graphical user interface is displayed on the touch screen display that provides feedback to the computer through the communications port . Annotations and toolbar selections can be performed from the composite screen however selecting one of the current display screens will allow finer control over any annotations. One of the display screens can be selected using the appropriate tab or or simply by selecting one of the windows or using one of the input devices .

The layout of the snapshot and the interface are exemplary in nature. Of course other functionally equivalent toolbars screen layout icon labels and features are contemplated within additional embodiments of the present invention.

There is much similarity between the tools and facilities available in the alternative presentation system of and those described and explained with respect to . However in the alternative arrangement there is preferably one touch screen for controlling the three video outputs. Thus a presenter switches from image to image on the touch screen rather than annotating three separate touch screens.

A typical use of this system would start with selecting the Chapter button to load a chapter of multiple screens for presentation. Using the instructor screen as the control interface for the presentation application pages are sent alternately left and right using the left and right buttons of the toolbar. Alternatively default preferences could be stored that automatically control how the screens are directed for presentation. To annotate a particular projected image the annotation tools can be used on the smaller display windows found on the instructor screen interface of . Alternatively should the presenter select one of the current projector screens by clicking on the window or using the tab button then the corresponding left or right screen image is magnified to nearly fill the touch screen area as shown in . This allows annotation to be applied much more accurately to the magnified window. Once any annotation is completed clicking on the Instructor Screen tab will cause the composite multi windowed instructor screen to reappear so that the presentation can continue.

In the particular situation depicted in known as split screen mode a current slide is displayed on both the left hand and right hand screens. For example the window shows the upper portion of the current slide while the window shows the lower portion of the current slide. There is some overlap portion that appears in both windows and this portion can be shaded or otherwise visually distinguished to help an observer recognize that this information is in both windows.

A zoom tool is available to the presenter that allows further control of how the current slide is displayed. depicts how the display windows change once the zoom tool is selected. While the window remains the same the display windows and change their behavior.

In the right hand window the entire current slide is shown as being displayed on the right side display screen. In a preferred embodiment the left side display screen is blank. However the left hand window can include helpful instructions for the presenter that suggest for example that a portion of the slide should be selected so as to permit zooming in . In practice the presenter would then use the select tool to select a portion of the slide displayed in window . This tool preferably utilizes a click and drag operation that is familiar to most computer users. Additionally in other embodiments a different slide may be present in the left and right hand screens. Using the zoom tool on either screen causes the opposite projected image to be replaced with a zoomed copy of the selected area.

As for annotation both the left hand window and the right hand window can be annotated using the tools and methods described earlier. illustrates a screen shot of one embodiment of the present invention that includes features not yet described in previous embodiments.

Similar to previous screen shots of the presentation control interface includes a sub window for displaying the next slide in the presentation as well as sub windows for displaying the slides presently being displayed on the left and right projections screens respectively.

During a presentation the presenter may become aware of an error or other inappropriate content on a slide. Additionally from audience feedback the presenter may learn of additional information that might be added to a slide. In these instances the presentation system and method herein described provides a tool to mark a slide during the presentation as needing correction.

While the slide is still being displayed during the presentation the presenter can use the annotation tool to create annotations that are depicted on the window but preferably not on the display screen seen by the audience. Alternatively the presenter can simply click on the tool to mark the slide for later revision. After a slide has been marked the presentation can continue until it is completed. The instructor can then review the slides and annotate any marked slides at a more convenient time. To assist the presenter in recognizing which slides have been marked using tool a visual indicator can be added to each such slide.

If the computer system e.g. on which the presentation control interface executes is connected to a network then the slides which are marked and annotated by the presenter can easily be forwarded to other individuals to perform correction or updating of the slides. In a preferred embodiment the presentation control system automatically locates recently annotated slides and forwards them on for updating.

Another feature of the screen shot involves a timeline tracking indicator . This indicator displays an indication of how the current presentation is progressing in comparison to a pre set timeline. To help the presenter maintain a predetermined schedule during the presentation each slide can have associated meta information that indicates how long the slide should preferably be displayed during the presentation. As discussed earlier each slide can have associated metadata such as screen preference and memory jogger text etc. The timing meta information now being described is used to determine how closely the presenter is following the expected timeline of a presentation. Such metadata can be displayed on the presenter s images of the slides as they are displayed to aid the presenter with their time management.

The logical flow diagram of depicts an exemplary method for providing timeline information to a presenter. Once a presentation is started a clock or timer is started in step . Next a slide is retrieved for presentation in step and timing information for the slide is extracted in step regarding when that slide should be displayed during the presentation. Eventually in step the presenter will display the slide to the audience. At this point in time a timestamp is created indicating when that particular slide was displayed based on the running clock or timer. If associated timing meta information cannot be located for a presentation the system can simply use a default time for each slide instead of generating an error message or otherwise affecting the presentation.

In step the time that has expired since the start of the presentation i.e. the timestamp from the previous step is compared to the expected time that the slide should have been displayed. A number of alternatives are contemplated for performing this comparison. For example each slide can have meta information that indicates how long it should be displayed during a presentation. In this instance then the expected display time for a slide is simply the sum of all the previous slides display times . Alternatively the meta information could be a point in time relative to the start of the presentation e.g. 5 15 minutes . In this instance the expected display time is explicitly identified and does not have to be calculated using information about the previous slides. Other functionally equivalent methods for tracking when a slide is presented and when it should have been presented are also contemplated by the present invention.

In step the timestamp information see step is stored in a log file either remotely or locally in order to record the progress of the presentation as it is occurring. If a slide is skipped then this log file can preferably include such an annotation rather than an associated timestamp.

An indicator of the comparison that occurred in step can be displayed for the presenter in step . As shown in a gauge indicating timing information about the current presentation is provided on the interface for the presenter. Although this timing information can be displayed in a variety of equivalent graphical formats depicts one exemplary display indicator . In this example a time bar includes region which can be red that indicates being behind schedule a center region which can be black that indicates being substantially on schedule and another region which can be green that indicates being ahead of schedule. A bar is also present which overlays the appropriate region of the timebar depending on how the presentation is progressing relative to the predetermined schedule. As shown the text 2 minutes ahead can also be present to more specifically indicate the timeline information to the presenter.

If there are more slides in the presentation then a decision in step returns logical flow to step so that the next slide can be retrieved. Once the presentation is over however the accumulated timestamp information such as the log file can be further analyzed. For example the log file can be automatically forwarded in step to a remote location in order to determine how closely the presentation followed the prescribed timeline. Historical data can thus be collected to permit such activities as evaluating presenters conformance or adjusting the prescribed timelines.

Additionally the Tools menu bar can include an option for timeline related information that provides more detailed information to a presenter. For example one option may be to display a list of all remaining slides in the presentation along with their expected display times. Another option may be to display a list of exercises that accompany the presentation and a calculation based on the remaining time and the remaining slides of how much time can be allocated by the presenter to the hands on exercises.

The stylus or highlighter tool is typically used by the presenter to highlight portions of a slide during its presentation. Usually manipulation of the stylus after it has been selected is accomplished using a mouse or other input device attached to the computer see . In addition to such an input device recent advances in wireless technologies permit an additional mouse or other input device to be located remotely from the computer . For example the presenter can carry a hand held input device that controls the stylus though an interface with any of the interface ports on the computer . In this manner the presenter can highlight and otherwise annotate a slide while being physically located somewhere else than at the keyboard of the computer .

In addition to the system functionality already described alternative embodiments of the present invention are contemplated as well. Some of these embodiments include additional tools and features that are available to a presenter using the described system. For example depicts an interface screen that is similar to that already described with respect to but includes additional or alternative interface elements. Those interface elements that have already been described in detail are not discussed further below so as not to obscure the additional features of the interface screen .

In this exemplary screen a navigation menu bar and an annotation menu bar are arranged near the top of the screen . These menu bars respectively allow a user to control the slide presentation and edit the slide s content as described earlier. In addition these menu bars include other tools that are described in more detail later.

Similar to previously described interface screens the interface screen includes a preview window a left screen window and a right screen window . Also displayed on this screen is a chapter window and a slide window . According to certain embodiments the chapter window list the chapters or modules that are included in a current course being presented. To aid the presenter the current chapter may be highlighted or otherwise visually denoted as shown in window . The slide window shows an ordered list of the slides that are included in the current chapter and may include a visual indication of which slide is the current slide in the preview window .

The chapter window is preferably displayed on the interface screen at all times while the appearance of the slide window may vary depending on the actions of the presenter. For example the presenter may select tools from the navigation menu bar that displays a list of favorites or displays a list of available files to open. In these instances the different lists may overlay on top of the slide window or simply replace the slide window on the display screen . One example of files that a presenter may want to display are PDF files. Embodiments of the present invention allow a presenter to open PDF documents and display them in either window. For example a presentation may include a PDF file that is being displayed of the left display window while a different PDF file from the favorites list is selected for display on the right display window . Of course other formats of files can be displayed in the two display windows as well.

As previously described a presenter controls a presentation by sending slides from the preview window to either the left display window or the right display window . There may be some instances in which the presenter may want both display windows to display what is in the preview window . Accordingly a tool is provided in the navigation tool bar that allows a presenter to easily send the slide in the preview window to both the left display window and the right display window simultaneously.

To accompany the three different windows there are three different regions around the periphery of the interface screen that allow a presenter to further manipulate the various slides of a presentation. The placement of these areas or regions correspond to the different display windows within the screen . For example region corresponds to the preview window region corresponds to the left screen window and region corresponds to the right screen window . As described earlier the interface elements available in these regions allow the presenter to create a blank page on a corresponding display screen black out a screen show different portions of a slide add a slide to a favorites list etc. In addition each region includes an interface element to mark a slide as having an error or a bug . According to the exemplary screen the region for the preview slide includes its own interface element for marking slides that have errors. This element permits a presenter to flag a slide as having an error before it is sent to the left or right screen thus minimizing any interruption of a presentation that might have been caused by sending slides to the right or left screen and then flagging them as having errors.

In conjunction with slides being able to be marked as having errors the navigation tool bar further includes an element that allows a list of slides that are marked as having errors to be displayed. When the presenter selects this menu element a screen similar to that of is displayed within the interface screen . The screen is preferably a separate window that opens and lists those slides that include errors or that need correcting.

In addition to flagging slides in the preview window as having an error a presenter may also annotate a slide in the preview window . According to the touch screen technology described earlier herein a presenter has a variety of input methods to change the focus of the system to the preview window . Once this window is selected then the elements of the annotation menu bar can be used to annotate the appropriate slide. Accordingly as described previously a presenter can continue to send a slide to a screen and then annotate it in view of the audience or alternatively a slide can be annotated while in the preview window and then sent to a display screen. Additionally an already annotated slide that is sent to one of the display window can be furthered annotated as well in view of the audience.

One set of annotation tools that are helpful to presenters are the arrow tools shown in the tool bar of . A presenter selects one of the tools and then moves the cursor to either the left or right display screens . As the cursor moves around the appropriate display screen an arrow is displayed that acts like a pointer to draw the audience s attention to a particular portion of the slide being presented. Depending on the layout of the slide and the item of interest a presenter may choose the left facing arrow or the right facing arrow based on which one would be more effective in the given situation. In some embodiments the arrow will move with the cursor movement or in alternative embodiments the presenter can click on a portion of the displayed slide to anchor the arrow onto the slide. In the latter embodiment once one arrow has been anchored on a slide additional arrow tools may be selected and utilized.

Another useful set of tools available to presenters that allow attention to be drawn to a particular area of a slide are the two highlighting tools of the annotation menu bar . The exemplary slide of depicts the difference in the two different highlighting tools. The region shows how the marquee highlighter highlights selected portions of a slides while the region depicts the more free form highlighting nature available with the chisel point highlighter . As shown both tools may be used on the same slide depending on how the presenter wants to highlight certain portions of the slide.

Once a slide is annotated manipulation of the annotations are sometimes needed and a variety of tools may be provided to assist a presenter in managing annotations to the slides. For example a tool may be used to select one or more annotations on a slide. For example the tool can be used in the familiar click and drag method to draw a polygon around annotations to be selected or alternatively the tool maybe more free form in nature to allow a user to draw irregular shapes to encompass selected annotations. Once selected the annotations can be manipulated en masse such as by moving them or deleting them. Another example would be to select an annotation using the tool and then changing the annotation such as for example by editing the text in a text box annotation on the slide. Whether annotations are deleted or edited one at a time or as a group a re do tool allows a presenter to add back annotations in the reverse order of their removal or editing. Thus a history of annotations and their removal is maintained by the system such that each selection of the re do tool successively re instates the most previously removed annotation.

Referring back to directly below the chapter window is an accompanying region that optionally provides additional information about the current chapter. For example this region as shown may show suggested times for when the chapter is to be presented during a presentation and when the chapter should be completed during a presentation. These suggested times may include not only hour and minute information but also day information if the presentation is scheduled to last multiple days. To further enhance this information a link may be provided that when selected displays time information for all chapters. For example the exemplary screen of includes a window that lists each chapter and its scheduled presentation times. Various details can be simultaneously displayed as well. In the example window the chapters are further delineated into sub portions such that the sub portions e.g. Exercises of each chapter are listed separately with their associated time periods as well. One of ordinary skill will appreciate that many different formats and detail levels can be displayed for the presenter s benefit without departing from the scope of the present invention.

Because the timing of a presentation is sometimes an important aspect to monitor additional time related tools are included within embodiments of the present invention to aid a presenter. For example the exemplary screen of includes an overlay window that displays how long a particular presentation portion is. In this example an exercise slide that would display in the left display screen the right display screen or both is shown that the presenter may display while the audience performs an exercise. The overlay window displays the length of the exercise to help the presenter remember that information. Although the overlay screen may be viewable on the display screens that the audience actually sees in a preferred embodiment the overlay screen is only visible on the touch display screen being used by the presenter.

The timer tool of the navigation menu bar is another useful tool available to the presenter. Selection of the timer causes a screen as shown in to open on the presenter s system. The screen allows a presenter to set and monitor a timer. Exemplary information would include such items as the current time the ending point of the timer and a dynamically changing display that counts down the remaining time. The screen also includes elements that allow changing or resetting the timer parameters and elements that allow the timer to be sent to the left right or both display screens.

As described earlier a blank slide can be created during a presentation so as to provide the presenter with a way to draw or write information without being obscured by other information on a slide. depicts features of one embodiment of the present invention that opens a blank slide with a title region and a editable region . In the editable region text or drawings can be added using the annotation tools as described earlier. However according to this embodiment the title region allows a presenter to name the blank slide with a meaningful label. Preferably when a presenter opens a blank page the cursor is positioned in the title region ready for the presenter to type in a name for the blank page. If the presenter moves the cursor directly to the editable region then a default naming scheme e.g. sheet sheet . . . could be used to name the blank page but the presenter continues to have an opportunity to move the cursor back to the title region and edit that information. A number of alternatives exist for saving the information of the edited blank page. One example would be to save the blank page as a favorite thereby allowing the text in the title region to be seen in the favorites list and selected by a presenter. Another example would be to save the edited blank page in another program s format such as a GIF file or an industry standard document format. An additional example would be to save the edited blank page in a format native to the presentation system such that it is available to be retrieved during other presentations as well.

In certain embodiments described herein manipulation of slides and information within a presentation causes slides to have additional information associated with them. For example the annotation information is associated with each slide. Also information such as which slide was the most recently accessed slide in a chapter is maintained as well. depicts a screen that allows a presenter additional control over the slides of a chapter. In particular a button is provided that allows a chapter to be reset. Using this feature a presenter is able to remove annotations from all slides at once within a chapter without having to open each slide and manually remove the annotations. Additionally by resetting the chapter the presenter is able to ensure that when that chapter is opened at some later time the first page of that chapter is presented instead of the most recently accessed page from that chapter. Access to this screen can be provided a number of different way but is preferably offered through an option under one of the menu items such as Tools available on the main navigation menu bar .

While particular embodiments of the present invention have been disclosed it is to be understood that various different modifications are possible and are contemplated within the true spirit and scope of the appended claims. There is no intention therefore of limitations to the exact abstract or disclosure herein presented.

