---

title: Natural fiber span reflectometer providing a virtual signal sensing array capability
abstract: A CW lightwave modulated by a continuously reiterated binary pseudorandom code sequence is launched into an end of a span of ordinary optical fiber cable. Portions of the launched lightwave back propagate to the launch end from a continuum of locations along the span because of innate fiber properties including Rayleigh scattering. This is picked off the launch end and heterodyned to produce a r.f. beat signal. The r.f. beat signal is processed by a plurality (which can be thousands) of correlator type binary pseudonoise code sequence demodulators respectively operated in different delay time relationships to the timing base of the reiterated modulation sequences. The outputs of the demodulators provide r.f. time-domain reflectometry outputs representative of signals (e.g., acoustic pressure waves) incident to virtual sensors along the fiber at positions corresponding to the various time delay relationships.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07030971&OS=07030971&RS=07030971
owner: The United States of America represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07030971
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050207
---
Applicant claims the benefit of a provisional application No. 60 599 437 which was filed on 6 Aug. 2004 and which is entitled Continuous Rayleigh Effect Sensor Backscattering Heterodyne Optical Sensor System by Robert M. Payton.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore.

 Natural Fiber Span Reflectometer Providing a Spread Spectrum Virtual Sensing Array Capability Navy Case No 96650 filed on even date herewith in the name of Robert M. Payton hereby incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

 Natural Fiber Span Reflectometer Providing A Virtual Phase Signal Sensing Array Capability Navy Case No. 96518 filed on even date herewith in the name of Robert M. Payton hereby incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

 Natural Fiber Span Reflectometer Providing a Virtual Differential Signal Sensing Array Capability Navy Case No. 96519 filed on even date herewith in the name of Robert M. Payton hereby incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The present invention relates generally to the field of time domain reflectometers. More specifically it relates to such reflectometers which are a part of a photonic system application in which the object of the reflectometry is a span of fiber which has an interrogation signal launch end and a remote end. The invention enables the provision of a linear array of virtual sensors along the span. One particular type of application toward which the invention is directed are acoustic security alarm systems in which the span serves as a perimeter intrusion monitoring line.

The U.S. Department of the Navy has been engaged in the development of towed acoustic arrays which are reflectometric systems in which the object of the reflectometry is a fiber span having an interrogation signal launch end and a remote end. One such development involves forming a towed array of acoustic sensors along the span by the costly process of irradiating Bragg reflective gratings into the fiber cable. These reflective gratings form the array of sensors of the reflectometry scheme of these systems. These towed arrays have a length of the order of at least 1.0 km and the need to irradiate the fiber has resulted in the fiber spans costing hundreds of thousands of dollars each.

The Department of the Navy development activities have been further tasked to apply their creative efforts to homeland defense problems. As part of this effort there is under consideration the use of a reflectometer in which a fiber span is the object of the reflectometry. In this scheme the fiber span provided with acoustic sensors would be used as an intrusion detector to monitor the perimeter of an area desired to be secure. The span lengths for this type of application include lengths of the order of 5 km links of a U.S. border protection network oil line protection chemical plant protection etc. . In such perimeter monitoring applications thousands of acoustic sensors would be required along the fiber span.

The cost of manufacturing such perimeter monitoring spans employing reflective Bragg grating sensors has been an obstacle to their use in perimeter intrusion monitoring applications. Thus there is considerable interest in the development of a reflectometer system in which a fiber span is the object of the reflectometry optic array that does not require the high cost of Bragg reflective acoustic sensors.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 194 847 issued Mar. 16 1993 to H. Taylor and C. Lee discloses an apparatus for sensing intrusion into a predefined perimeter which comprises means for producing a coherent pulsed light which is injected into an optical sensing fiber having a first predetermined length and positioned along the predefined perimeter. A backscattered light in response to receiving the coherent light pulses is produced and coupled into an optical receiving fiber. The backscattered light is detected by a photodetector and a signal indicative of the backscattered light is produced. An intrusion is detectable from the produced signal as indicated by a change in the backscattered light. To increase the sensitivity of the apparatus a reference fiber and interferometer may also be employed.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 285 806 issued on Sep. 4 2001 to A. Kersey et al. discloses an apparatus and method for measuring strain in an optical fiber using the spectral shift of Rayleigh scattered light. The interference pattern produced by an air gap reflector and backscatter radiation is measured. Using Fourier Transforms the spectrum of any section of fiber can be extracted. Cross correlation with an unstrained measurement produces a correlation peak. The location of the correlation peak indicates the strain level in the selected portion of optical fiber.

The above patents do not show how to obtain signals representing acoustic pressure signals incident upon a fiber span to detect perimeter intrusion at a very large number of sensing stations without involving high manufacturing costs. Consequently those skilled in the arts will appreciate the present invention which addresses these and other problems.

These and other objects features and advantages of the present invention will become apparent from the drawings the descriptions given herein and the appended claims. However it will be understood that the above listed objects and advantages of the invention are intended only as an aid in understanding aspects of the invention and not intended to limit the invention in any way and do not form a comprehensive list of objects features and advantages.

Accordingly a time domain reflectometer is provided for sensing and providing output signals representative of acoustic wave signals incident on the fiber span which is the object of the reflectometry wherein the innate properties of low cost commercially available fiber optic cables are employed to create a plurality upwardly extending to very large numbers e.g. 5000 and more virtual sensors.

The present invention is implemented as follows Time and spatial domain multiplexing and de multiplexing of optical signals is accomplished by an electronic delay or time of transversal delay coupled with modulated retransmission of a master or reference carrier wave. Each individual optical signal occupies a unique time delay slot or bin. A master or carrier wave is modulated with each individual optical signal and delayed by the appropriate time interval specific to a particular signal. All such signals are combined and simultaneously transmitted as a composite optical signal to a receiver where these are collected and photodetected. By correlating the photodetected composite optical signal with the master or reference carrier wave each individual optical signal is sorted or demultiplexed into separate electronic signal channels. The continuous wave nature of the master or reference carrier wave provides more power than a pulsed optical wave and heterodyne optical reception of the invention allows a very low optical detection threshold or noise floor. The invention provides significant improvement over other systems because the optical noise floor is lowered considerably over more conventional means.

The invention applies to several applications. The invention allows audio bandwidth tens of kilohertz bandwidth providing time domain reflectometry measurements of fiber optical cables or other optical mediums such as glass air water etc. Other time domain reflectometry methods do not sample the optical medium fast enough to detect tens of kilohertz bandwidth variations in the medium. The invention also relates to fiber optic sensors and optical sensors generally. A fiber optic sensor array is typically time domain multiplexed by the time of transversal of an interrogation lightwave to each sensor and back to a common optical collection and detection point. The invention relates generally to both amplitude and phase type optical senor arrays. The invention is an enabling technology for a Department of Navy development known as the Rayleigh Optical Scattering and Encoding ROSE sensor system. The spatial separation of segmentation of a ROSE acoustic array into spatial channels is enabled by the invention.

The invention relates to acoustic security alarm systems Naval towed arrays for sensing underwater acoustic signals fiber optic bugging devices and many other potential ROSE applications. The invention also relates to non fiber optical sensors such as laser velocimeters lasers imagers laser radar laser rangers and remote laser acoustic strain motion or temperature measurement devices.

Optical receivers are built around photodetectors which detect optical power rather than instantaneous electric field. Typically the photodetector output current is proportional to the incident optical power. This relationship severely limits the dynamic range of an incoherent optical receiver because for every decibel of optical power lost in a receiver system two decibels of receiver output current is lost. The square law characteristics of photodetectors limits typical incoherent optical receivers often called video detection receivers to dynamic ranges of less than 80 dB and optical detection noise floors to greater than 80 dBm per Hertz bandwidth. As illustration suppose an electric field E t volt meter immersed in a material of impedance Ohms impinges upon a photodetector of responsivity ampere watt loaded by resistor Rand amplified by amplification A then the optical power Pby amplification A is 

The output fades only if the optical signal power goes to zero because the vector dot product of an optical signal against itself has no polarization or phase effects. This lack of fading due to polarization or phase comes at a cost phase information is lost and signal to noise ratios are severely impacted.

A coherent optical receiver takes advantage of the square law characteristics of photodetectors. A coherent optical receiver combines two optical beams a signal and a local oscillator together to form an interference. The interference between these optical waves produces a beat which allows the measurement of the phase difference between the signal and the local oscillator. This interference produces an amplitude polarization and phase sensitive receiver output. In order to consider these effects a discussion of the polarization state of plane waves is in order. A plane wave contains two orthogonal vector components which are also orthogonal to the direction of propagation of the wave. For purposes of discussion we will consider the plane wave to be oriented so that the vector components of the electromagnetic field lie in an X Y plane and that the wave propagates in the Z direction. However this choice of axes is completely arbitrary. In practice the wave can be oriented in any propagation direction. In order to simplify discussions a simple change of coordinates will make this discussion completely general.

The polarization of an electromagnetic or optical plane wave p is described by a minimum of five parameters. There are two basic ways of specifying these parameters. The first way leads to a description which is oriented towards that which is directly obtained from physical measurements.

The optical cross interference portion of the receiver output will fade due to polarization even if the local oscillator and the signal lightwaves both do not have zero optical powers. This condition will occur if cos cos cos sin sin 2overscore sin 11 Also equivalently when the condition will occur 

When heterodyne optical detection is employed is non zero the local oscillator has a different frequency from the signal the conditions for a fade are shown in Table 1. When homodyne detection is employed is zero both phase and polarization fading occur. The conditions for a homodyne fade are shown in Table 2. Heterodyne detection is therefore seen to be superior to homodyne because the probability of a fade is fully one half as likely.

Given the conditions for and the functional relation of a fade the question now arises as to how a fade can be prevented. Since the signal is being measured no a priori knowledge is assumed and therefore E are all probably unknown quantities. If fading is prevented then no loss of information occurs and determination of these four parameters is possible. In order to decode the optical receiver output into these parameters at least four independent measurements must be made to uniquely determine these four independent variables. However if the interfering optical beam or beams of the local oscillator are unknown then additional independent measurements must be made four additional measurements for each unknown beam to determine the E or for each optical beam of the local oscillator. The cross reference output of the photoreceiver v t offers the only means by which to measure these parameters. If the parameters cannot be determined from this output then an optical fade cannot be ruled out.

We shall now examine the information which can be gleaned from this output. Define the following functions.

Since sine and cosine waves are orthogonal the heterodyne receiver provides two independent measurements by mixing down to baseband the radian frequency components. Thus two outputs are obtained 

In many optical sensor applications the lightwave signal heterodyne detected by the photodetector system is a composite optical signal formed from the superposition of many individual optical signals. When the receiver lightwave is generated by backscatter the composite optical signal is the superposition of individual light signals generated by a continuum of reflections of an interrogation light source. The temporal and spatial characteristics of each reflector or reflective region creates a modulation of the interrogation light source. The time delay amplitude polarization and phase states control the backscattered modulation of these individual optical signals arriving at the photodetector with a unique time delay interval can be separated into channels which sort the optical signals into time delay slots or bins. Depending upon how the signals are generated these channels can represent spatial regions in space or time delay slots of a time domain reflectometer mechanism.

Let an interrogation lightwave source be generated by modulating the amplitude phase or polarization of a coherent lightwave with a time structured correlation code c t . The correlation code c t can be a series of pulses chirps binary sequences or any other type of code which provides the required correlation characteristics. If the lightwave source is cos 17 Then an amplitude modulated interrogation source is cos 18 Alternatively a phase modulated interrogation source is cos . 19 If c t is chosen to be temporally structured properly then 

Therefore delaying the correlation decoding demultiplexing function d t allows demultiplexing of delay multiplexed signals identifiable by speed of propagation and distance of flyback travel. Suppose an optical wave is formed a summation of delayed signals modulated onto the interrogation wave E t then the received wave E t is 

In order to more fully describe the capabilities and new features of the invention the application of the invention to a subsystem of ROSE which launches an interrogation signal onto fiber span and retrieves lightwave back propagation from a continuum of locations along the span. Back propagation mechanisms may include Rayleigh Optical Scattering ROS and other effects generated within the optical fiber. Rayleigh Optical Scattering ROS in an optical fiber backscatters light incident upon the fiber. The incident light transverses down the optical fiber to the scattering point region. At the scattering region the incident light is backscattered back up the optical fiber. As the light transverses the round trip optical path i.e. distance of flyback travel any disturbance of the fiber which increase or decrease the optical path length will cause the phase of the incident and backscattered light to be modulated. Suppose a pressure is applied to the optical fiber. The pressure elongates the path length of the light transversing the region.

Refer to . for the following discussion. In the FIGS. like parts correspond to like numbers. Let p t z be pressure applied to the outside of the optical fiber at time t and at point or length z along the fiber axis. Then if an interrogation optical wave E t generated by laser passed through optical coupler and modulated by optical modulator is applied to optical coupler this results in the following output interrogation wave E t being transmitted down the fiber cos . 27 

The backscattered wave E t arriving back at an optical coupler from ROSE fiber optic array passes into optical path . The backscattered light which arrives at optical path is the summation of all light backscattered from a continuum of locations along the length of the ROSE fiber optic span . As will later herein be described in detail fiber has a longitudinal strain component enhancing coating . If r z is the reflection density at point or length z along the fiber and CL is the optical wave speed then the backscattered light after a pressure p t z is applied to fiber is represented mathematically as 

If the distributed reflection r z is essentially independent of the applied pressure p t z then the backscatter is 

Since optical path length change caused by the applied pressure p t z is usually extremely small on the order of 10to 10times an optical wavelength the backscattered light from each z distance down the fiber arrives at the optical path with a transversal delay t z equal to 

Therefore to receive the signal Sbackscattered from the fiber region at length down the fiber z L the correlational multiplexing characteristic of the transmitted interrogation light can be utilized. Multiplication of the total backscattered optical signal by the correlation decoding demultiplexing function d t t z produces an output which contains the signal S backscattered from a distance Ldown the fiber and rejects signals originating from other fiber regions such as S Sand etc. Representing this process mathematically the resulting channel output B t L is obtained as follows 

Once the correlation process isolates the optical signal originating from a spatial region the signal must be phase demodulated to extract the pressure information. The signal is I in phase and Q quadrature phase demodulated is 

Then I Q or cosine phase and sine phase outputs are converted into either phase rate or phase outputs with simple analog or digital hardware. The phase so demodulated allows the inference of information about the acoustic pressure down the fiber to the measurement point.

Once the I Q outputs are generated the temporal phase state of B t L can be determined by one of several types of phase demodulation processes. The phase state of the region of Lspatial delay is therefore 

Likewise the plurality which may be a large number e.g. 5000 of optical signals arising with spatial delays such as the propagation time for flyback travel to Lor L can be correlated out of the backscattered signal E t . These are 

The phase signals obtained by phase demodulation of each B t L represent a pressure field p t z which is integrated along the length z of the fiber. Therefore rather than directly measure p t z the sensor provides all of the accumulated pressure effects down the fiber to the measurement point L where m is integer corresponding to the measurement point . In sensor arrays it is usually desired to detect the pressure over a specific measurement region. If two optical signals Sand Sare received from measurement lengths Land L the corresponding demodulated phases and are 

The resulting sensor is of length L L Lwith a center position of L L 2. The differencing of phase signals and into a new phase signal allows a virtual sensor of arbitrary position and length to be formed. The resulting spatially differential sensor also adds the advantage of minimizing other effects such as lead in fiber strum or vibration which create unwanted phase signals.

The above phenomena illustrates that when the interrogation light is properly encoded a ROSE Rayleigh Optical Scattering and Encoding sensor system is enabled. The subject invention therefore enables the ROSE concept. The subject invention enables spatial discrimination of the optical backscatter effects in a ROSE sensor. The spatial differencing technique rejects unwanted common mode signals inadvertently introduced in fiber leads down to the sensor region. The invention also applies in a similar manner to more conventional fiber optic acoustic sensor arrays i.e. those having Bragg reflective grating sensors or to non fiber optic remote optical sensors which detect phase.

The invention also applies to point wise non distributed sensors or artificially generated multiplexing by electronics means. The interrogation lightwave can be intercepted and retransmitted back to the receiver with an artificial electronically generated delay as a means of delay correlation multiplexing many channels.

The invention can be realized with bulk optical fiber optical or integrated optical components. For simplicity a fiber optic implementation will be presented. However the fiber optic embodiment is being presented without intent of limitation. The teachings of the invention can be used to implement a reflectometer system in accordance with the present invention using these and other instrumentalities providing a light path that has the innate property of producing back propagation of portions of an interrogation signal at a continuum of locations along the length of the propagation path therethrough.

More particularly the propagation of the optical spread spectrum interrogation signal down the continuous full span of the optical fiber span signal launch end to remote end causes a back propagating composite optical signal which is the linear summation or integration spatially of all of the individual continuous or continuum of back reflections along the span of the optical fiber.

One component of this composite signal is comprised of the naturally occurring continuum of optical back reflections including Rayleigh optical scattering ROS effects of the optical spread spectrum carrier signal that is formed by modulating the primary carrier signal by the spectrum spreading signals. Another component is comprised of the artificially occurring optical back reflections either point wise reflections or distributed reflections of the optical spread spectrum carrier signal that is formed due to propagation discontinuities as the result of presence of a fiber cable coupler in span . Still another component comprised of the continuum of modulations at locations along the span of the reflected signals due to longitudinal components of optical path length change causing a delay in the reflected signal experienced by the fiber optical span along its length.

Such optical path length change or delay may be caused by a variety of possible sources including acoustic pressure waves incident to the fiber electromagnetic fields coupled to the fiber mechanical strain or pressure on the fiber thermal strain or pressure induced in the fiber or other means of causing change in the optical path length. Use of the acoustic pressure waves mode of changing path length in perimeter intrusion monitoring systems is the principle embodiment illustrated herein. In this use optical fiber span is employed to provide an array of virtual geophones buried at a range of depths beneath the surface of the ground of about between six 6 inches and one 1 foot to sense motion of an object on the surface of the ground. The acoustic pressure wave sensing mode is also useful to sense seismic signals as for example as linear arrays inserted into casing structures of an existing oil wells. Predetermined artificial pressure wave producing shocks are imparted into the ground and the responses from the sensor are used to locate secondary oil deposits. The acoustic pressure wave sensing mode is further useful for employing span as an array of virtual hydrophones with the media which couples the signals to the hydrophones at least in part being the body of water in which the array is immersed. Such hydrophone arrays find use as naval undersea warfare towed arrays or towed geophysical exploration arrays. In the latter the arrays respond to artificially produced shocks of predetermined character and location induced in the body of water and the response of the array to bottom return signals are used to locate ocean bottom geophysical feature indicating likely presence of an oil deposit. Yet further a sensing position on a fiber span could be used to receive as an input microphonic signals suitably imparted to the region of the sensing position. The electromagnetic field sensing mode of fiber span could be used for monitoring electronic signals along a telecommunication cable s span to localize malfunctions. Responses of fiber span to mechanical pressure or thermal strains can be used in systems for monitoring such strains.

The composite lightwave propagates up the optical fiber or medium passes through optical coupler beamsplitter or circulator to optical pathway . Optical pathway passes the backscattered time delay multiplexed composite lightwave E t to the optical receiver .

Preferably fiber is of the relatively low cost conventional single mode or multimode fiber cable types.

Further it is preferable that fiber have extruded thereon a coating of a material which enhances the longitudinal strain which the fiber undergoes from a given radially or generally laterally applied pressure wave strain. Materials which provide such enhancement include extrudable thermoplastic polymers TPU s or extrudable thermoplastic elastomers TPE s which exhibit a combination of a low Young s modules E and a low Poisson s ratio . The Poisson s ration is preferably below 0.5 which is the Poisson s ratio of natural rubber. Examples of such materials include i low density polyethylene having characteristic E 1.31 dynes cm 10and 0.445 and ii polystyrene E 3.78 dynes cmand 0.35 values as reported in the paper R. Hughes and J. Javzynski Static Pressure Sensitivity Amplification in Interferometric Fiber Optic Hydrophones Applied Optical Vol. 19 No. 1 1 Jan. 1980 .

An alternate embodiment of fiber albeit involving significantly greater cost per unit length of the fiber is to provide fiber in the more expensive form of a polarization preserving or single polarization optical fiber. The polarization preserving fiber of this type holds the backscattering light in a narrow range of polarization states so that a substantially single RF signal enters a single set of correlators reducing the complexity of the system. However in cases involving long surveillance lines this alternative embodiment becomes expensive in cost of fiber.

The correlation code generator creates a signal c t that has a broad bandwidth. The broadband nature of the correlation code is required to obtain the desired properties in the signals autocorrelation function. The calculation and definition of the autocorrelation function of any general signal is well known and defined in signal processing literature. The correlation code signal c t is so structured that its autocorrelation function is highly peaked at zero delay and is very small away from zero delay. This criterion is well known to those of skill in the art and is the essence of why the correlation code has a broad bandwidth. Any signal that has the desired autocorrelation function properties can be used as the correlation code in the invention. There are many reasons for choosing one correlation code over another ease of creation autocorrelation properties cost of creation hardware cost of correlation hardware and effectiveness in producing spread spectrum signal effects. According to the teaching of the invention the correlation code for the invention can be a binary sequence with a desired transorthogonal autocorrelation property sometimes called a pseudonoise sequence a pseudorandom number PRN sequence with the such desired autocorrelation property chirps or other types of signals which provide correlations code having predicable non repetitive behavior. The foregoing list of types of sequence signals which may be employed to modulate the carrier lightwave signal includes both binary pseudonoise sequences and pseudorandom number PRN sequences. For purposes of construction of this specification and the appended claims these terms are employed as they are defined under the listings Pseudonoise PN sequence communication satellite and Pseudorandom number sequence at pages 747 and 748 of the IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and Electronic Terms Fourth Edition which listings are hereby incorporated herein by reference. Further for purposes of construction of this specification and the appended claims it is deemed that binary pseudonoise sequence is generic and pseudorandom number sequence is a species thereof. Still further for purposes of construction of this specification and its appended claims both terms are deemed to include analog signal forms of sequences as well as digital signal forms.

It is to be appreciated that in addition to its correlation encoding function master correlating code generator is a source of a spectrum spreading signal comprised of a spectrum spreading signal which produces an autocorrelation that is well behaved. It has one dominate maxima at zero correlation delay and its spectrum is large enough to provide sampling of the said optical fiber spatially along the length of the fiber with a resolution commensurate with a sub length Z of fiber span . These characteristics enable segmentation of an optical fiber of span length L into n segments in accordance with a relationship L

An illustrative embodiment of generator is a shift register type pseudorandom number code generator having n bits wherein a code is generated that satisfies said resolution sublength and segment length relationship by choosing an appropriate combination of the number of its bits and the clock time.

The temporal length of the code sequence which is reiteratively produced by generator may be either less than the time period for propagation of a lightwave to the remote end of span and propagation back of a backscattering i.e. distance of flyback travel or greater than this time period. It cannot be equal to this period.

The predetermined timing base employed by the source of the spectrum spreading signals which determines the length of Z segment is so chosen to provide a positive enhancement to the ratio of the power of back propagating Rayleigh scattering effect Pto the power of the forward propagated Rayleigh scattering effect P in accordance with the following equation 

Refer to . Local oscillator laser generates a local oscillator lightwave. The local oscillator lightwave propagates from local oscillator laser to optical coupler or beamsplitter . The optical coupler splits off the smaller portion of power of the local oscillator lightwave into optical pathway . Optical path propagates the smaller portion of the local oscillator lightwave to the phase locking means optical receiver . The larger portion of the power of the local oscillator lightwave is split off by optical coupler and passed to optical path . Optical pathway propagates the larger portion of the local oscillator lightwave to optical receiver . The phase locking means optical receiver receives and interferes the transmitter laser lightwave from optical pathway and the local oscillator lightwave from optical pathway . The receiver interferes the reference lightwaves from lasers and producing an electrical output which is a radio frequency wave on electrical pathway . The electrical output provides an electronic beat frequency which directly indicates the difference in optical frequency and phase between lasers and . Phase locking circuitry employing a conventional phase lock loop mechanism controls the difference in frequency between laser and and phase locks the two lasers to a fixed frequency and phase relationship as indicated by the dashed line between circuitry and local oscillator laser . The radian frequency difference is as discussed early in the text. The purpose of the laser phase locking means is to insure that the local oscillator lightwave traveling on optical path into optical receiver has the proper phase and frequency relationship to the composite lightwave on optical pathway . It is to be appreciated that the phase locking mechanism also acts cooperatively with phase demodulator system to be described later herein. Conventionally a common master clock oscillator provides the timing base for both phase locking circuitry and an I Q demodulator .

Refer to . The composite lightwave on optical path is an input into optical receiver . The local oscillator lightwave on optical path is also an input into optical receiver . The local oscillator and composite lightwaves are interfered on photodetectors producing an electronic signal which electronically represents the heterodyned optical interference power between the two lightwaves. The resulting composite radio frequency signal at output represents electronically the composite lightwave signal on optical path . The composite electronic receiver signal is passed from optical receiver output through amplifier via electronic path to the correlator system . The local oscillator lightwave on optical path is interfered with the composite lightwave on optical path . The interference power is photodetected in optical receiver by optically interfering the composite back propagating lightwave on the local oscillator signal. As one of the components of this interfering action there is produced a difference beat signal which is a composite radio frequency representation of the composite light wave on optical path .

This interfering of the local oscillator output lightwave and the composite back propagating CW lightwave provides the translation of signal from the optical domain to a CW radio frequency r.f. composite difference beat signal . This reduces the frequency of signal into an electronically processable signal frequency range. It is to be appreciated that an important aspect of the present invention that the r.f. composite difference signal produce by this translation action includes having counterpart components of the aforesaid components of the composite back propagating lightwave signal with the phase states of these counterpart r.f. domain signals the same as the phase states of the corresponding components of the back propagating lightwave.

In accordance with the present invention lasers and are to have sufficiently stringent high performance capability with respect to exactness of frequency to enable interference effects therebetween and heterodyne detection of acoustic perturbation signals incident to fiber to produce beat frequencies within the radio frequency r.f. range. Also in accordance with the present invention lasers and have stringent performance criteria with respect to the phase stability or coherence of their beams. They are to be substantially coherent over at least a propagation path distance substantially equal to twice the length L of sensing fiber . For example a commercially available non planar ring laser e.g. Lightwave Electronics Corp. Model 125 would be suitable for an intruder sensing perimeter intrusion monitoring fiber having a length of 8.0 km approximately 5 miles . The laser beam of this commercially available laser which is in the near infrared range has a frequency of 227 terahertz or 1319 nanometer wavelength and has a frequency stability accurately within one part in a billion over 1 millisecond period or 5 Kilohertz in a 1 millisecond period.

It is to be appreciated that the provision of such frequency and phase stability of lasers and enables implementing the phase locking to produce a sufficiently small non zero radian phase locking circuitry . This in turn enables lasers and under regulation by phase locking circuitry to provide a pair of beams which are phase locked and with a non zero sufficiently small to enable a heterodyne mode optical receiver to provide the desired beat frequency outputs in the r.f. range. It is understood that laser optical receiver circuitry and beamsplitter could be replaced with an apparatus applying the non zero W to the beam from optical pathway to give the same result. The returned interrogation optical composite wave is defined in the preceding subsection Optical Transmitter and Time delay Multiplexing Process of this DESCRIPTION OF THE PREFERRED EMBODIMENT.

In the preceding section 1 Description of Underlying Theories of this DESCRIPTION OF THE PREFERRED EMBODIMENT there is a definition of non zero and a mathematical demonstration of its importance in the heterodyne mode of interfering. It makes it possible to use relatively simple processes to avoid fading. By way of contrast fading with the zero homodyne mode of interfering would entail much more difficult and less effective fade avoidance processes.

Refer to . The composite radio frequency signal on electrical path is input into the correlator system . The correlator system delays the master correlation code generator output an appropriate amount and correlates the delayed correlation code with the composite radio frequency signal. This produces electrical outputs O O. . . Ocorresponding to signals S S. . . . S in turn corresponding to spatial delays L L. . . L. The spatial delays L L. . . . Lare arbitrary and programmable. The electrical output Ocorresponds to B t L referred to in the preceding subsection .

The correlation process is well understood in the literature. The signal that represents the backscattered optical wave in array that is passed from the optical receiver to the correlator system contains all of the information for all sensors or channels S S. . . . Sat once on the electronic signal path entering the correlator . Because the backscattered composite signal is modulated with the correlation code by modulator the backscattered light is time structured with the time structure of the correlation code. Because the correlation code is selected to have special autocorrelation code properties the time structure of the correlation codes allows an electronic representation of the backscattered light at positions L L. . . . Lto be obtained via the correlation process in the correlator . In a preferred embodiment of the invention the master code generator is a shift register type pseudorandom number PRN code generator and each correlator of the set would be a correlation type demodulator herein later described in greater depth. Code generator may alternatively be embodied as a binary sequence having transorthogonal autocorrelation properties binary pseudonoise sequence and each correlator would then be a correlation type demodulator for demodulating a binary pseudonoise sequence whose implementation would be understood by those of skill in the art. The correlator uses the reference correlation code from correlation code generator which is passed via electronic path to the correlator as a golden ruler enabling sorting out by temporal and spatial domain demultiplexing electronic representations of the backscattering optical signals at sensors or channels S S. . . S. Various delayed versions of the correlation code are multiplied by the composite signal with all of the sensor or channel signals present simultaneously from electronic path so that the electronic representations of the sensors or channels S S. . . Sare output from the correlator on signals O O. . . Owith respect to the index.

Correlator system is an electronic spread spectrum signal de spreader and temporal and spatial domain de multiplexer of the r.f. signal counterpart to the optical composite signal. Its input is coupled to the amplified output of the heterodyner and photodetector and it is operative in cooperation with said source of spectrum spreading signals to perform a coherent signal correlation process upon the r.f. counterparts of the aforesaid one and the aforesaid still another components of the composite back propagating CW lightwave. This causes the de spreading of the r.f. counterpart of the optical reflected spread spectrum signal and causes the temporal and spatial demultiplexing of the r.f. counterpart of the still another component of the composite r.f. signal. This processing provides signals which temporally and spatially sort the said still another component into n virtual sensor signal channels or stated another way n of each of the Z length measurement regions measuring the induced optical path change at each of the n Z length segments of the optical fiber span .

It will be appreciated that this sorting process is accomplished by the autocorrelation properties of the spectrum spreading signal and by the time of flight of the optical spectrum spreading signal down to each nth reflection segment and back to the heterodyne optical receiver . A delayed replica of the spectrum spreading signal is correlated against the r.f. signal counterpart of the optical composite back propagating signal thereby segmenting the optical fiber into n independent segments or virtual sensors via the time of flight of the optical composite back propagating signal and the autocorrelation function of the transmitted spectrum spreading signal.

It is to be appreciated that system is operating in the spread spectrum transmission and reception mode. Namely by providing optical interrogation light wave E t with modulation by the correlation code c t the continuous wave carrier signal is temporally structured into a spread spectrum interrogation lightwave which continuously reiterates autocorrelatable code sequences. Then after correlation system provides an appropriate time of delay the correlator system correlates the backscattered light wave E t with the same output c t of code generator de spreading the spread spectrum signal.

In accordance with well known communication electronics theory this has the effect of increasing signal output of the ROSE sensor system while the noise bandwidth remains the same. In temporally and spatially sorting the r.f. counterpart of the aforesaid still another component of the composite back propagation lightwave the aforesaid another component of undesired noises such as reflections from couplers in fiber span are materially attenuated.

More particularity in accordance with this well known theory the signal to noise ratio SNR is enhanced by considerable attenuation of noise mechanisms in frequency ranges outside of center frequency lobe of the autocorrelation function and outside the pair of first side lobes to one and the other side of the center frequency lobe.

An illustrative embodiment of electronic spread spectrum signal de spreader and spatial de multiplexer for cooperation with the previously described shift register type PRN code generator may comprise a series of n like shift register code generators respectively receiving the spectrum spreading signal through a corresponding series of n feed channels which cause delays which incrementally increase by an amount of time bearing a predetermined relationship to the fiber span length and C the speed of light through the fiber. The composite r.f. signal is fed to a corresponding series of n multipliers connected to receive as the other multiplier the codes generated by the respective de spreader and demultiplexer to thereby provide the de spread and de multiplexed signal.

Refer to . After the composite radio frequency signal on electrical path is correlation time delay demultiplexed by the correlator system the plurality which upwardly may include a very large number for instance 5 000 of outputs O O. . . O on the plurality of electrical paths and respectively are phase demodulated by a plurality of individual phase demodulations in the phase demodulator system . The outputs of the phase demodulator system are the corresponding plurality of electrical paths and . The phase demodulator outputs and correspond to the correlator outputs O O. . . O and respectively and to the corresponding plurality of corresponding signals S S. . . Srespectively corresponding to spatial delays L L. . . Lrespectively. The outputs and electronically indicate with tens of kilohertz potential bandwidth the phase states of optical signals S S. . . S. In particular output is proportional to the temporal phase of B t L hereinbefore discussed in subsections 1 b Correlation or Time delay Multiplexing and 3 c Correlation Time Delay Demultiplexing of this DESCRIPTION OF THE PREFERRED EMBODIMENT. The phase demodulator outputs and indicate the temporal phase states and of B t L and B t L respectively.

Preferably system further includes polarization signal characteristic processing functions not shown which are used together with the previously described feature that the heterodyning function provides in reducing fading of the backscattering signal E t . These polarization processing functions are disclosed in the commonly assigned U.S. Pat. No. 6 043 921 entitled Fading Free Optical Phase Rate Receiver hereby incorporated herein in its entirely. The optical heterodyning feature which provides benefit in reducing fading includes i cooperation of phase locked lasers and in the formation of the optical interrogation light wave E t applied to optical fiber or other linearly extended light propagation medium producing Rayleigh effects backscattering and ii the manipulation of this by optical receiver to provide the composite electronic receive signal as optical receiver output . This takes advantage of the feature of more favorable Heterodyne fading conditions in a way in which polarization and phase state signal fading is materially reduced in the detected backscattered light wave E t . The electronic decoding module 700 of U.S. Pat. No. 6 043 921 is substantially an equivalent to the correlator system herein. However the system disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 043 921 for implementing polarization fading reduction if not substantially eliminating fading is a generalized stand alone system for processing any optical phase signal having temporally varying polarization phase and phase frequency. It must be adapted for application to system by appropriate integration into system included the two following alternative approaches.

One approach for such adaptation passes the fade free optical phase rate FFOPR photoreceiver RF signal to the correlator performs the correlation on the RF signal and completes the Phase Demodulation by In phase and Quadrature phase hereinafter I Q demodulating the correlated RF signal into outputs. This method creates low bandwidth I Q components and therefore requires low bandwidth analog to digital converters implying a requirement for a large number of analog RF correlation electronic components . This RF correlator approach requires two correlator circuits for every virtual sensor element or spatial channel along fiber . One correlator is needed for the vertical polarization RF signal path and one correlator is needed for the horizontal polarization RF signal path.

Another approach applies the I Q demodulator of of the U.S. Pat. No. 6 043 921 prior to correlation. This approach therefore correlates a wideband set of four I Q signals. One I Q set is for horizontal polarization and the other I Q set is for the vertical polarization. In this case the I Q signals are the I Q signals for the whole virtual array rather than for one virtual sensor element of the array. Four correlators are required for each sensor element. One correlator is applied to each of the four wide bandwidth I Q signals for each virtual sensor element. This second approach requires very wideband analog to digital converters but allows digital correlators to be used instead of analog RF correlators. The RF correlator or first approach requires far more analog to digital converters and RF electronics. The digital correlator approach enables the correlators to be implemented by the digital approaches of massively integrated logic circuits and or programmed processors requiring far more digital logic but substantially reducing the r.f. electronics and number analog to digital converter units in the system.

Refer to . The plurality which upwardly may include a very large number for instance 5 000 of signals indicating the phase states . . . on electrical paths and respectively are input into the phase differencer 99. The phase differencer forms a corresponding plurality of outputs and which are arbitrarily and programmably assigned as the subtractions of any two pairs of phase signals and where j and k are selected from 1 2 . . . n .

Each of the programmably selectable pairs of differenced phase signals form a signal which is spatially bounded within the region of the fiber between lengths Land L. The phase differencer therefore produces differential phase outputs corresponding to a set of programmable length and position virtual sensors.

Stated another way each programmable selection of pairs of phase signals forms a virtual spatial differential sensor which senses the difference between the phases of the output of the photodector sub system which is the subject of the next subsections in receiver . Each is an r.f. difference beat signal representative of the aforesaid still another component of the composite back propagating CW lightwave signal which passes from the launch end of fiber span to directional coupler . These signals from each pair therefore represent signals of virtual spatial differential sensors along fiber span . As a result of the choice of pairs being selectively programmable these virtual sensor can be employed to implement adaptive apertures in processing signal incident the fiber span. This feature would be useful for example in enabling security system operators to classify objects causing acoustic pressure wave signals incident up a fiber span used as a perimeter intrusion monitoring line.

The optical receivers and and are comprised of photodetector sub systems. Any of the many well known photodetecting techniques and devices may be employed. Possible implementation of the photodetection sub systems will now be discussed.

Refer to . Like parts correspond to like numbers. Optical signals enter the photodetector sub system via optical paths and which are extensions of the paths and in the case of receiver and not shown of paths and in the case of subsystem . The optical signals are equally split by optical coupler or beamsplitter . The optical signal on path is composite signal comprised of half the optical power of path and half of the optical power arriving on pate . The optical signal on path is illuminated on optical detector . The photo current of optical detector flows into electrical conductor . Likewise the optical signal on path is comprised of half the optical power on path and half of the optical power on path . The optical signal on path is illuminated on optical detector . The photo current of optical detector flows out of electrical conductor . Therefore the photo currents of optical detectors and are subtracted at electrical conductor or node .

Photo detectors and are precisely matched in responsivity. The differential photocurrent on electrical conductor is input into pre amplifier amplifier and is passed to electrical output . The differential nature of the photo detection rejects either of the self optical interference power of the signals on paths and and receives only the cross interference power between the two optical signals on paths and . This particular optical detector architecture is called a balanced heterodyne optical detection scheme. The scheme is 3 dB more sensitive than all other heterodyne optical detection methods and offers the distinct advantage of rejecting local oscillator noise.

Refer to . illustrates an alternative photo detection scheme to . lightwaves enter the receiver at paths and . The optical coupler or beamsplitter combines the lightwaves on paths and into a composite lightwave on path . The composite lightwave on path illuminates optical detector . The photo current of optical detector caused by the self interference and cross interference of lightwaves originating from optical paths and passes through conductor is amplified by pre amplifier and is passed to electrical output .

The optical detector sub system of correspond to optical receivers or of . Paths and correspond to and and output corresponds outputs in optical receiver . Paths and correspond to and and output corresponds to output in optical receiver . Either of the photo detection schemes of or can be used for the optical receivers or . However the photodetection scheme of is preferred.

Refer to . The composite radio frequency signal or r.f. composite reference beat signal which electronically represents the received time delay multiplexed optical signal or composite back propagation CW lightwave E t is input into the correlator system at electrical input . The composite radio frequency signal is n way split with power splitter into a plurality which upwardly may include a very large number for instance 5 000 of electronic pathways including and . The master correlation code c t is input into the correlator system at electrical input . The correlation code is distributed to such a plurality of programmable delay circuits including and . Each programmable delay circuit delays the master correlation code by the delay required to decode demultiplex each time delay multiplexed channel. The plurality of programmable delay circuits including and output a plurality of delayed correlation codes including those on electrical pathways and respectively. The corresponding plurality of delayed correlation codes including those on electrical pathways and are multiplied by a corresponding plurality of multipliers or balanced mixers including and respectively by the radio frequency signal on the plurality of electronic pathways including and which are amplified by a corresponding plurality of amplifiers including and respectively to produce the corresponding plurality of outputs including O O and O on lines and respectively. Each of the outputs therefore produces the corresponding demultiplexed signal which is time gated by the corresponding time delay of the correlation code. The correlator system of is an example implementation of the correlation system of .

The output Ocorresponds to signal B t L which is hereinbefore discussed in subsections 2 a ROSE Optical Phase Sensor Interrogation Enables Sensor System and 3 c Correlation Time Delay Demultiplexing of this DESCRIPTION OF THE PREFERRED EMBODIMENT. The output O O. . . Oon lines and respectively correspond to signals S S. . . Swhich in turn are based upon the spatial delay associated with distance L L. . . . Lindicated in . These spatial delays are based on the time of propagation for flyback travel along these distances which are arbitrary and programmable. The time delay multiplexing of the optical signals comprising the composite back propagating optical signal on path arise from a plurality which upwardly may include a very large number for instance 5 000 of spatial locations causing a like plurality of time delays. The correlator system spatially separates the components of the r.f. composite difference beat signal into channels which each uniquely represent an optical signal at a single spatial location.

The correlator system allows the spatial sampling of the optical signals so that a virtual array can be formed along the fiber span on .

The embodiment of phase demodulator system of has two uses in system . It either i receives the outputs of the just described r.f. correlator subsection or ii is part of the integration of the polarization fading reduction system of U.S. Pat. No. 6 043 921 as discussed in the preceding subsection 2 Fading Free Polarization Processing of this DESCRIPTION OF THE PREFERRED EMBODIMENT. Refer to . The phase demodulation system is comprised of a plurality which upwardly may include a very large number for instance 5 000 of phase demodulators and . The inputs to the plurality of phase demodulators and the correlator outputs O O. . . Odiscussed previously are phase demodulated with phase demodulators and respectively. The outputs of these demodulators are passed on electrical pathways and respectively.

Refer to . An example block diagram of any one of the just discussed phase demodulators and is shown as part . The input electrical path corresponds to any one of electrical path etc. of the plurality of phase demodulators. The output electrical path corresponds to any one of electrical path etc. of the plurality of phase demodulators. A correlation system output such as O Oor Ois passed via electrical path into a bandpass filter . The bandpass filter passes only a band of radian frequencies in the vicinity of so that only B t L passes through the filter where m is an integer corresponding to the particular channel . The band passed signal passes from via electrical path to amplitude control . Amplitude control is either an analog automatic gain control circuit an electronic clipper circuit or a combination thereof. The amplitude control removes amplitude variations due to polarization fading or other types of signal fading. Because the signal B t L is a result of a heterodyne interference the phase remains the same after clipping. It is to be appreciated that other phase demodulation schemes for fiber optic signals use a phase carrier technique which does not allow the clipping operation. Clipping is a preferred amplitude control mechanism. The amplitude control passes an amplitude stabilized signal via electrical path to I Q demodulator . The I Q demodulator removes the carrier that is it shifts the center radian frequency of the amplitude stabilized B t L from down to zero. The I Q demodulator outputs a voltage proportional to cos on electrical path and a voltage proportional to sin on electrical path . The cos and sin proportional voltages on electrical paths and respectively are converted in an output signal proportional to on electrical path by the phase detector .

Reviewing the previous discussion the plurality of phase demodulators and of each function like the block diagram of on . The plurality which upwardly may include a very large number for instance 5000 of phase demodulators convert to a like plurality of signals B t L B t L . . . B t L into a like plurality of signals proportional to . . . which correspond to optical signals S S. . . S.

An example implementation of the I Q demodulator of will now be presented. Refer to . An amplitude stabilized B t L signal originating from the amplitude control of is passed on electrical path to a power splitter . Half of the signal power exiting from power splitter is passed to analog mixer balanced mixer Gilbert cell or analog multiplier via electrical path . The other half of signal power exiting form power splitter is passed to analog mixer balanced mixer Gilbert cell or analog multiplier via electrical path .

The reference oscillator generates an electronic wave proportional to cos t . As noted earlier herein this reference oscillator is also the oscillator employed in the conventional phase lock mechanism establishing the fixed phase relationship between the frequencies of primary laser and local oscillator laser whose differences in frequency W are of a very low order. In accordance with known principles of heterodyning lightwaves having fixed phase relationships heterodyning these signals can produce a difference beat signal small enough to be in the r.f. signal range but with the frequency difference sufficiently high to provide the heterodyning with a band pass allowing transforming a given binary code rate into corresponding code components of the beat signal such as the code rate of the PRN code sequence produced by PRN code generator . This reference oscillator wave is passed from the reference oscillator via the electrical path to amplifier . The wave is amplified by amplifier and passed to hybrid coupler via electrical path . The hybrid coupler splits the amplified reference oscillator electronic wave into two components one proportional to cos t on electrical path providing the I or In phase reference and one proportional to sin t on electrical path providing the Q or Quadrature phase reference .

The In phase reference on electrical path is multiplied or frequency mixed with the signal on electrical path by multiplier to produce the output on electrical path . The signal on electrical path is amplified by amplifier and passed to electronic lowpass filter via electrical path . The lowpass filter removes high frequency components of the multiplication or frequency mixing process and results in an output at electrical path which is proportional to cos .

The Quadrature phase reference on electrical path is multiplied or frequency mixed with the signal on electrical path by multiplier to produce the output on electrical path . The signal on electrical path is amplified by amplifier and passed to electronic lowpass filter via electrical path . The lowpass filter removes high frequency components of the multiplication or frequency mixing process and results in an output at electrical path which is proportional to sin .

Example implementations of the phase detection of will now be presented. Refer to . An example digital phase detector implementation is shown in the block diagram. The signal proportional to cos on electrical path is converted to a digital code or number by analog to digital converter hereafter A D . The digital number proportional to cos is input into the digital signal processor via electrical path . The signal proportional to sin on electrical path is converted to a digital code or number by A D . The digital number proportional to sin is input into the digital signal processor via electrical path . The digital signal processor converts the numbers proportional to sin and cos into a number proportional to as follows.

Suppose the constant of proportionality for the sin and cos is V. Then the digital signal processor can optimally select estimates of and Vto minimize the calculated error function circumflex over cos cos circumflex over sin sin 42 

The digital signal processor can also calculate directly by taking the inverse tangent function or the inverse cotangent function 

If desired the digital signal processor can also implement the differentiate and cross multiply hereafter DCM algorithm. The DCM method is as follows. The digital representation of the signals proportional to sin and cos are temporally differentiated and cross multiplied by the non differentiated signals. The result U t is integrated to produce the desired output . Mathematically this algorithm is 

Refer to . An example analog phase detector implementation is shown in the block diagram. The example analog phase detector shown in implements an analog version of the DCM algorithm discussed in the previous text. The signal proportional to cos on electrical path is input into analog temporal differentiator and analog multiplier . The signal proportional to sin on electrical path is input into analog temporal differentiator and analog multiplier . The differentiated cosine term on signal path is multiplied by the sine term on electrical path by analog multiplier producing the signal on electrical path . The differentiated sine term on electrical path is multiplied by the cosine term on electrical path by analog multiplier producing the signal on electrical path . The signals on electrical paths and are applied as inputs to differential summer . The output of differential summer on electrical path which is the result of the differentiated sine and cosine product being subtracted from the differentiated cosine and sine product corresponds to U t of the DCM discussion. The signal on electrical path is integrated by analog integrator to produce the analog phase detector output proportional to on electrical path and output . By way of summarization the example analog phase detector accepts inputs and which originate from the I Q demodulator of then the analog phase detector outputs the phase signal on electrical path . Optionally any of other well known implementations of analog phase detectors may be employed.

The example programmable phase differencer implementation shown as part of corresponds to part shown as a block in . Refer to . The plurality which upwardly may include a very large number for instance 5 000 of demodulated signals proportional to optical signal phases . . . are input into the programmable phase signal switching and routing network via electrical paths and respectively. Network programmably selects on a basis of timed relation to code generator and routes on a basis of conventional hold in memory and transfer from memory a plurality which upwardly may include a very large number for instance 5 000 of pairs of phase signals onto a plurality which upwardly may include a very large number for instance 5 000 of pairs of electronic paths and and and and . The plurality of routed pairs of phase signals are applied to the corresponding of subtracters and as shown on . The plurality of phase pairs on electronic pairs of paths and and and and are subtracted by subtracters and respectively and the differential signal are outputted on a corresponding plurality of electrical paths and respectively. The following description focuses on the differencing channel output on electrical path it being understood that the modes of operation of other differencing channels in network are the same. Programmable phase switching and routing network selects one of the phase signals on one of the plurality of electrical paths or and routes the signal to electrical path . The signal on electrical path is selected to be proportional to where j is of the set 1 2 . . . n . Network also selects another of the phase signals on one of the other of the plurality of electronic paths or and routes the signal to electrical path . The signal of electrical path is selected to be proportional to where k is of set 1 2 . . . n . The signal on electrical path is subtracted from the signal on electrical path by subtracter . The output of subtracter is passed on via electrical path and is proportional to hereinabove discussed in subsection 3 f Phase Differencing of this DESCRIPTION OF THE PREFERRED EMBODIMENT. Employing this mode network programmably makes selection from optical signal phases . . . to provide other differential phase outputs on electrical paths and . This may include a very large number of differential phase signals for instance 5000. As an alternative to the just described type of circuitry employing subtracters and any of other well known forms of producing a differential signal my be employed.

As an alternative to the viewpoint inferable from the preceding sequence discussing system may be considered as partitioned into i an optical network for illuminating an optical fiber sensing span or other light propagation medium sensing span and retrieving back propagating portions of the illumination and ii a photoelectronic network for establishing virtual sensors at predetermined locations along the span and picking up external physical signals incident to or impinging upon the sensors.

In general the optical network for the illumination of and for the retrieval of back propagation from fiber span comprises transmitter laser directional optical coupler and optical fiber or other light propagation medium .

The photoelectronic network for establishing virtual sensors and picking up signals therefrom generally comprises two subdivisions. One subdivision provides a cyclically reiterative autocorrelatable form of modulation of the lightwave illuminating fiber span . This modulation is in the form reiterated sequences having autocorrelatable properties. The other subdivision takes the retrieved back propagation and performs a heterodyning therewith to obtain an r.f. beat signal. It then picks up the signal from the virtual sensors by autocorrelation and further processes it into more useful forms.

In general the subdivision providing the cyclical reiterative modulation of sequences illuminating fiber span comprises master correlation code generator via one of its electrical pathway outputs and optical modulator .

In general the subdivision for performing heterodyning with and picking up of virtual sensor signals from the retrieved back propagation from fiber span includes local oscillator laser and the network which phase locks transmitter laser and local oscillator and a sequence of elements which perform processing upon the retrieved back propagation. The phase locking network comprises beamsplitter phase locking means optical receiver phase locking circuitry and optical coupler . First in the sequence of processing elements is an optical receiver which photodetects interference power derived by heterodyning the back propagated illumination portion retrieved from fiber span with the output of a local oscillator . Lasers and are operated with a frequency difference to produce an r.f. beat signal W. Then correlation system receives as one of its inputs another electrical pathway output from master correlation code generator and provides a series of channels which in turn respectively provide predetermined time delays in relation to the timing base of cyclic reiterative code generator to perform a series of autocorrelations of the respectively delayed inputs from code generator with the signal W. This picks up r.f. signals respectively representative of the affects in the lightwave domain of the external physical signals incident upon the respective virtual sensor. Phase demodulator system provides a linear phase signal derived from such r.f. signals representative of optical signals at the respective virtual sensors. Programmable phase differencer processes pairs of these linear phase signals occurring across segments of fiber span between programmably selected pairs of the virtual sensors.

Following is another overview description which more particularly calls attentions to an aspect of the invention that the system elements which performs the autocorrelation enable providing an output in the form of an r.f. counterpart of a lightwave time domain reflectometry output of signals incident to the virtual sensors as lightwave time domain reflectometry outputs a CW lightwave modulated by a continuously reiterated binary pseudorandom code sequence is launched into an end of a span of ordinary optical fiber cable. Portions of the launched lightwave back propagate to the launch end from a continuum of locations along the span because of innate fiber properties including Rayleigh scattering. This is picked off the launch end and heterodyned to produce an r.f. beat signal. The r.f. beat signal is processed by a plurality which can be thousands of correlator type binary pseudonoise code sequence demodulators respectively operated in different delay time relationships to the timing base of the reiterated modulation sequences. The outputs of the demodulators provide r.f. time domain reflectometry outputs representative of signals e.g. acoustic pressure waves incident to virtual sensors along the fiber at positions corresponding to the various time delay relationships.

Following is still another overview description which more particularly calls attention to an aspect of the invention that the system elements performing the autocorrelation enable detection of unique spectral components representing a phase variations of external signals incident to the virtual sensors. A CW lightwave modulated by a continuously reiterated pseudorandom code sequence is launched into an end of a span of ordinary optical fiber cable. Portions of the launched lightwave back propagate to the launch end from a continuum of locations along the span because of innate fiber properties including Rayleigh scattering. This is picked off the launch end and heterodyned producing an r.f. beat signal. The r.f. beat signal is processed by a plurality which can be thousands of correlator type pseudonoise code sequence demodulation and phase demodulator units operated in different time delay relationships to the timing base of the reiterated modulation sequences. These units provide outputs representative of phase variations in respective unique spectral components in the r.f. beat signal caused by acoustic or other forms of signals incident to virtual sensors at fiber positions corresponding to the various time delay relationships.

Following is yet another overview description which more particularly calls attention to an aspect of the invention that a pair of the different delay time relationships of the autocorrelation system elements are effective to establish a virtual increment of the optical fiber span and that a substracter circuit of phase differencer enables representing the differential phase signal across the virtual increment. A CW lightwave modulated by a continuously reiterated pseudorandom PN code sequence is launched into an end of a span of ordinary optical fiber cable. Portions of the launched lightwave back propagate to the launch end from a continuum of locations along the span because of innate fiber properties including Rayleigh scattering. This is picked off the launch end and heterodyned producing an r.f. beat signal. The r.f. beat signal is processed by a plurality which can be thousands of correlator pseudonoise code sequence demodulation and phase demodulator units operated in different delay time relationships to the timing base of the reiterated modulation sequences. Pairs of outputs of the units are connected to respective substracter circuits each providing a signal representative of phase differential of incident acoustic signals or other forms of signals across virtual increments of the span established by a pair of said delay time relationships.

The invention enables the interrogation or time delay correlational multiplexing and demultiplexing of optical phase signals.

The invention enables the interrogation of ROSE Rayleigh Optical Scattering and Encoding fiber optic sensors. The invention enables the spatial sorting and separation of the temporal optical phases of backscattered optical signals arising from a plurality which upwardly may include a very large number for instance 5 000 of virtual optical sensors along fibers or other optical mediums. The invention enables the spatial decoding of backscattered optical signals with a bandwidth of tens of kilohertz. The invention enables the sensor locations along the fiber to be programmable. The invention allows the electronic separation or segmentation of the array of fiber sensors into programmable bounded lengths and positions. Because the correlation signal c t can be designed to be a continuous wave the invention increases the average optical power considerably over conventional pulsed optical phase sensor interrogation methods. Because the correlation signal c t can be chosen to have spectrum spreading properties for which dispreading electronic circuitry is readily available undesired optical fiber system noises such as reflection discontinuity noises due to cable couplings can be materially attenuated.

In hypothetically assessing the potential achievable by the present invention with regard to employment of a common grade of optical fiber cable buried beneath the ground surface as a perimeter intrusion monitoring fiber span the following assumptions have been made i signal to noise ratio S N degradation of Rayleigh effect light propagation in such an optical fiber cable are assumed to be 0.5 db km ii it is assumed there is a requirement for bandwidth of ten times that of the geo acoustic intruder signal needs to be detected iii and digital circuitry functions are performed employing conventional high end clock rates. Using these assumptions and employing conventional single mode or multimode fiber buried 6 12 inches underground and using conventional engineering methodology for noise effect prediction it can be shown that ROSE system has the potential of sensing intruder caused geo acoustic i.e. seismic signals along a length of fiber span line as long as 8 km or 5 miles. This assessment is based upon S N degradations for flyback travel of signals from the interrogation launch end of fiber span to its remote end and back. The hypothetical segment resolution capability with such a 8 km. or 5 mile line would be 1 meter.

The invention provides a new capability of heterodyne optical phase detection without resorting to dithered phase carrier methods. The phase demodulation method introduces heterodyne I Q demodulation to produce cosine and sine phase components clipped signal amplitude stabilization techniques and digital signal processing based phase detection. The spatially differential phase detection method provided by the invention enables the rejection of unwanted lead in fiber phase signals.

The details materials step of operation and arrangement of parts herein have been described and illustrated in order to explain the nature of the invention. Many modifications in these are possible by those skilled in the art within the teachings herein of the invention. For example while in system the transformation from optical to r.f. signal takes place prior to processing by programmable correlation it is within the skill of the art to design optical receiver and correlator system to have the transformation take place otherwise. Also as an alternative to the previously described mechanism for phase locking laser and the laser optical wave on an optical path can be passed through an acoustic optic modulator sometimes called a Bragg Cell. The diffracted optical wave exiting the acousto optic modulator will be Doppler shifted by an impinging driving RF wave that is translated into a sound wave in the acousto optic modulator and the so called Bragg shifted diffracted optical wave will exit the acousti optical modudulator with an optical frequency equivalent to the phase locked laser . The acousto optically generated lightwave at an equivalent frequency of the phase locked laser is sent along optical pathway and becomes the local oscillator input to heterodyne photoreceiver . An acousto optically frequency shifted version of the light in optical path can therefore replace the phase locked light of coherent optical source . Accordingly it is to be understood that changes may be made by those skilled in the art within the principle and scope of the inventions expressed in the appended claims.

