---

title: Practical threat analysis
abstract: The following subject matter provides a computer-implemented method and system for calculation of cost-effectiveness of countermeasures in mitigating the threats on a system through calculating risk of threats. The calculation is run on a model of assets, threats, vulnerabilities and countermeasures and enables the production of easy to understand reports and action item lists showing the financial value of threat risks and countermeasures priorities and cost-effectiveness.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08312549&OS=08312549&RS=08312549
owner: 
number: 08312549
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050802
---
This application claims the benefit under 35 U.S.C. 119 e of Provisional Application No. 60 612 527 filed Sep. 24 2004.

The present invention relates to methods for managing threats on systems and to managing countermeasures for mitigating the threats.

Threat analysis is an ongoing process whose aim is to mitigate the risk posed by different types of threats reduce damages and ensure the continuity availability and successful operation of systems. It involves assessment of potentially damageable assets modeling threats and vulnerabilities and valuating risks and countermeasures. The progresses in computing and communications together with the globalization of economical and social processes has emphasized the need for proactively analyzing risks and constantly evolving assessment models of realist threats against systems. Optimally threat models should be constructed from the very first steps of system planning taken into consideration in advanced design stages and continuously maintained and updated through the whole life cycle of the system.

Threat modeling involves identifying the assets of the system that are at risk identifying system vulnerabilities and weaknesses and discovering scenarios of threats that can take advantage of these vulnerabilities and damage the assets. The outcome of the process is a set of proposed countermeasures that might mitigate the threats that were identified. The prosperity of the system directly depends on the effectiveness of the efforts invested in protecting the system assets against the identified threats. Since the implementation of all of the proposed countermeasures is in most cases impractical due to limitations of budget time and resources the goal of a beneficial threat analysis process is to propose the set of the most cost effective countermeasures against the identified threats.

The effectiveness of a countermeasure is measured by the overall mitigation it provides to the system risks in relation to the cost of implementing it. One can use the above measure of effectiveness of countermeasures in order to decide upon the priorities in implementing the countermeasures. The outcome is a realistic item list of actions to be taken in each stage of the system life cycle.

US Patent Applications 20030046128 is a computer implemented method and system for assessing the overall risk in at least part of an information technology system includes inputting into a risk assessment database a plurality of identified risks in a system associating the risks to at least one severity band in a risk echelon assigning a value to each risk multiplying each risk value by a coefficient factor and summing the factored risk values to determine the overall risk. The method preferably includes modifying the security implementation of the information technology system and determining the modified overall risk. The system preferably includes an automated vulnerability detection scanner to gather risk information which is stored on a database and used in calculating the overall risk.

US Patent Applications 20030182337 discloses a method system and computer product for risk valuation. A computer assigns a risk to an object. The object has an object measure value and the risk has at least one threat level. The computer receives a probability of the threat level. The probability refers to the object. The computer calculates the object measure value by using the probability of the threat level and by using a deviation value that corresponds to the threat level and relates to the object. The article Paranoid Penguin Practical Threat Analysis and Risk Management published at http www.linuxjournal.com article.php sid 5567 describes a risk valuation method in which for each vulnerability associated with each asset the estimated cost of replacing or restoring that asset is calculated its single loss expectancy and then the vulnerability s expected annual rate of occurrence is estimated. The annual vulnerability loss expectancy may be calculated by multiplying these two factors.

Attack Trees as described in http www.schneier.com paper attacktrees ddj ft.html provide a formal methodology for analyzing the security of systems and subsystems. They provide a way to think about security to capture and reuse expertise about security and to respond to changes in security. According to the suggested perspective security should be viewed as a process and attack trees form the basis of understanding that process.

The Threat Modeling Tool as described in http www.microsoft.com downloads details.aspx familyid 62830f95 0e61 4f87 88a6 e7c663444ac1 displaylang en allows users to create threat model documents for applications. It organizes relevant data points such as entry points assets trust levels data flow diagrams threats threat trees and vulnerabilities into an easy to use tree based view. The tool saves the document as XML and may export to HTML and MHT using the included XSLTs or a custom transform supplied by the user.

As described above there are at present several methodologies and tools for assessing risks in various systems domains. These tools provide static lists of individual risks but do not give a true picture of the relative contribution of each threat to the overall risk combined with the cost effectiveness of the proposed countermeasures. Other methodologies are based on creation of attack trees that provides a clearer understanding of the attack options from the opponent s point of view. Although these methodologies may be helpful in valuating probabilities of threats they do not relate to the ranking of countermeasures by their effectiveness.

These methodologies and tools do not provide means for the creation of threat models where threats and countermeasures are classified according to a clear significance metrics in order to facilitate a cost effective decision making process needed for protecting contemporary systems.

There is an obvious need for a practical threat analysis methodology and tools for maintaining a dynamic threats model and are capable of reacting to changes in system s assets and vulnerabilities by automatically recalculating threats and countermeasures priorities and providing decision makers with updated realistic action item lists that reflect the changes in threats realities. Countermeasure priorities should be expressed as a function of system asset values degrees of damage threat probabilities and degrees of mitigation provided by the proposed countermeasures to the threats.

Disclosed is a method for performing risk management of a given system having known vulnerabilities and weaknesses based on the assets values of the system the risks of possible threats potential asset damages in relation to each threat possible countermeasure and relative threat mitigation in relation to a single countermeasure or to a set of countermeasures. The method comprises the following steps valuating relative threat monetary risk. Each threat is correlated to the possible damage to system assets based on possible threat scenarios in accordance with relevant vulnerabilities and weaknesses of the system and valuation of relative threat damage. Calculating cost effectiveness for each countermeasure or each set of countermeasures taking into account the relative relevant threats damages and estimating the contribution of each countermeasure or set of countermeasures to reduce said damages. The method also includes the step of calculating the current overall countermeasure mitigation level for each countermeasure. The current overall countermeasure mitigation CurCM of a specific countermeasure is the percentage of contribution of a specific countermeasure to the reduction of the current total system risk.

The current cost effectiveness CurCCE of a specific countermeasure is calculated by dividing the overall countermeasure mitigation by the implementation cost IC of the countermeasure. Valuating relative threat risk is based on calculating the following the mitigation level for each threat calculating the total value of and relative value of system assets calculating the relative damage level of each threat calculating the risk level of each threat calculating the risk for each asset and calculating the total system risk.

The method also includes the step of calculating an optimized risk reduction plan wherein. The optimized risk reduction plan is an optimized subset of the countermeasures that if implemented will reduce the total current risk level below a given target risk level within the limits of a given target budget TarB .

The optimization is based on optimizing cost effectiveness optimizing the risk optimizing the cost or optimizing countermeasure execution complexity. The optimization includes an iterative process for testing various combinations of counter measurements. The optimization process may be performed manually enabling the user to change combinations according the received mitigation results or automatically wherein the combinations are changed in accordance with calculated mitigation results.

Vulnerability a weakness limitation or deficiency in one or more of the system s elements that can be exploited to disrupt its normal functionality. The weakness or defect may be either in specific areas of the system its layout its users operators and or in its associated regulations operational and business procedures.

Countermeasure a procedure action or mean for mitigating a specific vulnerability. A specific countermeasure may mitigate several different vulnerabilities.

Asset an ability an advantage a feature a financial or a technical resource that may be damaged lost or disrupted. The damage to an asset may affect the normal functionality of the system as well as harm the individuals and or organizations associated with it in some way.

Threat a scenario that exploits at least one of the system s vulnerabilities and may cause damage to one or more of the system s assets.

Threat s risk a quantified measure that expresses the financial loss and or damage that may be caused to one or more of the system s assets due to the specific threat.

Threat s recommended countermeasures a set of countermeasures that may mitigate the threat s risk. Since a threat may take advantage of one or more vulnerabilities the set of countermeasures against the threat includes all the countermeasures that mitigate at least one of the threat s vulnerabilities.

Threat s actual mitigation a subset of threat s recommended mitigation that is assumed to be effective for mitigating a specific threat.

Countermeasure cost effectiveness the degree of mitigation introduced by a specific countermeasure to the overall risk in the system in relation to the cost of implementing it.

Threat analysis the process of identifying system s vulnerabilities threats and countermeasures and calculating their quantitative parameters such as threats risk and countermeasures cost effectiveness.

Quantitative valuation of threats and countermeasures a calculative process for valuating the risk of each of the threats to the system translating it to financial values computing the cost effectiveness of each of the proposed countermeasures and setting priorities in protecting the system against threats.

Threat modeling the organization of threat related data in a dynamic data model that adjusts quantitative parameters of threats and countermeasures according to changes in the system assets and vulnerabilities.

The present invention is a new method for performing risk analysis. The method enables users to dynamically estimate the relative contribution of each threat in a given system to the overall risk combined with the cost effectiveness of the proposed countermeasures. The method therefore enables ranking the countermeasures according to their estimated effectiveness. The method therefore provides a practical threat analysis methodology and tools for maintaining a dynamic threats model and is capable of reacting to changes in system s assets and vulnerabilities by automatically recalculating threats risks and countermeasures priorities and providing decision makers with updated realistic action item lists that reflect the changes in threats realities. Countermeasure priorities are expressed as a function of system asset values degrees of damage threat probabilities and degrees of mitigation provided by the proposed countermeasures to the threats.

Step Input the time period and currency type parameters. Time period t and currency type c parameters are used as units of the calculated financial values. For example when t annual and c USD then a financial value such as an asset value is expressed in USD per year. If the t parameter is omitted then the calculation treats the monetary values as fixed one time values with no recurring factor over time.

Step Input list of system assets. The set A1 . . . ANa includes all system assets that may be threatened. Each asset is identified by a unique ID and name and assigned with a value of asset ValA that represents the maximal financial value of the damage that may be caused to the system due to the loss of the asset.

Step Input list of system vulnerabilities. The set V1 . . . VNv includes all system vulnerabilities that may be exploited to threaten system assets. Each vulnerability is identified by a unique ID and name.

Step Input list of system countermeasures. The set C1 . . . CNc includes all countermeasures that may mitigate system vulnerabilities. Each countermeasure is identified by a unique ID and name and assigned with its estimated implementation cost IC that represents the financial value of the implementation of the countermeasure. Each countermeasure is also assigned with a Boolean implementation flag IF indicating whether or not the countermeasure has been already implemented.

Step Input list of system threats. The set T1 . . . TNt includes all threats that may threaten system assets. Each threat is identified by a unique ID and name and assigned with the estimated threat probability TP that it will materialize within the time period t . The TP values may range between 0 and 1 where 0 means that threat scenario will never materialize in the t period and 1 means that it will certainly materialize at least once within t . If the t parameter is omitted then the TP value refers to the whole life time of the system.

Step Input the relations between threats and assets. Each threat is associated with threat assets TA that includes the assets that may be damaged if the threat materializes. Each threat is assigned with the relative threat asset damage RelTAD that is the level of the damage that may be caused by the threat to each of the assets in the TA of the specific threat. The damage is expressed in percents where 0 means that no damage is caused to the asset if the threat materializes and 100 means that the damage caused to the asset by the threat is total and equals to the whole asset s value.

Step Input the relations between vulnerabilities and countermeasures. Each of the vulnerabilities is associated with vulnerability countermeasures VC that includes countermeasures providing some mitigation to the vulnerability.

Step Input the relations between threats and vulnerabilities. Each of the threats is associated with threat vulnerabilities TV that includes one or more vulnerabilities that are exploited in the threat scenario.

Step Calculating the relations between vulnerabilities and countermeasures. Each of the countermeasures is automatically associated with countermeasure vulnerabilities CV that includes one or more vulnerabilities for which it provides some mitigation. CV is calculated from the inputs in step .

Step Calculating the set of recommended countermeasures for each threat. Each threat is automatically associated with a set of recommended countermeasures mitigating threat RCMT that includes the countermeasures that may mitigate the threat. RCMT is calculated from the inputs in step and step .

Step Define the actual mitigation sets of countermeasures for each of the threats. An actual countermeasures mitigating threat ACMT of a specific threat is a subset of the RCMT associated with that threat which in order to be efficient has to be implemented as a whole. There can be several ACMTs for a given threat each representing a different possible solution to the specific threat. A set which is a union of several ACMTs may also be defined by the user as a valid ACMT.

An ACMTj Ti is said to be implemented if all of its countermeasures are implemented otherwise it is considered as not implemented.

Step Define the threat s mitigation level for each of the actual mitigation sets of countermeasures. The actual countermeasures mitigating threat level ACMTL of a given ACMT for a specific threat is the level of the overall mitigation provided by the countermeasures in the ACMT to the risk posed by that threat. The ACMTL is expressed in percents where 0 means that the risk posed by the threat is not reduced by the specific ACMT and 100 means that the risk posed by the threat is completely mitigated by the ACMT.

Step Calculating the total value of all system assets. Value of all system assets ValSA is calculated by summing the ValA of all assets.

Step Calculating the relative value of each asset. Relative value of asset RelValA is the percentage of the value of a specific asset ValA out of the total value of all system assets. It is calculated by dividing the asset s value ValA by the total value of all assets ValSA and multiplying by 100.

Step Calculating the relative damage level of each threat. Relative threat damage RelTD is the percentage of the damage of a specific threat out of the total value of assets in the system. It is calculated by summing the multiplications of the relative damage that may be caused by the threat to a specific asset RelTAD divided by 100 by the relative value of that asset RelValA.

Step Calculating the maximal risk level of each threat. Maximal threat risk MaxTR is the expected damage in percents out of the total value of assets in the system that may be caused by a specific threat Ti if none of the ACMTs for this threat is implemented. It is calculated by multiplying the relative damage RelTD of the threat by the threat s probability TP.

Step Calculating the minimal risk level of each threat. Minimal threat risk MinTR is the expected damage in percents out of the total value of assets in the system that may be caused by a specific threat Ti if the most efficient ACMT the one with the highest ACMTL for this threat is implemented. It is calculated by multiplying the threat s maximal risk MaxTR by a factor that expresses the unmitigated part of the threat that is left after the most efficient ACMT is implemented.

Step Calculating the current risk level of each threat. Current threat risk CurTR is an approximation of the expected damage in percents out of the total value of assets in the system that may be caused by a specific threat taking into account the current mitigation provided by the implemented ACMTs for this threat. It is calculated by multiplying the threat s maximal risk MaxTR by a factor that expresses the unmitigated part of the threat that is left taking into account only the currently implemented ACMTs for the threat.

Step Calculating the maximal risk for each asset. Maximal asset risk MaxAR is the upper bound in percents relative to the total value of assets in the system on the expected risk to a specific asset by all threats that may damage that specific asset assuming that no countermeasures are implemented for any threat. It is calculated by averaging the relative damage that each threat may cause to the specific asset. The threats are weighted by their probabilities.

Step Calculating the minimal risk for each asset. Minimal asset risk MinAR is the lower bound in percents relative to the total value of assets in the system on the expected risk to a specific asset by all threats that may damage that specific asset assuming that all of the ACMTLj Ti of all the threats are implemented. It is calculated by averaging the relative damage that each threat may cause to the specific asset multiplied by a factor that expresses the unmitigated part of the threat that is left after all countermeasures are implemented. The threats are weighted by their probabilities.

Step Calculating the current risk for each asset. Current asset risk CurAR is the current risk to a given asset in percents relative to the total value of assets in the system taking into account the currently implemented countermeasures. It is calculated by averaging the relative damage that each threat may cause to the specific asset multiplied by a factor that expresses the unmitigated part of the threat that is left when the currently implemented ACMTLj Ti are taken into account. The threats are weighted by their probabilities.

Step Calculating the total system maximal risk. Maximal value of system risk MaxValSR is the financial value of the risk to the system if no countermeasures are implemented. It is calculated by summing the multiplications of the asset s maximal risk MaxAR by the asset s value ValA for each of the assets in the system. Maximal system risk MaxSR is the risk to the system in percents relative to the total value of all assets if no countermeasures are implemented. It is calculated by dividing MaxValSR by the total value of all assets ValSA and multiplying it by

Step Calculating the total system minimal risk. Minimal value of system risk MinValSR is the financial value of the risk to the system if all countermeasures are implemented. It is calculated by summing the multiplications of the asset s minimal risk MinAR by the asset s value ValA for each of the assets in the system. Minimal system risk MinSR is the risk to the system in percents relative to the total value of all assets if all countermeasures are implemented. It is calculated by dividing MinValSR by the total value of all assets ValSA and multiplying it by 100.

Step Calculating the total system current risk. Current value of system risk CurValSR is the financial value of the risk to the system taking into account the contribution of countermeasures already implemented. It is calculated by summing the multiplications of the asset s current risk CurAR by the asset s value ValA for each of the assets in the system. Current system risk CurSR is the risk to the system in percents out of the total value of all assets taking into account the contribution of countermeasures already implemented. It is calculated by dividing CurValSR by the total value of all assets ValSA and multiplying it by 100.

In the user interface the actual values of the three total risk quantities calculated in steps to are displayed in the status screen graph although they may exceed 100 . A marker indicating the 100 risk level may be added for the user s convenience. It is clear that the actual damage to the system s assets cannot exceed 100 however the risk level is not equivalent to the actual damage. It reflects the amount of effort that has to be invested in order to mitigate the threats on the system and since neither the number of threats nor their severity are limited the risk quantities cannot be limited to 100 .

Step Calculating the relative maximal threat risk for each threat. Relative maximal threat risk RelMaxTR is the percentage of the maximal risk of a specific threat out of the total system maximal risk MaxSR. It is calculated by dividing the maximal threat risk MaxTR of the specific threat by the total system maximal risk MaxSR.

Step Calculating the relative minimal threat risk for each threat. Relative minimal threat risk RelMinTR is the percentage of the minimal risk of a specific threat out of the total system minimal risk MinSR. It is calculated by dividing the minimal threat risk MinTR of the specific threat by the total system minimal risk MinSR.

Step Calculating the relative current threat risk for each threat. Relative current threat risk RelCurTR is the percentage of the current risk of a specific threat out of the total system current risk CurSR. It is calculated by dividing the current threat risk CurTR of the specific threat by the total system current risk CurSR.

Step Calculating the current overall countermeasure mitigation level for each countermeasure. Current countermeasure mitigation CurCM of a specific countermeasure is the percentage of contribution of a specific countermeasure to the reduction of the current system risk CurSR. It is calculated by dividing the difference of CurSRCNotI and CurSRCI by CurSRCNotI and multiplying it by 100. CurSRCI is the system risk calculated under the assumption that the specific countermeasure is implemented and all other countermeasures are in their current implementation status. CurSRCNotI is the system risk calculated under the assumption that the specific countermeasure is not implemented and all other countermeasures are in their current implementation status.

Step Calculating the current cost effectiveness of each countermeasure. Current countermeasure cost effectiveness CurCCE of a specific countermeasure is the current overall countermeasure mitigation CurCM per unit of implementation cost in c . It is calculated by dividing the current countermeasure mitigation CurCM by the implementation cost IC of the countermeasure.

Step Calculating an optimized risk reduction plan. Optimized risk reduction plan OptRRP is an optimized subset of the countermeasures that if implemented will reduce the total current risk level CurSR below a given target risk level TarR and within the limits of a given target budget TarB . There are three optimization options optimize by cost effectiveness OptCE and optimize by risk OptR and optimized by cost OptC .

The two targets TarR and TarB define a set of solutions that meet these targets. Each solution is a subset of the set of currently unimplemented countermeasures such that if implemented as a whole will reduce the current total risk level below TarR and the cost of its implementation will not rise above TarB. The three methods of optimization further narrow the set of solutions the OptCE offers the solutions which are the most cost effective the OptR offers the solutions which achieve a maximal risk reduction and the OptC offers the solutions whose cost of implementation is the lowest.

It is important to note that in order to offer the fastest risk reduction plan the user needs to input for each countermeasure its period of implementation or some other parameter that reflects the complexity of the operation. The number of countermeasures in a solution is not necessarily the appropriate indicator for such a parameter.

It is also important to note that at certain situations conflicts between countermeasures may occur. For example a countermeasure that mitigates a specific vulnerability may contradict the mitigating effect of another countermeasure which is aimed at the same or at different vulnerability. At these situations the user needs to indicate the pairs of conflicting countermeasures that might affect both the risk calculations and the recommendation on the appropriate risk reduction plans.

This concludes the practical threat analysis process. The effectiveness and cost effectiveness of countermeasures is calculated by the rules described above that enable the arranging of countermeasures in a prioritized action item list for the use of the system s decision makers.

Input steps to of the calculation method may be implemented by intelligent user friendly input wizards with graphical user interface that enable analyst to enter the entities information and their interrelations. The input of the entities information and some of the relations in these steps may be automated by connecting to online store with information on known assets threats vulnerabilities and countermeasures and their relations as well as to any other predefined database. Input steps to of the calculation method may be implemented by the software via user friendly intelligent input wizards that enable the analyst to enter the mitigation policy and threat mitigation levels.

For the sake of simplicity only two threats are identified the car may be stolen T001 and the car and the passenger may be severely hurt by a gun fire attack T002 . Threat T001 damages asset A001 and exploits vulnerabilities V001 and V002. Threat T0001 damages assets A001 and A002 and exploits vulnerability V003.

See Appendix A for a detailed calculation of example 1. As illustrated in the flow diagram of the calculation includes the specified steps. At step the time period and the currency type parameters are entered. As is shown in Appendix A the time period in the current example is defined as a fixed one time period and the currency type is American dollar. Next at steps to the system s assets the system s vulnerabilities the countermeasures and threats are specified according to the description above. At steps the relations between the threats and the assets are defined and threat T001 the stealing of the car is defined as threatening asset A001 the car itself whereas threat T002 the gunfire attack is defined as threatening both asset A001 and asset A002 the car and its passenger. In this example both threats pose 100 damage on the assets associated to them. The relations between the vulnerabilities and the countermeasures are define at step and the relations between the threats and the vulnerabilities are defined at step threat T001 the stealing of the car exploits vulnerabilities V001 and V002 the cars windows which may be broken and the car ignition which may be done by crossing wires instead of using the key. Threat T002 the gunfire attack exploits vulnerability V003 the fact that bullets may penetrate the car.

In steps and the recommended countermeasures for each threat are calculated and at steps and the mitigation policies are defined. After the initial definitions are entered the system performs the risk and mitigation priorities as they are specified in great details in Appendix A. The results provide a clear prioritized list for implementing the countermeasures according to their calculated cost effectiveness installing an alarm and an immobilizer are recommended since they provide risk reduction of 0.4167 for each dollar. Arming the vehicle is much less recommended since the risk reduction it provides is only 0.00075 for each dollar. The ratio of the two values of cost effectiveness is 1 555 in favor of installing an alarm and an immobilizer.

The current calculation would change significantly if instead of an ordinary driver the passenger of the car is a top government official. In this case the probability for car theft is estimated to be a relatively low 0.01 but the likelihood of a terrorist attack is estimated to be a high 0.5. In step where the current risk level of each thread is calculated T001 risk changes to 0.05 and T002 risk changes to 50 . The following calculation change accordingly the cost effectiveness of each countermeasure and yields the following results installing an alarm and an immobilizer are not recommended since the risk reduction they provide is only 0.001 for each dollar but arming the vehicle is found to provide 0.005 of risk reduction for each dollar. It is evident then that the order of countermeasures in the prioritized list changes and the ratio of the cost effectiveness is 1 5 in favor of armoring the vehicle.

Tables Assets Threats Vulnerabilities and Countermeasures are used for storage of system s assets threats vulnerabilities and countermeasures accordingly. Table AssetsForThreats is used for storage of relations between system threats and system assets. AssetsForThreats has a field for threat asset Damage. Table CountermeasuresForVulnerabilities is used for storage of relations between vulnerabilities and countermeasures. Table VulnerabilitiesForThreats is used for storage of relations between threats and vulnerabilities. Table CountermeasuresForThreats is used for storage of relations between threats and countermeasures.

The calculation and data storage described above may be used for maintenance of threat models of evolving systems where parameters and entities are changed and updated. In each step of the system evolution the user of the computerized system who implements the calculation method may see the calculated values derived from the inputs entered in previous steps. The user may then change various parameters of the inputs add additional entities such as assets threats vulnerabilities and countermeasures and see the reaction of the calculated values to the changes.

After a threat model is built and threat analysis outputs have been calculated the calculation method may be used for optimization risk reduction policies in the analyzed system by finding the optimal set of countermeasures according to criteria provided by the analyst.

The optimization process is performed on a complete threat model by setting the implemented flag IF to True for various combinations of countermeasures and learning the changes in the value of the system s current risk according to the output of the calculation method. The process is performed in an iterative fashion by using the mitigation results reported by the calculation method on previous steps for choosing the set of countermeasures for the next guess. The iterative process can be done manually by the analyst or automatically by the software that calculates the mitigation results for the most promising combinations of countermeasures.

The priorities of countermeasures to be implemented are chosen by their cost effectiveness or by additional countermeasure attributes such as area of implementation. The goal of the iterative optimization process is to find the most cost effective combination of countermeasures with specified attributes which reduce the total risk to the requested target level. The analyst may learn from the results of the optimization that such combination does not exist and in this case it may be practical to review the starting parameters of the optimization process.

The first report displays an action item list showing countermeasures in a decreasing order of their overall mitigation. Each countermeasure is associated with a list of threats that are mitigated by countermeasures and their risk parameters. The second report displays an action item list showing countermeasures in a decreasing order of their cost effectiveness. Each countermeasure is associated with a list of threats that are mitigated by countermeasure and their risk parameters. The third report displays an optimized set of countermeasures that may reduce the total system risk to a specific required level.

The first application embodiment is a suite of desktop computer applications connected to the threat model data storage. This type of applications is preferable for individuals or organizations with small number of employees that access the threat analysis data.

The second application embodiment is an enterprise Web application providing simultaneous access to threat model data to a large numbers of concurrent users. This type of application is preferable for big organizations or government units.

The third application embodiment is a hosted application service providing threat modeling tools to users without deploying them on their machines. Such service is preferable for organizations willing to pay for threat analysis products in proportion with the actual usage without buying standalone installation of the system. The service may be protected with modern data protection technologies to prevent leakage of threat information.

The fourth application embodiment is threat analysis data storage processing mechanisms and algorithms delivered in form of an API application programming interface . This approach enables the integration of threat analysis functionality with existing systems such as ERP enterprise resource planning AVS automatic vulnerabilities scanning SEM security events management ISM information security management and IDE interactive development environment in order to provide enhanced security solutions.

A variety of visual tools are offered to help the analyst in building and valuating threat models. These tools may be Web based or desktop computer applications. Several examples of most productive visual tools are provided here.

The Model Explorer is a visual tool that enables the display creation and modification of any type of entities that form the threat model. The Model Explorer displays lists of available threats vulnerabilities countermeasures assets etc. When a single item in the list is selected the tool displays a details screen containing all the properties of the selected entity. Some properties such as threat risk or countermeasure cost effectiveness are calculated automatically according to calculation methods described above. The Model Explorer enables editing the properties of each entity and establishing relationships between the entities. The creation of new entities and deletion of existing entities are supported in the corresponding entity list screens.

The Threat Builder is a visual tool that enables the quick creation of threat model using the core mandatory entities assets threats vulnerabilities and countermeasures. The tool enables the establishment of relationships between the core entities in a straight forward easy to use user interface skipping the need to enter the details of each entity. The main screen of the Threat Builder presents lists of assets threats vulnerabilities and countermeasures and the tree representation of their interrelations. The quantity of data that is displayed for each entity is minimal and intended to facilitate the modeling task. The analyst is able to create each type of entity and establish the relations between the entities in a single user interface operation. After creating the mandatory model entities with the Threat Builder the analyst is prompted to utilize the Model Explorer tool for entering the details required for calculation of threat risk and countermeasure cost effectiveness.

While this invention has been shown and described in connection with the embodiments described it is apparent that certain changes and modifications in addition to those mentioned above may be made from the basic features of this invention. In addition there are many different types of computer systems and computer software and hardware and tools that may be utilized in practicing the invention and the invention is not limited to the examples given above. Accordingly it is the intention of the applicants to protect all variations and modifications within the valid scope of the present invention. It is intended that the invention be defined by the following claims including all equivalents.

