---

title: Use of licensed content without identification thereof
abstract: A content key (CK) to decrypt a piece of encrypted content is obtained encrypted according to a public key of a licensor (PU-L) to result in (PU-L(CK)). (PU-L(CK)) is obscured according to (PU-L) and a value R to result in Obs (PU-L(CK)), and Obs (PU-L(CK)) is sent to the licensor, which applies a private key (PR-L) corresponding to (PU-L) to Obs (PU-L(CK)) to result in Obs (CK) as an obscured version of (CK). Obs (CK) is received from the licensor; and (CK) is obtained from Obs (CK) based on applying R thereto. The licensor cannot identify from Obs (PU-L(CK)) or from Obs (CK) the encrypted content or the content key (CK) from which the encrypted content may be identified.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08706635&OS=08706635&RS=08706635
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 08706635
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051011
---
The present invention relates to a rights management RM system whereby access to digital content is provided only in accordance with a corresponding digital license or the like. More particularly the invention relates to such an RM system that allows digital content to be employed by a user without specifically identifying the content to a provider or licensor thereof whereby the user is provided with a degree of privacy regarding such use.

Rights management RM and enforcement is highly desirable in connection with digital content such as digital audio digital video digital text digital data digital multimedia etc. where such digital content is to be distributed to one or more users. Digital content could be static such as a text document for example or it could be streamed such as the streamed audio and video of a multimedia presentation. Typical modes of distribution of such content include tangible and intangible forms such as an optical disk a cable access feed a feed from an electronic network such as the Internet a feed from an over the air broadcast etc. Upon being received by a user at an appropriate computing device thereof such user renders the digital content with the aid of the computing device appropriate rendering software and appropriate output devices such as speakers a video monitor etc.

In one scenario the content is distributed as a stream by a distributor as part of a pay per use service such as for example an on command digital television service and the streamed content as distributed is protected by for example being encrypted. In another scenario the content is distributed as a file by a distributor by any appropriate communications medium such as for example a computer communications network and the file of content as distributed is again protected by for example being encrypted. In either scenario then the user provides to a licensing service such as a licensor or the like a request including relevant data regarding the content and an appropriate form of payment. Upon accepting the payment then the licensor returns to the requesting user a content key CK by which the encrypted content may be decrypted by such user.

Typically inasmuch as symmetric encryption and decryption is easier faster and less expensive than asymmetric encryption and decryption the content key CK is symmetric. Also typically the content key CK is returned by the licensor to the requesting user in a form so that such content key CK is available only to such user. For example such content key CK can be provided to the user in an encrypted form and as part of a digital license or the like that specifies license rules that must be satisfied before such content is allowed to be decrypted and rendered by the user by way of an appropriate media system.

It is to be recognized that in some circumstances a user of such an RM system would prefer not to identify the content to be consumed thereby both to the licensor and to those who may be able to access data maintained by the licensor. That is such a user as a matter of privacy may wish to request the content key CK to render a particular piece of content without in fact identifying the content to the licensor returning such content key CK . Reasons for avoiding such identification are many and varied and need not be set forth herein in any detail although it is to be appreciated that such reasons could for example be grounded in avoiding embarrassment and or humiliation that could result from such identification.

At any rate it is to be appreciated that avoiding such identification of such content requires not only avoiding providing the name or any other identification of the content but also avoiding providing any indicia that may lead to an identification of the content. For example and most pertinent to the present disclosure a user requesting from a licensor a particular content key CK corresponding to a particular piece of content could identify the content key CK only and not the corresponding content in an attempt to avoid identifying and being associated with such content. However in identifying the content key CK it likely would not be difficult for the licensor to identify the corresponding content based on such identified content key CK and in doing so to associate the user with the content.

A need exists then for a system and method to provide a user with some measure of privacy by allowing such user to request from a licensor a content key CK for a piece of content without identifying the content key CK or the content. In particular a need exists for a method by which the requesting user sends to the licensor as part of a request an encrypted form of the content key CK in an obscured form that is unrecognizable to the licensor and yet that allows the licensor to decrypt the encrypted content key CK into a decrypted yet still obscured form that remains unrecognizable to the licensor. Thus although the licensor decrypts same to result in the content key CK such decryption never results in the content key CK in a form identifiable to the licensor. As a result the licensor cannot associate the content key CK and by extension the requesting user to a particular piece of content. Nevertheless the licensor can note that the requesting user did in fact obtain a content key CK for some piece of content.

The aforementioned needs are satisfied at least in part by the present invention in which a method is provided in connection with a piece of encrypted digital content to allow a user to obtain a content key CK to decrypt the encrypted content. In the method CK is obtained encrypted according to a public key of a licensor PU L to result in PU L CK and also PU L itself is obtained. A value R is selected which may be a random value or some other value selected by the user and PU L CK is obscured according to PU L and R to result in Obs PU L CK .

Obs PU L CK is sent to the licensor which applies a private key PR L corresponding to PU L to Obs PU L CK to result in Obs CK as an obscured version of CK . Obs CK is thereafter received from the licensor and CK is obtained from Obs CK based on applying R thereto. Significantly the licensor cannot identify from Obs PU L CK or from Obs CK the encrypted content or the content key CK from which the encrypted content may be identified.

Although not required the invention can be implemented via an application programming interface API for use by a developer and or included within the network browsing software which will be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by one or more computers such as client workstations servers or other devices. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures and the like that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Typically the functionality of the program modules may be combined or distributed as desired in various embodiments. Moreover those skilled in the art will appreciate that the invention may be practiced with other computer system configurations. Other well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers PCs automated teller machines server computers hand held or laptop devices multi processor systems microprocessor based systems programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network or other data transmission medium. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing the invention includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus .

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CDROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies. A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard and pointing device commonly referred to as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB .

A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . A graphics interface such as Northbridge may also be connected to the system bus . Northbridge is a chipset that communicates with the CPU or host processing unit and assumes responsibility for accelerated graphics port AGP communications. One or more graphics processing units GPUs may communicate with graphics interface . In this regard GPUs generally include on chip memory storage such as register storage and GPUs communicate with a video memory . GPUs however are but one example of a coprocessor and thus a variety of co processing devices may be included in computer . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface which may in turn communicate with video memory . In addition to monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer although only a memory storage device has been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on memory device . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

One of ordinary skill in the art can appreciate that a computer or other client device can be deployed as part of a computer network. In this regard the present invention pertains to any computer system having any number of memory or storage units and any number of applications and processes occurring across any number of storage units or volumes. The present invention may apply to an environment with server computers and client computers deployed in a network environment having remote or local storage. The present invention may also apply to a standalone computing device having programming language functionality interpretation and execution capabilities.

Distributed computing facilitates sharing of computer resources and services by direct exchange between computing devices and systems. These resources and services include the exchange of information cache storage and disk storage for files. Distributed computing takes advantage of network connectivity allowing clients to leverage their collective power to benefit the entire enterprise. In this regard a variety of devices may have applications objects or resources that may interact to implicate authentication techniques of the present invention for trusted graphics pipeline s .

It can also be appreciated that an object such as may be hosted on another computing device or . Thus although the physical environment depicted may show the connected devices as computers such illustration is merely exemplary and the physical environment may alternatively be depicted or described comprising various digital devices such as PDAs televisions MP3 players etc. software objects such as interfaces COM objects and the like.

There are a variety of systems components and network configurations that support distributed computing environments. For example computing systems may be connected together by wireline or wireless systems by local networks or widely distributed networks. Currently many of the networks are coupled to the Internet which provides the infrastructure for widely distributed computing and encompasses many different networks.

In home networking environments there are at least four disparate network transport media that may each support a unique protocol such as Power line data both wireless and wired voice e.g. telephone and entertainment media. Most home control devices such as light switches and appliances may use power line for connectivity. Data Services may enter the home as broadband e.g. either DSL or Cable modem and are accessible within the home using either wireless e.g. HomeRF or 802.11b or wired e.g. Home PNA Cat 5 even power line connectivity. Voice traffic may enter the home either as wired e.g. Cat 3 or wireless e.g. cell phones and may be distributed within the home using Cat 3 wiring. Entertainment media may enter the home either through satellite or cable and is typically distributed in the home using coaxial cable. IEEE 1394 and DVI are also emerging as digital interconnects for clusters of media devices. All of these network environments and others that may emerge as protocol standards may be interconnected to form an intranet that may be connected to the outside world by way of the Internet. In short a variety of disparate sources exist for the storage and transmission of data and consequently moving forward computing devices will require ways of protecting content at all portions of the data processing pipeline.

The Internet commonly refers to the collection of networks and gateways that utilize the TCP IP suite of protocols which are well known in the art of computer networking. TCP IP is an acronym for Transport Control Protocol interface Program. The Internet can be described as a system of geographically distributed remote computer networks interconnected by computers executing networking protocols that allow users to interact and share information over the networks. Because of such wide spread information sharing remote networks such as the Internet have thus far generally evolved into an open system for which developers can design software applications for performing specialized operations or services essentially without restriction.

Thus the network infrastructure enables a host of network topologies such as client server peer to peer or hybrid architectures. The client is a member of a class or group that uses the services of another class or group to which it is not related. Thus in computing a client is a process i.e. roughly a set of instructions or tasks that requests a service provided by another program. The client process utilizes the requested service without having to know any working details about the other program or the service itself. In a client server architecture particularly a networked system a client is usually a computer that accesses shared network resources provided by another computer e.g. a server. In the example of computers etc. can be thought of as clients and computer etc. can be thought of as the server where server etc. maintains the data that is then replicated in the client computers etc.

A server is typically a remote computer system accessible over a remote network such as the Internet. The client process may be active in a first computer system and the server process may be active in a second computer system communicating with one another over a communications medium thus providing distributed functionality and allowing multiple clients to take advantage of the information gathering capabilities of the server.

Client and server communicate with one another utilizing the functionality provided by a protocol layer. For example Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP is a common protocol that is used in conjunction with the World Wide Web WWW . Typically a computer network address such as a Universal Resource Locator URL or an Internet Protocol IP address is used to identify the server or client computers to each other. The network address can be referred to as a Universal Resource Locator address. For example communication can be provided over a communications medium. In particular the client and server may be coupled to one another via TCP IP connections for high capacity communication.

Thus illustrates an exemplary networked or distributed environment with a server in communication with client computers via a network bus in which the present invention may be employed. In more detail a number of servers etc. are interconnected via a communications network bus which may be a LAN WAN intranet the Internet etc. with a number of client or remote computing devices etc. such as a portable computer handheld computer thin client networked appliance or other device such as a VCR TV oven light heater and the like in accordance with the present invention. It is thus contemplated that the present invention may apply to any computing device in connection with which it is desirable to process store or render secure content from a trusted source.

In a network environment in which the communications network bus is the Internet for example the servers can be Web servers with which the clients etc. communicate via any of a number of known protocols such as HTTP. Servers may also serve as clients as may be characteristic of a distributed computing environment. Communications may be wired or wireless where appropriate. Client devices may or may not communicate via communications network bus and may have independent communications associated therewith. For example in the case of a TV or VCR there may or may not be a networked aspect to the control thereof. Each client computer and server computer may be equipped with various application program modules or objects and with connections or access to various types of storage elements or objects across which files may be stored or to which portion s of files may be downloaded or migrated. Thus the present invention can be utilized in a computer network environment having client computers etc. that can access and interact with a computer network bus and server computers etc. that may interact with client computers etc. and other devices and databases .

As is known and referring now to rights management RM and enforcement is highly desirable in connection with digital content such as digital audio digital video digital text digital data digital multimedia etc. where such digital content is to be distributed or redistributed to a user. Upon being received by the user such user renders the digital content with the aid of an appropriate rendering device such as a media player text displayer etc. on a personal computer or the like.

Typically a content owner or developer or distributor hereinafter distributor distributing such digital content wishes to restrict what the user can do with such distributed digital content or at least ensure that the content is not redistributed in an unwanted manner. For example the content distributor may wish to restrict the user from copying and re distributing such content to a second user or may wish to allow distributed digital content to be rendered only a limited number of times only for a certain total time only on a certain type of machine only on a certain type of rendering platform only by a certain type of user etc.

However after distribution has occurred such distributor has very little if any control over the digital content . An RM system then allows the controlled rendering of arbitrary forms of digital content where such control is flexible and definable by the content distributor of such digital content. Typically to protect the content such content is encrypted with a symmetric encryption decryption content key CK i.e. CK CONTENT and is packaged with other information relevant to the content in a package .

The trust based RM system may allow a distributor of digital content to specify at least some license rules that must be satisfied before such digital content is allowed to be rendered by a computing device of a user. Such license rules can include the aforementioned temporal requirement and may be embodied within a digital license or use document hereinafter license that the user user s computing device hereinafter such terms are interchangeable unless circumstances require otherwise must possess. Such license also includes the content key CK for decrypting the digital content perhaps encrypted according to a key decryptable by the user s computing device . As seen in such encrypting key is a public key of the user s computing device PU C and the user s computing device presumably has the corresponding private key PR C by which PU C CK may be decrypted.

The content distributor for a piece of digital content must trust that the user s computing device will abide by the rules and requirements specified by such content owner in the license i.e. that the digital content will not be rendered unless the rules and requirements within the license are satisfied. The user s computing device should therefore be provided with a trusted component or mechanism that will not render the digital content except according to the license rules embodied in the license associated with the digital content and obtained by the user.

The trusted component typically has a license evaluator that determines whether the license is valid reviews the license rules and requirements in such valid license and determines based on the reviewed license rules and requirements whether the requesting user has the right to render the requested digital content in the manner sought among other things. As should be understood the license evaluator is trusted in the RM system to carry out the wishes of the owner of the digital content according to the rules and requirements in the license and the user should not be able to easily alter such trusted element for any purpose nefarious or otherwise.

As should be understood the rules and requirements in the license might specify whether the user has rights to render the digital content based on any of several factors including who the user is where the user is located what type of computing device the user is using what rendering application is calling the RM system the date the time etc. In addition the rules and requirements of the license may limit the license to a pre determined number of renderings or pre determined rendering time for example. Thus the trusted component may need to refer to a clock on the computing device . If such clock is provided such clock may be a secure clock that cannot be tampered with by a user in an effort to overcome a temporal restriction of a license .

The rules and requirements may be specified in the license according to any appropriate language and syntax. For example the language may simply specify attributes and values that must be satisfied DATE must be later than X e.g. or may require the performance of functions according to a specified script IF DATE greater than X THEN DO . . . e.g. .

Upon the license evaluator determining that the license is valid and that the user satisfies the rules and requirements therein the digital content can then be rendered. In particular to render the content the content key CK is obtained from the license and is applied to CK CONTENT from the content package to result in the actual content and the actual content is then in fact rendered. As set forth above the license with PU C CK in effect authorizes an entity in possession of PR C to access CK and thereby access the content encrypted according to such CK presuming of course that the entity abides by all conditions as set forth in the license .

Note that a license typically includes a digital signature for authentication validation purposes. Likewise other forms of digital constructs such as a piece of digital content may also have such a digital signature for authentication validation purposes. As should be known such a digital signature may be constructed based on a first key from a pair of asymmetric keys or from a symmetric integrity key for example by performing some sort of hash on the underlying data to which the signature is attached and then encrypting the hash with the key. Thereafter the signature is validated by applying the second key from the pair of asymmetric keys or the integrity key again for example by decrypting the encrypted hash and comparing the decrypted hash to another hash of the underlying data to which the signature is attached. If the hashes match it can be presumed that the underlying data has not been altered and the underlying construct therefore can be authenticated. Typically an RM system will not honor a license or the like that is not authenticated.

Note too that in at least some RM systems a license is dispensed with especially if forming and providing such a license may not be feasible or necessary. For example in an RM system for distributing multiple streams of multimedia content on a continuing basis providing licenses for each stream may not be deemed necessary especially if the license terms do not vary as between streams . In such a case and presuming that each stream has a different corresponding content key CK all that is necessary is that the content key CK for decrypting a particular stream be returned upon request from a user requiring same.

As was set forth above in connection with an RM system such as that shown in an end user of such system may prefer not to identify the content to be consumed thereby both to the licensor that provides the content key CK for decrypting such content and also to those who may be able to access data maintained by such a licensor. That is such a user as a matter of privacy may wish to request the content key CK to render a particular piece of content without in fact identifying the content to the licensor returning such content key CK . Note that while not identifying the content such user likely may nevertheless be required to identify oneself especially if the nature of the system so dictates. For example the system may require that the request from the user include a return address or another identification of the user or that the request include some sort of payment vehicle which can be traced back to the user. It is to be understood then that the present invention is primarily directed to not identifying the content that is the basis of a request from a user and not to not identifying the user.

To in fact allow the user to avoid identifying the content either directly or indirectly upon requesting the licensor for the corresponding content key CK and in one embodiment the present invention the content as provided to or identified to the user includes the content key CK encrypted according to a public key of the licensor PU L to result in PU L CK . That is and turning now to the content itself as provided to the user by a distributor or the like includes therewith PU L CK or else such distributor or the like identifies the content as being available such as for example by way of a menu or the like and along with such identification the distributor includes therewith PU L CK . Thus the content key CK can be obtained from such PU L CK only upon the user providing same to the licensor as part of an appropriate request inasmuch as only such licensor can apply a corresponding private key PR L to reveal CK as should be appreciated.

However and again the user does not wish to allow the licensor to gain knowledge of the content key CK inasmuch as such knowledge likely will allow the licensor to identify the corresponding content . Accordingly in one embodiment of the present invention the user prior to sending PU L CK to the licensor obscures same in such a way that the licensor can apply PR L to same to reveal an obscured version of CK that only the user can comprehend.

More specifically and turning now to it is seen that in one embodiment of the present invention the distributor arranges with the licensor to provide the content key CK to the user for a particular piece of content and in so doing the distributor obtains from the licensor the public key PU L from a public private key pair PU L PR L owned by the licensor step . Of course such public key PU L is intended to be widely available while the private key PR L is closely held and known only to the licensor . In addition the distributor either encrypts the content at issue with a particular content key CK or receives the content as already encrypted with such CK to be in the form CK content step . In either case the distributor encrypts CK with PU L to result in PU L CK step .

Thereafter if distributing CK content to the user such as for example in a file form PU L CK is associated with CK content step such as for example by being included within the same package . Likewise if merely identifying the availability of CK content to the user such as for example in a menu of streams available for rendering PU L CK is associated with the identification step such as for example by being visibly or non visibly included with the identification on the menu. Note that in the latter case it may be advisable to also associate PU L CK with CK content as at step especially if the stream containing such CK content can be saved and later rendered.

In either case and turning now to upon encountering the package with CK content and PU L CK of step of or the like and deciding to render the content thereof or upon encountering and choosing the content from the menu of step of or the like with the associated PU L CK step such PU L CK and PU L itself are identified step . As may be appreciated PU L itself is likely found in some predetermined association with PU L CK such as for example in an attached certificate or the like.

In addition if necessary a location at which the licensor that own PR L may be identified step . As may be appreciated the identification of the location of the licensor may not be necessary if the user expects the licensor to be at a predetermined location. If necessary such identification likely may be found in some predetermined association with PU L CK such as for example the aforementioned attached certificate or the like.

At any rate it is to be appreciated that public private key cryptography is based on an algorithm such as the known RSA algorithm which takes two large primes p and q and computes their product n pq where n is to be employed as a modulus in performing modular mathematics. Thus with n a number e is chosen to be less than n and relatively prime to p 1 q 1 which means e and p 1 q 1 have no common factors except 1. Thereafter another number d is chosen such that ed 1 is divisible by p 1 q 1 . As should be understood the values e and d are employed as public and private exponents respectively with the result being that the pair n e are referred to as the public key PU and the pair n d are referred to as the private key. Note there that once n d and e are arrived at the factors p and q are no longer necessary and may be destroyed or kept with the private key.

The public key PU n e may be widely distributed while the private key PR n d and especially the private exponent d are typically closely held as a secret by an owner of such public private key pair PU PR . Significantly if an interested party with knowledge of PU n e wishes to encrypt some piece of data m so that only the aforementioned owner with knowledge of PR n d can decrypt same such interested party according to the aforementioned algorithm would compute a cipher text c by exponentiation and modular mathematics mod where e and n are from PU . Such exponentiation and modular mathematics are known to the relevant public and need not be set forth herein in any detail.

With c as computed to encrypt m then the interested party would send c to the owner of PR and such owner would then decrypt c to reveal m by similar exponentiation and modular mathematics mod where d and n are from PR . That is such encryption and decryption are based on the known property of the aforementioned e d and n as calculated that mod mod Note here that in a similar manner mod mod whereby the owner can send a piece of data m encrypted according to PR to an interested party that in turn can decrypt same according to PU .

As may be appreciated public private key cryptography and the aforementioned algorithm are based on the fact that it is exceedingly difficult to obtain the private exponent d from the public key n e unless one can factor n into p and q. However such factoring is itself also exceedingly difficult especially as n becomes large.

Based on the aforementioned public private cryptography algorithm and properties then and in one embodiment of the present invention the user sends PU L CK to the licensor to obtain CK therefrom but prior to doing so such user obscures such PU L CK by determining e and n from the public key PU L of the licensor step picking a value R between 1 and n step computing mod and multiplying PU L CK by Y to result in such PU L CK being obscured i.e. Obs PU L CK step . Note here that R may be a random value or may be another value selected by the user or the like where R is not to be known by the licensor . Critically it is to be appreciated that such multiplication is in effect mod mod mod which mathematically reduces to mod and which further mathematically reduces to mod

At any rate the user then requests CK from the licensor by sending Obs PU L CK to the licensor at the location thereof step perhaps along with some form of payment or other remuneration for being provided with the content key CK to decrypt the corresponding encrypted content CK content . At this point then the licensor has Obs PU L CK and likely has some identification of the user perhaps from a return address from the payment or the like. Critically though the licensor has no identification of the content or of the content key CK from which the content may be identified and thus the content that is the basis of the request is not identified to the licensor .

To continue then with Obs PU L CK as set forth above the licensor applies the corresponding private key PR L to same to reveal an obscured version of CK that only the user can comprehend. In particular the licensor determines d and n from PR L step and based thereon computes PR L Obs PU L CK as mod step . Critically it is to be appreciated that such equation is in effect mod mod which mathematically reduces to mod and which further may be restated as thematically reduces to mod

That is by applying PR L to the obscured PU L CK the licensor results in CK obscured by R i.e. Obs CK . At this point then and again critically the licensor is in possession of Obs CK but cannot derive CK without R and thus again has no identification of the content or of the content key CK from which the content may be identified and thus the content that is the basis of the request is still not identified to the licensor .

To continue the licensor with Obs CK returns same to the requesting user step . Note here that although not encrypted by PU L CK is nevertheless hidden during transmission to the user inasmuch as such CK is in the obscured form of Obs CK and cannot be revealed without knowledge of R. At any rate the user upon receiving Obs CK retrieves CK therefrom based on having such knowledge of R by in effect dividing Obs CK by R step . In particular mod 1 mod which is 1 mod which is mod which is .

As should now be appreciated with such CK the user may then apply same to CK content to reveal the content and render same. To summarize then by employing the method shown in the user prior to sending PU L CK to the licensor obscures same in such a way that the licensor can apply PR L to same to reveal an obscured version of CK that only the user can comprehend. Significantly inasmuch as the licensor has no knowledge of the value R such licensor should not be able to deduce the content that is the basis of the request from the user and such content is thus not identified to the licensor barring of course other external factors that could be employed to identify the content to the licensor .

It is to be appreciated that based on the content not being identified to the licensor the licensor in performing the method set forth in connection with cannot without more information perform any administrative functions with regard to each piece of content . For example any payment or remuneration received in connection with a request cannot be allocated to any particular piece of content . In a similar manner different pieces of content cannot have different payment remuneration values inasmuch as each request presumably would have to be handled in a common manner including receiving a common payment remuneration value.

Accordingly in one embodiment of the present invention to in fact have different payment remuneration values for different pieces of content each piece of content is encrypted according to multiple content keys CK CK etc. . Accordingly if a particular piece of content is encrypted according to 5 content keys CK CK the user would be required to request each of the content keys CK CK with each request having a common payment remuneration value thus resulting in 5 payments remunerations in total. Likewise if a particular piece of content is encrypted according to 7 content keys 7 payments remunerations would be required in total and the like.

The programming necessary to effectuate the processes performed in connection with the present invention is relatively straight forward and should be apparent to the relevant programming public. Accordingly such programming is not attached hereto. Any particular programming then may be employed to effectuate the present invention without departing from the spirit and scope thereof.

In the present invention a system and method provide a user with some measure of privacy by allowing such user to request from a licensor a content key CK for a piece of content without identifying the content key CK or the content . The requesting user sends to the licensor as part of a request an encrypted form of the content key CK in an obscured form that is unrecognizable to the licensor and yet that allows the licensor to decrypt the encrypted content key CK into a decrypted yet still obscured form that remains unrecognizable to the licensor . Thus although the licensor decrypts same to result in the content key CK such decryption never results in the content key CK in a form identifiable to the licensor . As a result the licensor cannot associate the content key CK and by extension the requesting user to a particular piece of content . Nevertheless the licensor can note that the requesting user did in fact obtain a content key CK for some piece of content .

It should be appreciated that changes could be made to the embodiments described above without departing from the inventive concepts thereof. Most notably although the present invention is set forth in terms of public private cryptography other forms of cryptography may also be employed without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. It should be understood therefore that this invention is not limited to the particular embodiments disclosed but it is intended to cover modifications within the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims.

