---

title: Loaded transducer for downhole drilling components
abstract: A robust transmission element for transmitting information between downhole tools, such as sections of drill pipe, in the presence of hostile environmental conditions, such as heat, dirt, rocks, mud, fluids, lubricants, and the like. The transmission element maintains reliable connectivity between transmission elements, thereby providing an uninterrupted flow of information between drill string components. A transmission element is mounted within a recess proximate a mating surface of a downhole drilling component, such as a section of drill pipe. To close gaps present between transmission elements, transmission elements may be biased with a “spring force,” urging them closer together.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07002445&OS=07002445&RS=07002445
owner: IntelliServ, Inc.
number: 07002445
owner_city: Provo
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050504
---
This application is a Division of pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 430 734 Loaded Transducer for Downhole Drilling Components filed on May 6 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 913 093 by David R. Hall et al and incorporated by reference herein for all it discloses.

This invention was made with government support under Contract No. DE FC26 01NT41229 awarded by the U.S. Department of Energy. The government has certain rights in the invention.

This invention relates to oil and gas drilling and more particularly to apparatus and methods for reliably transmitting information between downhole drilling components.

For the past several decades engineers have worked to develop apparatus and methods to effectively transmit information from components located downhole on oil and gas drilling strings to the ground s surface. Part of the difficulty of this problem lies in the development of reliable apparatus and methods for transmitting information from one drill string component to another such as between sections of drill pipe. The goal is to provide reliable information transmission between downhole components stretching thousands of feet beneath the earth s surface while withstanding hostile wear and tear of subterranean conditions.

In an effort to provide solutions to this problem engineers have developed a technology known as mud pulse telemetry. Rather than using electrical connections mud pulse telemetry transmits information in the form of pressure pulses through fluids circulating through a well bore. However data rates of mud pulse telemetry are very slow compared to data bandwidths needed to provide real time data from downhole components.

For example mud pulse telemetry systems often operate at data rates less than 10 bits per second. At this rate data resolution is so poor that a driller is unable to make crucial decisions in real time. Since drilling equipment is often rented and very expensive even slight mistakes incur substantial expense. Part of the expense can be attributed to time consuming operations that are required to retrieve downhole data or to verify low resolution data transmitted to the surface by mud pulse telemetry. Often drilling or other procedures are halted while crucial data is gathered.

In an effort to overcome limitations imposed by mud pulse telemetry systems reliable connections are needed to transmit information between components in a drill string. For example since direct electrical connections between drill string components may be impractical and unreliable converting electrical signals to magnetic fields for later conversion back to electrical signals offers one solution for transmitting information between drill string components.

Nevertheless various factors or problems may make data transmission unreliable. For example dirt rocks mud fluids or other substances present when drilling may interfere with signals transmitted between components in a drill string. In other instances gaps present between mating surfaces of drill string components may adversely affect the transmission of data therebetween.

Moreover the harsh working environment of drill string components may cause damage to data transmission elements. Furthermore since many drill string components are located beneath the surface of the ground replacing or servicing data transmission components may be costly impractical or impossible. Thus robust and environmentally hardened data transmission components are needed to transmit information between drill string components.

In view of the foregoing it is a primary object of the present invention to provide robust transmission elements for transmitting information between downhole tools such as sections of drill pipe in the presence of hostile environmental conditions such as heat dirt rocks mud fluids lubricants and the like. It is a further object of the invention to maintain reliable connectivity between transmission elements to provide an uninterrupted flow of information between drill string components.

Consistent with the foregoing objects and in accordance with the invention as embodied and broadly described herein an apparatus is disclosed in one embodiment of the present invention as including a transmission element having a communicating surface mountable proximate a mating surface of a downhole drilling component such as a section of drill pipe.

By mating surface it is meant a surface on a downhole component intended to contact or nearly contact the surface of another downhole component such as another section of drill pipe. For example a mating surface may include threaded regions of a box end or pin end of drill pipe primary or secondary shoulders designed to come into contact with one another or other surfaces of downhole components that are intended to contact or come into close proximity to surfaces of other downhole components.

A transmission element may be configured to communicate with a corresponding transmission element located on another downhole component. The corresponding transmission element may likewise be mountable proximate a mating surface of the corresponding downhole component. In order to close gaps present between communicating surfaces of transmission elements transmission elements may be biased with respect to the mating surfaces they are mounted on.

By biased it is meant for the purposes of this specification that a transmission element is urged by a biasing member such as a spring or an elastomeric material or by a spring force caused by contact between a transmission element and a mating surface in a direction substantially orthogonal to the mating surface. Thus the term biased is not intended to denote a physical position of a transmission element with respect to a mating surface but rather the condition of a transmission element being urged in a selected direction with respect to the mating surface. In selected embodiments the transmission element may be positioned flush with above or below the mating surface.

Since a transmission element is intended to communicate with another transmission element mounted to another downhole tool in selected embodiments only a single transmission element is biased with respect to a mating surface. For example transmission elements may be biased only in pin ends of downhole tools but may be unbiased or fixed in box ends of the same downhole tools. However in other embodiments the transmission elements are biased in both the pin ends and box ends.

In selected embodiments a gap may be present between mating surfaces of downhole tools due to variations in tolerances or materials that may become interposed between the mating surfaces. In other embodiments the mating surfaces are in contact with one another. In selected embodiments a biasing member such as a spring or elastomeric material may be inserted between a transmission element and a corresponding mating surface to effect a bias therebetween.

A mating surface may be shaped to include a recess. A transmission element may be mounted or housed within the recess. In selected embodiments a recess may include a locking mechanism to retain the transmission element within the recess. In certain embodiments the locking mechanism is a locking shoulder shaped into the recess. A transmission element once inserted into the recess may slip past and be retained by the locking shoulder.

A transmission element and corresponding recess may have an annular shape. In selected embodiments a transmission element may snap into the recess and be retained by the locking mechanism. In selected embodiments angled surfaces of the recess and the transmission element may create a spring force urging the transmission element in a direction substantially orthogonal to the mating surface. This spring force may be caused by the contact of various surfaces of the transmission element and the recess including the outside diameters the inside diameters or a combination thereof.

In selected embodiments a transmission element on a downhole component communicates with a transmission element on a separate downhole component by converting an electrical signal to a magnetic field or current. The magnetic field or current induces an electrical current in a corresponding transmission element thereby recreating the original electrical signal. In other embodiments a transmission element located on a downhole component may communicate with a transmission element on another downhole component due to direct electrical contact therebetween.

In another aspect of the present invention a method for transmitting information between downhole tools located on a drill string includes mounting a transmission element having a communicating surface proximate a mating surface of a downhole tool. Another transmission element having a communicating surface may be mounted proximate a mating surface of another downhole tool the mating surfaces of each downhole tool being configured to contact one another. The method may further include biasing at least one transmission element with respect to a corresponding mating surface to close gaps present between communicating surfaces of the transmission elements.

In certain instances a gap may be present between the mating surfaces. In other instances mating surfaces may be in direct contact with one another. The method may further include providing a biasing member such as a spring elastomeric material or the like to effect the bias between a transmission element and a mating surface.

A method may further include shaping a mating surface to include a recess such that the transmission element substantially resides in the recess. Within the recess a locking mechanism may be provided to retain the transmission element within the recess. The locking mechanism may be a locking shoulder and the transmission element may be retained within the first recess by slipping by and engaging the locking shoulder.

A method in accordance with the invention may further include forming a transmission element and a recess into an annular shape. Furthermore biasing of the transmission element may be provided by angled surfaces of the recess and the transmission element to create a spring force thereby urging the transmission element in a direction substantially orthogonal to a mating surface. This spring force may be caused by contact between various surfaces of the transmission element and the recess including the outside diameters the inside diameters or a combination thereof. The method may further include communicating between transmission elements due to direct electrical contact or by transfer of magnetic energy therebetween.

In another aspect of the present invention an apparatus for transmitting data between downhole tools may include a loaded annular housing. By loaded it is meant for the purposes of this specification providing a spring force between a mating surface and an annular housing mounted thereon. In selected embodiments the annular housing may include at least one substantially U shaped element disposed within the loaded annular housing.

The U shaped element may be composed of a magnetically conductive and electrically insulating material such as ferrite thereby enabling magnetic current to be retained therein and channeled in a desired direction. An electrical conductor may be disposed within the U shaped element to carry electrical current. The electrical conductor may be electrically insulated to prevent shorting of the conductor to other electrically conductive components.

The loaded annular housing may be formed such that it is mountable in a recess of a mating surface of a downhole tool. The annular housing may be flush with the mating surface below the mating surface above the mating surface or a combination thereof.

It will be readily understood that the components of the present invention as generally described and illustrated in the Figures herein could be arranged and designed in a wide variety of different configurations. Thus the following more detailed description of embodiments of apparatus and methods of the present invention as represented in the Figures is not intended to limit the scope of the invention as claimed but is merely representative of various selected embodiments of the invention.

The illustrated embodiments of the invention will be best understood by reference to the drawings wherein like parts are designated by like numerals throughout. Those of ordinary skill in the art will of course appreciate that various modifications to the apparatus and methods described herein may easily be made without departing from the essential characteristics of the invention as described in connection with the Figures. Thus the following description of the Figures is intended only by way of example and simply illustrates certain selected embodiments consistent with the invention as claimed herein.

Referring to drill pipes or other downhole tools may include a pin end and a box end to connect drill pipes or other components together. In certain embodiments a pin end may include an external threaded portion to engage an internal threaded portion of the box end . When threading a pin end into a corresponding box end various shoulders may engage one another to provide structural support to components connected in a drill string.

For example a pin end may include a primary shoulder and a secondary shoulder . Likewise the box end may include a corresponding primary shoulder and secondary shoulder . A primary shoulder may be labeled as such to indicate that a primary shoulder provides the majority of the structural support to a drill pipe or downhole component . Nevertheless a secondary shoulder may also engage a corresponding secondary shoulder in the box end providing additional support or strength to drill pipes or components connected in series.

As was previously discussed apparatus and methods are needed to transmit information along a string of connected drill pipes or other components . As such one major issue is the transmission of information across joints where a pin end connects to a box end . In selected embodiments a transmission element may be mounted proximate a mating surface or shoulder on a pin end to communicate information to another transmission element located on a mating surface or shoulder of the box end . Cables or other transmission medium may be operably connected to the transmission elements to transmit information therefrom along components 

In certain embodiments a recess may be provided in the secondary shoulder of the pin end and in the secondary shoulder of the box end to house each of the transmission elements . The transmission elements may have an annular shape and be mounted around the radius of the drill pipe . Since a secondary shoulder may contact or come very close to a secondary shoulder of a box end a transmission element may sit substantially flush with a secondary shoulder on a pin end . Likewise a transmission element may sit substantially flush with a surface of a secondary shoulder of a box end .

In selected embodiments a transmission element may communicate with a corresponding transmission element by direct electrical contact therewith. In other embodiments the transmission element may convert an electrical signal to a magnetic flux or magnetic current. A corresponding transmission element located proximate the transmission element may detect the magnetic field or current. The magnetic field may induce an electrical current into the transmission element that may then be transmitted from the transmission element to the electrical cable located along the drill pipe or downhole component .

As was previously stated a downhole drilling environment may adversely affect communication between transmission elements located on successive drill string components . For example materials such as dirt mud rocks lubricants or other fluids may inadvertently interfere with the contact or communication between transmission elements . In other embodiments gaps present between a secondary shoulder on a pin end and a secondary shoulder on a box end due to variations in component tolerances may interfere with communication between transmission elements . Thus apparatus and methods are needed to reliably overcome these as well as other obstacles.

Referring to for example as was previously stated a gap may be present between the secondary shoulders of the pin end and box end . This gap may be the result of variations in manufacturing tolerances between different sections of pipe. In other embodiments the gap may be the result of materials such as dirt rocks mud lubricants fluids or the like interposed between the shoulders .

If transmission elements are designed for optimal function when in direct contact with one another or when in close proximity to one another materials or variations in tolerances leaving a gap may cause malfunction of the transmission elements impeding or interfering with the flow of data. Thus apparatus and methods are needed to improve reliability of communication between transmission elements even in the presence of gaps or other interfering substances.

In accordance with the present invention a transmission element may be provided such that it is moveable with respect to a corresponding shoulder . Thus transmission elements may be translated such that they are in closer proximity to one another to enable effective communication therebetween. In selected embodiments direct contact between transmission elements may be required.

In other embodiments only a specified separation may be allowed between transmission elements for effective communication. As illustrated transmission elements may be mounted in secondary shoulders of the pin end and box end respectively. In reality the transmission elements may be provided in any suitable surface of the pin end and box end such as in primary shoulders .

Referring to in selected embodiments a transmission element may include an annular housing . The annular housing may include a magnetically conducting electrically insulating element therein such as ferrite or some other material of similar electrical and magnetic properties. The element may be formed in a U shape and fit within the housing . Within the U shaped element a conductor may be provided to carry electrical current therethrough. In selected embodiments the electrical conductor is coated with an electrically insulating material .

As current flows through the conductor a magnetic flux or field may be created around the conductor . The U shaped element may serve to contain the magnetic flux created by the conductor and prevent energy leakage into surrounding materials. The U shape of the element may also serve to transfer magnetic current to a similarly shaped element in another transmission element . Since materials such as ferrite may be quite brittle the U shaped elements may be provided in segments to prevent cracking or breakage that might otherwise occur using a single piece of ferrite.

As was previously stated a recess may be provided in a mating surface such as in a secondary shoulder . Likewise the transmission element may be inserted into and retained within the recess . In selected embodiments the recess may include a locking mechanism to enable the housing to enter the recess while preventing the exit therefrom. For example in one embodiment a locking mechanism may simply be a groove or recess formed within the larger recess . A corresponding shoulder may be formed in the housing such that the shoulder engages the recess thereby preventing the housing from exiting the larger recess .

As was previously discussed in order to close gaps or space present between transmission elements in the pin end and box end respectively a transmission element may be biased with respect to a mating surface such as a secondary shoulder . That is a transmission element may be urged in a direction with respect to a secondary shoulder . In selected embodiments angled surfaces of the recess and housing respectively may provide this spring force in the direction .

For example each of the surfaces may form an angle with respect to a direction normal or perpendicular to the surface . This angle may urge the housing in a direction due to its slope . That is if the housing is in tension as it is pressed into the recess a spring like force may urge the housing in a direction .

In other embodiments a biasing member such as a spring or other elastomeric material may be inserted between the housing and the recess in a space to urge the housing in a direction . In selected embodiments the housing may only contact a single surface of the recess . Gaps may be present between the recess and the housing along other surfaces. These may serve several purposes.

For example if the housing were to contact both a surface on one side of the recess as well as another surface on the other side of the recess pressure on both sides of the housing may create undesired stress on a U shaped element or elements . If an element is constructed of ferrite the stress may cause cracking or damage due to its brittleness. Thus in selected embodiments it may be desirable that only a single surface of the housing contact a surface of the recess .

Nevertheless a surface in contact with the housing may be along either an inside or outside diameter of the recess or a combination thereof. Other recesses or spaces may be provided between the housing and U shaped elements . These recesses may be filled with an elastomeric or bonding material to help retain the U shaped elements within the housing .

Referring to B and C while continuing to refer generally to a transmission element may include one or several shoulders to engage one or several locking recesses within the larger recess . For example referring to a transmission element may include multiple locking shoulders along both an inner and outer diameter of a housing . These shoulders may interlock with corresponding grooves or recesses formed in the recess .

In another embodiment referring to a transmission element may simply include a single locking shoulder located along an inside diameter of the transmission element . This locking shoulder may engage a corresponding groove or recess located along the inside diameter of the larger recess . Likewise with respect to a transmission element may simply include a locking shoulder around an outside diameter of the transmission element . A corresponding groove may be included around the outside diameter of the recess to retain the transmission element .

The present invention may be embodied in other specific forms without departing from its essence or essential characteristics. The described embodiments are to be considered in all respects only as illustrative and not restrictive. The scope of the invention is therefore indicated by the appended claims rather than by the foregoing description. All changes within the meaning and range of equivalency of the claims are to be embraced within their scope.

