---

title: Ion conducting electrolyte brush additives
abstract: The present invention's unique utilization of an electrolytic solution renders more efficient the conduction of electricity between two objects (such as two parts of electrical or electromechanical machinery) in relative motion. According to typical inventive practice, the electrolytic solution is a “strong” electrolytic solution of a “dual-valance” nature, including two compatible solute compounds containing electron donor ions and electron acceptor ions. When inventively implemented at the current collector interface, the electrolytic solution serves to improve current transfer across the interface. During machine operation in which a brush (e.g., fiber brush) slidingly contacts a first machine part while being affixed to a second machine part, the inventive additive represents an auxiliary vehicle for conducting electrical current from one machine part to the other machine part. Among the benefits of inventive practice are reduced conduction power losses, reduced friction power losses, and reduced wear rate.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07557485&OS=07557485&RS=07557485
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07557485
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051008
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. provisional application No. 60 616 843 filed 8 Oct. 2004 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Ion Conducting Electrolyte Brush Additives joint inventors William A. Lynch and Neal A. Sondergaard.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

This application is related to U.S. nonprovisional application Ser. No. 10 863 844 filed 3 Jun. 2004 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Electrical Current Transferring and Brush Pressure Exerting Interlocking Slip Ring Assembly joint inventors William A. Lynch Wayne Marks Jr. and Neal A. Sondergaard.

This application is related to U.S. nonprovisional application Ser. No. 10 985 074 filed 5 Nov. 2004 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Solid and Liquid Hybrid Current Transferring Brush joint inventors Neal A. Sondergaard and William A. Lynch.

This application is related to U.S. nonprovisional application Ser. No. 10 985 075 filed 5 Nov. 2004 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Folded Foil and Metal Fiber Braid Electrical Current Collector Brush joint inventors William A. Lynch Neal A. Sondergaard and Wayne Marks Jr.

This application is related to U.S. nonprovisional application Ser. No. 11 033 619 filed 13 Jan. 2005 hereby incorporated herein by reference entitled Quad Shaft Contrarotating Homopolar Motor joint inventors William A. Lynch and Neal A. Sondergaard.

The present invention relates to machinery involving the conduction of electrical current between parts moving relative to each other more particularly to methods and devices for effecting or facilitating such electrical conduction.

Various kinds of motors generators and other electrical apparatus require the conduction of electricity between two relatively moving parts. Such mechanical arrangements usually involve the conduction of current between a stationary part stator and a rotating part rotor . A device known as a brush or current collector is normally used for making sliding contact between stationary and rotating parts so as to conduct electrical current therebetween. A conventional current collection assembly includes a brush and a holder for the brush as two separate components that are attached to each other. The holder is also attached to either the stationary part or the rotating part of the machinery.

Depending on the particular machinery a brush can be used to conduct current in either direction i.e. either from the stationary part to the rotating part or vice versa and can be fixed with respect to either the rotating part or the stationary part. Among the desirable qualities of a brush are high current carrying capacity e.g. in terms of capability of carrying a high amount of current per unit area of the interface between the brush and the surface contacted thereby low resistance low friction and high wear resistance. Current collection brush technology has grown in interest with the advent and continued development of homopolar machine technology particularly in the realm of homopolar motors which operate on direct current such as those that are currently envisioned for naval ship propulsion.

Conventional brushes include solid e.g. carbon brushes and metal fiber e.g. copper brushes. The majority of brushes currently used are of the solid carbon variety. Solid carbon brushes provide limited power densities due to their characteristically small number of contact spots. In addition solid carbon brushes tend to have a short life and to produce conductive wear debris resulting in frequent brush replacement and frequent machinery cleaning and associated high maintenance costs. Generally speaking as compared with solid carbon brushes copper fiber brushes are considered to afford superior performance. However copper fiber brushes are currently expensive to produce and can support only moderate current densities.

Furthermore fiber brushes are prone to wear frequently manifested as a fiber brush wear in contour that matches the curvature of the rotor that is in constant running contact with the fiber brush. The fiber brush wear sometimes resembling welding like damage may result from friction and or from electrical sparking associated with the fiber brush s sliding contact with the relatively moving machine part. Moreover the electrical conductivity of fiber brushes is characterized by discontinuities concomitant with the intermittencies of contact by the fibers with the relatively moving machine part. Such contact intermittencies are occasioned by the running nature of the contact in conjunction with the roughness often microscopic of the surface of the relatively moving machine part. It has been estimated that a typical brush fiber is in actual physical contact with the relatively moving machine part only about one third of the time during which the machinery is in operation hence each fiber represents a non contributor to the overall electrical conduction during about two thirds of the period of machine operation.

Liquid metal additives have been investigated for use in conjunction with fiber brushes in order to alleviate the above noted conductive intermittency. Although a liquid metal material can succeed in lending constancy or smoothness to the electrical conduction between the brush and the slidingly contacted machine part the high electrical conductivity of the liquid metal material invites electrical problems in the machinery such as involving short circuiting. Liquid metal brushes are capable of supporting very high current densities but more research is needed in this area because of problems concerning stability and reactivity. Liquid metals have been tested with some success in association with small brushes for high performance current collection in homopolar motors. Generally liquid metals require very clean operating environments absent oxygen and water. Since liquid metals are highly conductive unwanted electrical connection of adjacent slip rings can occur especially at locations where the liquid metal may drip or migrate such as the bottom of the machine resulting in short circuits in the machine.

Notable liquid metals that have been tested in current collection context are sodium potassium NaK alloy and various gallium alloys. NaK an alloy of sodium with potassium approximately 22 Na and 78 K has performed well in a range of applications including both generators and motors. NaK does not react with most materials normally used in electrical machines however NaK is a water reactive caustic alkali metal so spillage of this hazardous material is to be avoided. Gallium alloys have similar conductivity attributes but because of their higher densities and viscosities these metallic materials are best suited for use with low speed propulsion motors. Because gallium alloys slowly react with copper possibly by forming an alloy with the copper all copper surfaces must be plated with a suitable non reactive metal nevertheless gallium alloys are non hazardous and should be further evaluated for current collector applications.

In view of the foregoing it is an object of the present invention to improve the conduction of electrical current between a fiber brush and a machine part that the fiber brush slidably contacts.

Another object of the present invention is to reduce the wear of a fiber brush that slidably contacts a machine part.

The present invention provides a liquid additive a strong electrolytic solution that is designed to enhance the performance of brushes by providing a uniform electrically conductive interface. The inventive electrolytic solution promotes constancy of electrical conduction at the interface by compensating via ionic electrical conduction for intermittencies of electronic electrical conduction that are associated with the fiber bouncing resulting from microscopic surface roughness characterizing the running surface of the object that contacts the brush fibers while moving relative thereto. A typical inventive electrolytic solution contains both electron acceptor ions and electron donor ions which can conduct electrical current without undergoing any net change in composition. Such a dual electrolytic solution containing both an oxidizing agent and a reducing agent serves not only to provide a uniform electrically conductive interface but also serves to protect the electrodes in applications such as involving high current density slip ring current collector devices.

In accordance with typical embodiments of the present invention a combination suitable for current collection applications comprises electronic conduction means and ionic conduction means. The electronic conduction means includes plural e.g. multiple fibers for effecting electronic conduction during relatively moving contact of the fibers with a structure. The contact of at least some of the fibers is characterized by intermittency associated with the relatively moving nature of the contact along with surface roughness characterizing the structure. The electronic conduction is characterized by discontinuity associated with the intermittency. The ionic conduction means includes a strong electrolytic solution for effecting ionic conduction when placed in the vicinity of the contact. The ionic conduction supplements the electronic conduction so as to promote the constancy of the overall conduction of electricity the overall conduction representing the sum of the ionic conduction and the electronic conduction. According to frequent inventive practice the electrolytic solution is an inorganic aqueous solution including an oxidizing agent and a reducing agent however non aqueous solutions and or organic solutes may also be utilized. An at least substantially neutral electrochemical cell reaction occurs in which the fibers constitute a first electrode and the structure constitutes a second electrode.

The conventional scientific electrical chemical and electrochemical concepts noted in the instant paragraph are germane to the present invention. A chemical solution includes a solvent and a solute the solute is dissolved in the solvent. An aqueous solution is a chemical solution in which the solvent is water. An electrolyte is a chemical substance that when dissolved ionizes to produce an electrically conductive medium. An ion is an electrically charged chemical particle such as an atom a molecule or a molecular fragment. An electrolytic solution is a chemical solution that can conduct electricity because its solute is ionically dissociated. Ions can be separated from an electrolytic solution using electrically charged electrodes. Many aqueous solutions are electrolytic solutions as many substances e.g. acids bases and salts dissociate in water to form positively charged ions cations and or negatively charged ions anions that enable the solution to conduct electricity. Anions are characterized by an excess of one or more electrons. Cations are characterized by a deficiency of one or more electrons. Electrical current is the movement of electrical charges in a conductor. There are two basic kinds of conductors namely an electronic conductor a material that conducts electricity by electron motion and an ionic conductor a material that conducts electricity by ion motion . An electrolytic solution is a notable example of an ionic conductor. According to electronic conduction electrical charges are carried by electrons. According to ionic conduction electrical charges are carried by ions.

The present invention s liquid additive represents an attractive alternative to liquid metals for use in association with current collector brushes. The inventive liquid material typically includes moderately strongly conductive electrolytes in solution. Although the inventive electrolytic solution has sufficient conductivity to enhance brush operation the inventive electrolytic solution is significantly less conductive than liquid metals thereby significantly reducing the risks of shunt leakage and short circuiting. In addition the present invention s electrolytic additives should be sufficiently conductive to allow for brush operation with a significantly thicker film than the water HO and carbon dioxide CO film that is currently used in a vaporous manner for lubrication and or anti oxygenation purposes in association with fiber brushes.

The water plus CO2 solution that is currently known in fiber brush current collection context is one of many known formulations of weak electrolytic solution. A weak electrolytic solution is one in which there is partial typically slight or minimal ionization dissociation of ions of the electrolytes in the solution that is the electrolyte solute s behave s weakly in that solvent. A strong electrolytic solution is one in which there is complete or nearly complete ionization dissociation of ions of the electrolytes in the solution that is the electrolyte solute s behave s strongly in that solvent. Data on solution and other material characteristics can be found in reference text books such as 82Edition edited by David R. Lide QD65.C57 2001 as well as in manufacturer s data. For purposes of quantitatively demarcating herein between a weak electrolytic solution and a strong electrolytic solution hydrofluoric acid HF which is partially dissociated in water is availed of herein with some approximation to establish the lower limit of a strong electrolytic solution. Hydrofluoric acid serves as baseline for a moderately strong electrolyte having a conductivity at 1 mole liter of 24.3 mS cm and a pH of 3.2.

The term weak electrolytic solution as used herein is an electrolytic solution characterized by an electrical conductivity of less than 10 mS cm at 1 molar concentration. Hence hydrofluoric acid is proximate the lower end of the range corresponding to the strong electrolytic solution category. Most weak electrolytic solutions such as carbonic acid CO2 solution acetic acid solution vinegar and ammonia solution are orders of magnitude weaker than this and are nearly neutral in pH. The term strong electrolytic solution as used herein is an electrolytic solution characterized by an electrical conductivity of 10 to 1000 mS cm at 1 molar concentration. More generally expressed a weak electrolytic solution is less conductive than hydrofluoric acid and a strong electrolytic solution is at least as conductive as hydrofluoric acid. Generally a strong electrolytic solution is very much more electrically conductive than is a weak electrolytic solution. A typical electrolytic solution in accordance with the present invention is a strong electrolytic solution nevertheless some weak electrolytic solutions may also lend themselves to inventive practice. Generally a weak electrolytic solution such as CO2 aqueous solution cannot be applied as thickly to a current collection interface as can a strong electrolytic solution as a weak electrolytic solution that is laid on too thickly will inhibit the electrical conduction at the interface. A thick film of inventive electrolytic solution can permit a brush to operate at a very light load thereby significantly reducing both the wear and the power loss.

A typical formulation of the present invention s electrolytic additive solution is significantly more electrically conductive than is the CO2 water solution conventionally used for non conductive purposes with fiber brushes. For instance at 25 C. A 10 molar HCl solution has a conductivity of 708 ms cm a 1 molar KCl solution has a conductivity of 109 mS cm a CO2 saturated water solution has a conductivity of 0.0011 mS cm seawater has a conductivity of 53 mS cm. Accordingly a thicker liquid layer at the interface is practical with those among the present invention s ionic conductive additives that are strongly electrolytic. Inventive practice is very much preferred with strong electrolytic solutions rather than weak electrolytic solutions as the latter only permits application in the interface as a thin layer. In fact a weak electrolytic solution may be insignificantly capable or thoroughly incapable of providing in accordance with inventive principles an ionically conductive vehicle that serves to supplement an electronically conductive vehicle for conducting electricity. Weak electrolytic solutions cannot significantly advance electrical conduction uniformity due to the insufficiency of the ionic electrical conduction that would be associated with the relatively low number of ions of the weak electrolytes. Nor is a weak electrolytic solution capable of counteracting the physical tendencies toward asperities in electronic electrical conductivities by brush fibers. Furthermore a thin layer of a weak electrolytic solution even in dual species oxidant reductant form is not strong enough to reduce brush wear through an electrochemical neutralization mechanism.

Many embodiments of the inventive additive eliminate wear caused not only by fiber bouncing mechanisms but also by electroplating mechanisms. The present invention s electrolytic solution as typically embodied is an electrolytic solution similar to the kind that has been used and known to work in flow batteries. A typical inventive electrolytic solution includes both electron donor ions and electron acceptor ions within an aqueous solution.

According to frequent inventive practice the inventive electrolytic solution is situated so as to form a film in the interface between a brush and a relatively moving machine part. During operation of the machinery the inventive electrolytic solution provides through the inventive electrolytic solution an electrochemical path for current flow. For inventive embodiments in which the electrolytic solution contains both an oxidant and a reductant current is carried by the present invention s electrolytic solution so that the ensuing net reaction within it is neutral zero . The total reaction of the inventive electrolytic solution is an electrochemical nullity hence the inventive electrolytic solution should last indefinitely.

A dual species oxidant reductant kind of inventive electrolytic solution i.e. one which includes both proton donor ions and proton acceptor ions can minimize brush wear associated with anodal electrochemical etching mechanisms thereby eliminating the anode cathode effect previously observed in testing of many types of metal fiber brushes. The inventive additive provides an alternate low impedance current conduction path thereby eliminating accelerated positive brush wear that may be associated with the formation of metal oxide or metal cations and the accompanying anodic etching. According to typical inventive practice during machine operation a brush experiences ultra low friction and light loading the inventive liquid interface layer affords minimal frictional loss and minimal brush wear. A moderately strong conductivity electrolytic additive material can provide optimal trade off between transport current conduction related power loss and magnetically induced circulating current related power loss. No net change will occur in the solution or at the electrodes which are thus inert electrodes. Slip ring motion can result in mixing of the electrolytic solution thereby preventing polarization or stratification in the electrolyte.

Generally the present invention s additive materials are corrosive. Therefore for many inventive embodiments gold plated silver brushes may be required and other parts of the machinery may require plating with a hard noble metal such as iridium. The prospects for successful practice of the present invention are great so long as a given inventive additive is teamed with suitable metal materials for the two relatively moving machine parts e.g. fiber brush and rotor that define the interface at which the inventive additive is to be situated. For instance depending on the inventive embodiment copper may or may not be a suitable electrically conductive material for the brush fibers. Copper based Cu I and Cu II solutions can also provide acceptor and donor ions but stable cuprous Cu I cations only exist in solutions with complex ions such as halide salts and acids. These copper based electrolytic solutions should not be used with copper brushes but can be used with gold brushes and possibly with gold plated silver brushes. vanadium titanium and polysulfide solutions may be suitable. Chromium vanadium titanium and polysulfide solutions may be suitable for use with copper brushes. Copper brushes may corrode or become coated with a thin passive coating. Silver brushes would represent a higher risk than gold brushes but a lower risk than copper brushes and may be suitable for most conductive solutions. Gold brushes are almost certainly compatible with most solutions but have higher initial costs.

There are at least two preferred modes for applying an inventive electrolytic solution in a current collector context in accordance with the present invention. According to a first inventive mode the electrolytic solution is dripped onto the brush or brushes . According to a second inventive mode the electrolytic solution is contained in a sealed environment for the current collector apparatus such as including slip rings. According to a third mode for applying an inventive electrolytic solution in a current collector context in accordance with the present invention the electrolytic solution is caused to be transmitted by the brush fibers themselves in a manner pursuant to principles disclosed by the aforementioned U.S. patent application entitled Solid and Liquid Hybrid Current Transferring Brush joint inventors Neal A. Sondergaard and William A. Lynch.

Inventive practice of liquid additives should be suitable in association with solid brushes. Nevertheless fiber brushes will generally provide greater current densities because of their larger surface areas in contact with the inventive electrolytic fluid. The present invention admits of diverse application. For instance a slip ring can use two solid non contacting surfaces or a non contacting fiber brush or a lightly loaded fiber brush or two non contacting fiber brushes. If the electrolytic solution is corrosive to low temperature solders the fiber brushes will likely require attachment to their holders using an alternative material such as eutectic 72 silver 28 copper braze to avoid solder corrosion. Alternatively the present invention can be practiced so as to implement a novel unitary device conceived by the present inventors which combines the brush and holder components.

Referring now to and a holder is mounted upon a stator . Brush which includes multiple fibers and a bonded section of fibers is fixedly held at bonded section by holder . The exposed portions of brush fibers contact rotor at interface . Rotor rotates about a rotational axis in a rotational direction r and is hence moving relative to the stationary brush . Interface the interface between the exposed brush fibers and the rotor surface is constantly moving along the rotor surface in accordance with the rotation of rotor . Outside of inventive practice a holder is used not only to hold a brush but also to exert a bias e.g. in spring like fashion against the brush in the direction of the relatively moving object that is slidingly contacted by the brush. In inventive practice depending on the inventive embodiment holder may be devised to exert a less forceful bias e.g. a slight bias against brush than is usually seen by a holder with respect to a brush in non inventive practice in fact in inventive practice a holder may even be designed so that exertion of bias against the brush is obviated completely.

As illustrated in a liquid electrolytic solution is contained in a tank or receptacle such as a reservoir . Electrolytic solution is pumped from reservoir via pump and along pipe and is dispensed via nozzle at the sliding contact interface between the fibers of brush and the surface of rotor . Drops of electrolytic solution are continually deposited e.g. dripped onto interface so as to generate an ongoing film of electrolytic solution film extending at least substantially throughout interface . By force of gravity droplets of electrolytic solution fall beneath interface e.g. toward the ground or floor or onto lower parts of the machinery . The solution may be collected and re circulated to the reservoir .

It is noteworthy that as distinguished from liquid metal materials that have been tested in current collection context the electrolytic solutions in accordance with the present invention are well suited for an inventive drip configuration such as shown in . A liquid metal is much more highly electrically conductive than is a typical inventive electrolytic solution . It would be less practical or more complicated to drip the liquid metal in an analogous manner because of the risk posed by falling liquid metal droplets which are characterized by high electrical conductivity of deleterious electrical events such as involving short circuiting.

As illustrated in a liquid electrolytic solution is contained in a vessel such as an immersion chamber . Due to the immersion of at least a portion of brush in electrolytic solution inside immersion chamber a film of electrolytic solution is continuously present at interface . According to some inventive embodiments apparatus such as including a reservoir a pump and a pipe is implemented to periodically e.g. timed or selectively replenish the electrolytic solution contained within immersion chamber . Similarly as provided by the inventive configuration shown in a film of electrolytic solution is present at interface on an ongoing basis and extends at least substantially throughout interface .

Reference is now made to which depicts the fiber bouncing phenomenon that takes place at interface . The distances of fibers from the rotor surface are exaggerated in for illustrative purposes. No mechanical surface is perfectly smooth. Even a macroscopically even rotor surface is characterized on a microscopic scale by surface roughness. As rotor rotates the surface roughness of rotor causes the fibers to bounce e.g. rebound jump or ricochet microscopic distances from the rotor surface. According to L. Boyer S. Noel and J. P. Chabrerie Wear vol. 116 pages 43 57 1987 incorporated herein by reference at any one moment in time only approximately one third of the brush fibers at a current collector interface are in actual physical contact with the relatively moving surface. Based on this teaching by Boyer et al. perhaps it is fair to assume for many inventive applications that at any particular moment in time during machine operation less than one half of fibers will actually be contacting the running surface of rotor . Because the fibers bounce around at least half and perhaps two thirds of fibers being separated from the rotor surface from moment to moment the electronic electrical conduction by the fibers to or from rotor is commensurately discontinuous intermittent and its average value is proportionally lower.

The film of electrolytic solution promotes constancy uniformity of the overall electrical conduction at interface . The overall electrical conduction equals the sum of the electronic electrical conduction that occurs via the brush fibers and the ionic electrical conduction that occurs via the electrolytic solution film . The electrolytic solution film provides an auxiliary electrically conductive mechanism i.e. an ionically electrically conductive mechanism that supplements the electronically electrically conductive mechanism provided by the brush fibers . The ionic conduction by the electrolytic solution film not only supplements but also complements the electronic conduction by the brush fibers by exerting a smoothing influence on the overall electrical conduction at interface . Otherwise expressed the electronically conductive discontinuity is tempered by the ionically conductive continuity thereby promoting the evenness of the overall electrical conduction.

With reference to and asperities are microscopic roughness elevations of a surface of a material. An asperity spot abbreviated a spot is the point of physical contact between an asperity on one surface and an asperity on another surface. When the respective surfaces of electrical contacts are mated physical contact occurs only at one or more asperity spots a spots . Each a spot is elastically plastically flattened to form a small contact area through which the electronic conduction of electrical current is constricted. The number of a spots and their sizes and arrangement can affect the performance and longevity of the electrical contact. Most of the electrical resistance of brush is associated with the voltage drop across interface . As depicted in which shows one asperity spot the current in each fiber is constricted in one or a few small asperity spots on the tip of each fiber . The fiber tip area that carries current is only a small portion of the total fiber tip area. The area of the a spot is known to the electrical contact industry to be small e.g. on the order of 1 of the area of a typical fiber in a metal fiber brush as disclosed in references such as Ragnar Holm 4Edition TK2821H74 1967 and Edited by Paul G. Slade TK2821.E34 1999. Each a spot is likely to occur at an asperity high point on the fiber tip micro roughness and is likely to move around on the fiber tip because of the micro roughness of the running surface of rotor . Moreover fibers are likely to jump over the micro roughness characterizing rotor s running surface so each fiber is not conducting electricity some of the time. The present invention s liquid additive can serve to facilitate electrical conduction over the entire or nearly the entire fiber tip such as illustrated in . The constantly present film of electrolytic solution serves to increase the areas of conductance a spots in fibers . Depending on characteristics of the electrolytic film such as thickness the electrical current conduction may be described by the mechanism depicted in or by the simultaneous combination acting in parallel of the mechanisms depicted in and .

Reference is now made to which illustrates a hypothetical electrochemical wear mechanism in non inventive practice. Under normal conditions electrons are conducted through a small gap greatly exaggerated in the illustration consisting of a few molecular layers of water. Copper metal in the brush fiber can act as an electron donor thereby becoming a copper ion Cu or Cu2 and dissolving into solution. The copper ion can then act as an electron acceptor thereby becoming metallic copper and plating on the rotor. This situation would cause increased fiber wear and could also increase rotor surface roughness if the plating process is not uniform.

With reference to in accordance with the present invention an ionic current shunt mechanism is provided by using an additive based on a dual valance vanadium solution. Since the vanadium half cell is less electro positive than copper V2 preferentially acts as an electron donor rather than copper. This current shuttle mechanism can both prevent the ion current induced wear mechanism and increase the electrical conductivity of the interface.

Among the various electrolytic solutions that are suitable for use in accordance with the present invention are certain electrolytic solutions that are known to be useful to store energy using redox type reactions in flow batteries. Two known types of flow batteries are the Vanadium V II III V IV V based battery system and the Sodium Bromide Sodium Polysulfide based Innogy Regenesys battery system. These types of batteries store energy in two solutions respectively contained inside anolyte and catholyte tanks. Each of these solutions contains both electron acceptors and electron donors. As distinguished from flow battery applications the present invention utilizes a single electrolytic solution rather than a plurality of electrolytic solutions. Not only compounds utilized in batteries but other compounds may be suitable for use in current collector applications in accordance with the present invention. Furthermore the present invention utilizes the single electrolytic solution for ionic conduction purposes rather than for energy storage purposes.

The Regenesys system uses a catholyte containing NaBr and NaBrsolution which has a very high half cell potential and would require gold brushes in inventive practice. This solution also can liberate highly toxic bromine fumes. A solution containing KI and KIshould have similar characteristics however it would be less toxic and would have a lower half cell potential. compatible with silver or palladium brushes. Iodine solution can be used as a precious metal etchant because of the formation of complex ions and therefore may cause excessive corrosion in inventive practice however suitable mixtures of iodine electrolytic solution may be possible combined with metals that do not form complex ions. The Regenesys anolyte uses polysulfides NaSand NaS. In inventive practice this alkali solution should be compatible with all brush types however the formation of low solubility sulfides may require maintenance in terms of cleaning and solution replenishment.

Iron and chromium solutions have also been tested in flow batteries. These are less toxic than those used in the Vanadium and Regenesys systems. Cr II and Cr III or titanium salts could be used in the anolyte solution however the solution s low half cell potential indicates a possibility of hydrogen gas evolution and poor stability of the Cr II ions. Fe II and Fe III could be used in the catholyte solution. The solution would include ferric chloride etching solution containing FeCland HCl with ferrous chloride FeCladded. Fe SO HSOand FeSOcould also be used. The iron solutions should be compatible with gold brushes and the iron sulfate solutions should also be compatible with gold and possibly palladium brushes.

The copper based additives are somewhat more difficult to prepare because of the low aqueous solubility of the Cu I cuprous ion. It complexes with chloride ions therefore addition of HCl hydrochloric acid is a possible technique for dissolving the Cu I chloride. Very concentrated acid was required to dissolve a 1 molar solution. This solution provided very high conductivity but this highly acidic solution had a negative pH. Salt solution made with saturated NaCl was also used to produce a copper based additive solution that was much less acidic and provided reasonably high conductivity. Further study of the copper based additives as a function of salt concentration and pH could lead to further optimization of characteristics of the copper based additive. A mildly alkali form of the copper based additive can be made using a mixture of ammonium chloride and ammonium hydroxide in the solution. Other procedures would be required for other types of additives included in and .

The present invention which is disclosed herein is not to be limited by the embodiments described or illustrated herein which are given by way of example and not of limitation. Other embodiments of the present invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art from a consideration of the instant disclosure or from practice of the present invention. Various omissions modifications and changes to the principles disclosed herein may be made by one skilled in the art without departing from the true scope and spirit of the present invention which is indicated by the following claims.

