---

title: Method and system of remote position reporting device
abstract: A remote position monitoring system, method, and computer-program product using a global position satellite receiver and information from at least two global position satellites to determine a position of a mobile object with the global position satellite receiver and report via Internet the position of the mobile object to a recipient in search of the mobile object. A remote position reporting device of the monitoring system can be part of or attached to any mobile object such as a child, a skier, a car, and expensive items. The remote position reporting device includes a global positioning system (GPS) receiver, monitoring software and an Internet access module. The monitoring software (e.g., a dynamic link library) supports multiple data formats and multiple protocols to communicated the position information. The GPS receiver provides the monitoring software with position information at prescribed times, and the monitoring software records the position information. The monitoring software communicates the position information at prescribed times to a desired party through the Internet access module.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07650233&OS=07650233&RS=07650233
owner: Ricoh Company Limited
number: 07650233
owner_city: Tokyo
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050718
---
This application is a continuation application of U.S. application Ser. No. 10 606 862 filed Jun. 27 2003 which is a continuation in part of U.S. application Ser. No. 10 167 497 filed on Jun. 13 2002 which is a continuation of U.S. application Ser. No. 09 575 702 filed on Jul. 12 2000 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 421 608. The present application is also related to the following U.S. applications and patents Ser. No. 09 453 934 filed May 17 2000 Ser. No. 09 453 935 filed May 17 2000 Ser. No. 09 453 936 filed May 17 2000 Ser. No. 09 453 937 filed May 17 2000 Ser. No. 09 542 284 filed Apr. 4 2000 Ser. No. 09 520 368 filed Mar. 7 2000 Ser. No. 09 440 692 filed Nov. 16 1999 Ser. No. 09 440 647 filed Nov. 16 1999 Ser. No. 09 440 646 filed Nov. 16 1999 Ser. No. 09 440 693 filed Nov. 16 1999 Ser. No. 09 440 645 filed Nov. 16 1999 Ser. No. 09 408 443 filed Sep. 29 1999 Ser. No. 09 407 769 filed Sep. 29 1999 Ser. No. 09 393 677 filed Sep. 10 1999 Ser. No. 09 311 148 filed May 13 1999 Ser. No. 09 192 583 filed Nov. 17 1998 Ser. No. 09 190 460 filed Nov. 13 1998 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 208 956 Ser. No. 08 883 492 filed Jun. 26 1997 Ser. No. 09 108 705 filed Jul. 1 1998 Ser. No. 09 107 989 filed Jul. 1 1998 Ser. No. 08 997 482 filed Dec. 23 1997 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 085 196 Ser. No. 08 997 705 filed Dec. 23 1997 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 279 015 Ser. No. 08 738 659 filed Oct. 30 1996 Ser. No. 08 738 461 filed Oct. 30 1996 Ser. No. 09 457 669 filed Dec. 9 1999 Ser. No. 08 916 009 filed Aug. 21 1997 now abandoned Ser. No. 07 902 462 filed Jun. 19 1992 now abandoned Ser. No. 07 549 278 filed Jul. 6 1990 now abandoned U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 908 493 5 887 216 5 818 603 5 819 110 5 774 678 5 649 120 5 568 618 5 544 289 5 537 554 and 5 412 779. The contents of each of the above applications and patents is incorporated herein by reference.

This invention generally relates to a method and system that can monitor and communicate positions of a mobile object such that the object may be found when necessary.

With the rise of chip technology many devices e.g. laptops are getting smaller with higher capabilities. The mainframe computer of 30 years ago has less capability than current laptop computers. In addition the advance of battery technology allows increased portability of various devices. The functions of the cellular phone also have been increasing with some services now supporting Internet access through the cellular phone.

Technology continues to address many of today s problems. One current problem is finding a missing item e.g. a stolen car or a missing or distressed person. Tracking of vehicles such as automobiles and trucks is known. For example Trimble Navigation Limited produces an array of products including a global positioning system GPS by which data from mobile vehicles is sent via a wireless network at regular intervals to a centrally located base station to track the vehicles.

Tremendous effort money and manpower also can be expended when searching for a missing person without ever finding that person. Personal Locator Services Emerge by Hiroaki Koshima Joseph Hoshen IEEE Spectrum February 2000 vol. 37 no. 2 pp. 41 48 hereinafter Koshima describes many implementations of a personal locator device including those that use global positioning system GPS to locate the position of an individual with the device. The location of the individual with the personal locator device is obtained when a subscriber requests the individual s location through a location service provider or when the panic button on the device is pressed. The personal locator device communicates its location to the location service provider and the information about the location of the individual is communicated to the subscriber. The system in Koshima utilizes a service center that has to be contacted by a requester to locate a missing subscriber e.g. a patient suffering from dementia . Further Layson Jr. U.S. Pat. No. 6 014 080 describes how global positioning system GPS data from a body worn active and passive tracking device is sent via a wireless network to a centrally located base station.

There is a need for a remote position reporting device which sends properly formatted location data from mobile objects via a wireless network to any specified party using appropriate data formats and communication protocols such that the recipient i.e. the person s in search of the mobile object can determine the location of the mobile object.

Accordingly one object of the present invention is to provide methods to improve the chances of finding a mobile object by transmitting from a position reporting device GPS location data periodically to a recipient in search of the mobile object. By communicating information about the mobile object s position or positions directly to the recipient in search of the mobile object there is a greater chance that the mobile object will be found.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a system for monitoring the position of a mobile object with a global positioning system GPS receiver a monitoring system and an Internet access module communicating the position directly to the recipient in search of the mobile object.

A further object of the present invention is to provide a system for communicating data obtained by monitoring the position of a receiver e.g. a GPS receiver to a remote recipient by transmitting data formats that ease the analysis of received data at the remote recipient.

The present invention achieves these and other objects by monitoring the positions of a remote position reporting device e.g. a device including a GPS receiver or other location sensing apparatus that can be part of or attached to any mobile object. Mobile object may include but are not limited to a child a skier a car and expensive items. Other objects that can be monitored include devices that may require maintenance or repair e.g. as part of a maintenance or service contract . Such objects can include business office devices e.g. facsimile machines copiers image scanners printers that may need to be serviced or repaired under a service contract. However if service is automatically requested by the office device itself e.g. based on internal diagnostics then the repair personnel may arrive only to find that the office device has been moved to another location thereby frustrating the ability to service the device. Thus to facilitate locating the business office device to be serviced or repaired a remote position reporting device may be attached thereto.

Similarly other machines that may need replenishment or servicing e.g. vending machines may be similarly equipped with a remote position reporting device to let the service personnel know where the machine is currently located. Thus any such device that may need replenishment or service under a contract may also have a remote position reporting device attached thereto.

The remote position reporting device may also be attached to inventory that is likely to be moved such as computers or monitors.

In one embodiment the obtained positions are collected logged and communicated to a desired location by at least one of 1 a store and forward protocol e.g. Internet e mail and 2 a direct connection protocol e.g. file transfer protocol FTP . The use of e mail communication reduces the costs associated with communicating such data. The data can be communicated to the desired location at specified intervals. If necessary direct connections between a monitored application and a monitoring system can be established in addition to or instead of the e mail communication.

One advantage of the present invention is that the positioning information can be directed to the desired destination rather than to a central location. The present invention allows the location information of the subscriber to be directed to a home computer that may have mapping capability showing the requester 1 where the subscriber is 2 how quickly the subscriber is moving and 3 in which direction the subscriber is moving. The system can likewise be used to track children coming home from school. Any abrupt departures from the path home could indicate that a monitored child is in trouble. With the present invention there is no need to periodically contact a service center to determine the children s location unless it is so desired.

Another application of the device of the present invention is to utilize the device on persons entering dangerous situations e.g. adventurous skiers who are likely to go to dangerous spots . The locations of the skiers can be reported directly to a rescue team. Should an avalanche occur the rescue team will know whether or not the skiers escaped the path of the avalanche and of those who did not escape how many are to be rescued.

It is another object of the present invention to mount a remote position reporting device on or within a vehicle e.g. a bus boat train or taxi such that the reporting device sends the position of the vehicle to a monitoring device without user intervention. The position information can be used to periodically update an estimated time of arrival.

Referring now to the drawings wherein like reference numerals designate identical or corresponding parts throughout the several views illustrates a position reporting device whose position is being monitored. As shown in according to one embodiment a GPS satellite of a larger GPS constellation transmits information to the position reporting device . The information is used by the position reporting device to determine its own position. The position reporting device can determine its own position using techniques such as those taught by Matsumoto U.S. Pat. No. 5 210 540 Hwang U.S. Pat. No. 5 021 792 both incorporated herein by reference or other techniques known in the GPS field that calculate positions from signals received from plural known locations e.g. plural GPS satellites plural ground stations or a combination thereof . The position reporting device may obtain the information continuously or periodically. The position reporting device can be used to obtain the position of any mobile object e.g. a hiker see a child a bike a car a pair of skis a snowboard a boat a hang glider or a business office device . As would be appreciated the position reporting device may be affixed to either permanently or temporarily or placed inside any of the mobile objects as necessary. The position information is 1 collected in the position reporting device and 2 communicated to a desired party e.g. using a store and forward or direct communication protocol using wireless communication. In the position information is communicated to a computer workstation . The user of the workstation is provided information on the location of a mobile object e.g. the hiker . If the object is missing the user of the computer workstation can use the position information communicated to it to provide information to a search team to quickly find the object.

In a wide area network e.g. the Internet or its successor is generally designated by . The WAN can either be a private WAN or a public WAN. The WAN includes a plurality of interconnected computers and routers designated by A I. The manner of communicating over a WAN is known through Request for Comments documents available via the HTTP protocol at www.ietf.org rfc.html. Transmission Control Protocol Internet Protocol TCP IP related communication is described in several references including 1 TCP IP Illustrated Vol. 1 The Protocols by Stevens from Addison Wesley Publishing Company 1994 ISBN 0201633469 2 Internetworking with TCP IP by Corner and Stevens 4th edition Vol. 1 Apr. 15 2000 Prentice Hall ISBN 0130183806 3 Internetworking with TCP IP Vol. II ANSI C Version Design Implementation and Internals by Corner and Stevens 3 edition Jun. 10 1998 Prentice Hall ISBN 0139738436 and 4 Internetworking with TCP IP Vol. III Client Server Programming and Applications Windows Sockets Version by Corner and Stevens 1 edition Apr. 28 1997 Prentice Hall ISBN 0138487146. The contents of all four books are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

In a firewall B is connected between the WAN and a network . Also a firewall A is connected between the WAN and a workstation . The firewall B is a device that allows only authorized computers on one side of the firewall to access a network or other computers on the other side of the firewall. Firewalls such as firewall A and B are known and commercially available devices and or software and for example include SunScreen from Sun Microsystems Inc.

The network is a conventional network and includes a plurality of workstations A D. In addition to the workstations connected via the network there is a workstation that is not directly connected to the network . Information in a database stored in a disk may be shared using proper encryption and protocols over the WAN to the workstations connected directly to the network . Also the workstation includes a direct connection to a telephone line and or Integrated Services Digital Network ISDN and or cable and or wireless network and the database in disk may be accessed through the telephone line ISDN cable or wirelessly. The cable used by this invention may be implemented using a cable which typically is used to carry television programming a cable which provides for high speed communication of digital data typically used with computers or the like or any other desired type of cable. The workstations and A D that are connected to the WAN provide a secure connection to the position reporting device . This allows the position reporting device to properly communicate its position information to any of the workstations and A D. Devices A D are data storage devices.

A feature of the present invention is the use of a store and forward mode of communication e.g. Internet e mail or transmission between the position reporting device and a workstation for monitoring the position information. The store and forward process avoids the position reporting device from having to wait until a direct connection is established with the recipient. Because of network delays the communication could take a substantial amount of time during which the application would be unresponsive. Such unresponsiveness can be unacceptable to the recipient if for example one is tracking the motion of the position reporting device . By using e mail as the store and forward process retransmission attempts after failures occur automatically for a fixed period of time. Alternatively the message that is transmitted may be implemented using a mode of communication that makes direct end to end connections. The destination address to which the store and forward or direct communications is to be sent is programmable at potentially any time before the communication is to occur i.e. preprogrammed before use . It also may be reprogrammed later if the location to which the communication is to be directed is to be changed. Similarly the remote position reporting device may be programmed with a plurality of destinations and may be further programmed to include an order in which the destinations are to be contacted e.g. based on the time of day or the inability to contact a particular destination within a fixed period of time . Such a destination address is considered semi static since it is reprogrammable but retained even if the remote position reporting device is powered off.

An alternate type of sub system includes the use of an Internet Service Provider ISP that may be any type of ISP including known commercial companies such as for example America Online Mindspring and Niftyserve. In this sub system a computer A is connected to the ISP through a modem e.g. an analog telephone line modem a cable modem an ISDN based modem an Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line ASDL based modem a frame relay adapter a wireless e.g. radio frequency modem an optical modem or a device that uses infrared light waves . The computer A may receive position information communicated to it by the position reporting device .

Also illustrated in is a firewall E connected to a network . The network may be implemented as any type of computer network e.g. an Ethernet or Token Ring network . Networking software that may be used to control the network includes any desired networking software including software commercially available from Novell or Microsoft. The network may be implemented as an Intranet if desired. Computers D and C connected to the network may receive position information from the position reporting device . The wireless communication described herein may be established using spread spectrum techniques including techniques which use a spreading code and frequency hopping techniques such as the frequency hopping technique disclosed in the Bluetooth Specification available at the world wide web site www.bluetooth.com which is incorporated herein by reference.

Another sub system illustrated in includes a firewall D an Intranet and a computer B. The computer B may receive position information from the position reporting device . While illustrates a plurality of firewalls the firewalls are preferable but optional equipment and therefore the invention may be operated without the use of firewalls if desired.

Further in the position reporting device contains a Monitoring System . The Monitoring System may be software e.g. a dynamic link library DLL that the GPS Receiver interfaces with to record the position information. The Monitoring System monitors and maintains the position information of position reporting device and when triggered the Monitoring System will communicate the position information to a desired party.

The position reporting device also contains a communications access module e.g. an Internet Access Module . The Internet Access Module interfaces with the Monitoring System so that it may communicate the position information to a desired party. The Internet Access Module provides wireless access to the Internet so that wireless communication can occur. As mentioned above there are commercially available products that establish connections to the Internet using wireless communications .e.g Ricochet Wireless Sprint PCS Wireless and RCN s Blackberry Wireless Email .

Further in the Monitoring System is the monitoring software or monitoring DLL that the position reporting device uses to record and maintain the position information it collects. The Monitoring System provides five interface functions to the GPS Receiver . SetApplicationID allows the GPS Receiver to inform the Monitoring System about the identification of the position reporting device . StartMonitoring allows the GPS Receiver to inform the Monitoring System that the monitoring system should prepare to log information about its position. StartMonitoring lets the Monitoring System initialize itself before recording position information. RecordEvent allows the GPS Receiver to inform the Monitoring System that it should record the position information. The GPS Receiver will pass information to the Monitoring System about its position. The Monitoring System maintains information about the position reporting device position. The Monitoring System may either maintain information about its latest position or information about its position over a period of time. SelectFormatProtocol allows the GPS receiver to inform the Monitoring System which format and protocol to use to communicate the position information to a desired party. StopMonitoring allows the GPS receiver to inform the Monitoring System that it should stop recording position information. In addition to triggering the Monitoring System to communicate the position information periodically the Monitoring System can be triggered to communicate the position information to a desired party when the GPS receiver calls the interface function StopMonitoring.

The Monitoring System contains information about the desired party to which the position information is communicated. In one embodiment this information is set up in the position reporting device prior to attaching it to a mobile object. This setup allows the position reporting device to communicate the position information to any desired party or recipient. Alternatively the desired party can be identified after attaching the device to the mobile object.

The initialize function receives a string parameter for the Application ID. The System manager calls this function when startMonitoring is called by the GPS receiver control application . The function sets the Application ID takes care of the Cumulative number of usages reads the clock to store the start time in order to compute the elapse time and duration and sets up the user information by examining the registry.

After initialization the storeEvent function can be called with a string parameter for the Event passed by recordEvent. The EventLogger stores the event string and the elapsed time from the start time recorded during the initialize function call .

After the application has completed its usage monitoring it calls the stopMonitoring function so that the duration can be computed. If multiple sessions are stored this function stops the recording of a corresponding session.

The EventLogger also provides access to a getEventData function. If the stopMonitoring was not previously called i.e. the current session s duration field is undefined the monitoring is stopped by calling the stopMonitoring function. The stopMonitoring function computes the duration of the current session. The getEventData function returns an abstract class with the access functions shown in . The abstract class facilitates extensions for multiple sessions.

The Format And Protocol Information Base System implemented as any one or a combination of package DLL static library etc. stores the format and protocol information and checks the combination of formats and protocols to determine the valid combinations. To facilitate the storage process the storeFormatAndProtocol function accepts two parameters i.e. one for format and one for protocol . The function checks to ensure that the parameters are a valid combination.

The component also includes a getFormatAndProtocolVector function returns a format and associated vector of protocols. In one embodiment the function performs error checking. For example if a protocol allows only one format to be sent then the format should be the last format in the function call of selectFormatProtocol. The return value is a boolean value where true indicates that valid parameters were returned and false indicates that no more data is available. The return parameters are int and vector of int. The first int refers to the format while the vector of int refers to the vector of protocols for the format. When there is no selectFormatProtocol function call the getFormatAndProtocolVector returns the default setting. Also would be evident other collections e.g. a list template may be used in place of a vector.

The Data Format Processor is responsible for formatting event data into a specified format. One exemplary function is the formatEventData function that receives a pointer to the abstract class EventData. The return value is a pointer to the abstract class FormattedEventData. Generally interface to the FormattedEventData abstract class is defined as in .

The Protocol Processor is responsible for communicating the formatted event data through the specified protocol. In one embodiment the processor also encrypts the data before it is sent. To output the data the processFormattedData function is called with an input pointer to the abstract class FormattedEventData. The function returns a boolean value where true represents no errors and false represents the existence of an error while sending the formatted data.

The System supplies important information and persistent information across the execution of the DLL. Some of the important information is timer information through the library call. The registry to keep the necessary information is another important component of the System . Many registry entries are set up at installation time. An exemplary structure for the registry is 

Where XXX represents the Application ID the following variables are placed in the registry under XXX tree CumulativeUsage UserID SMTP Server Recipients From FTP Server FTP User FTP Password FTP Target Path etc. In one embodiment CumulativeUsage is an integer and the rest of the variables are strings.

The aforesaid methods and steps for remote position monitoring are contained according to this invention on a computer program product. The computer program product is a storage medium including instructions which can be used to program or control a computer or a plurality of networked computers to perform a process of the invention. The storage medium can include but is not limited to any type of disk including floppy disks optical discs CD ROMs and magneto optical disks ROMs RAMs EPROMs EEPROMs magnetic or optical cards or any type of media suitable for storing electronic instructions.

The various computers utilized by the present invention including the computers and A D of may be implemented as illustrated in . Further any other computer utilized by this invention may be implemented in a similar manner to the computer illustrated in if desired including the service machine and computer C. However not every element illustrated in is required in each of those computers. In the computer includes a CPU which may be implemented as any type of processor including commercially available microprocessors from companies such as Intel AMD Motorola Hitachi and NEC. There is a working memory such as a RAM and a wireless interface which communicates with a wireless device . The communication between the interface and device may use any wireless medium e.g. radio waves or light waves . The radio waves may be implemented using a spread spectrum technique such as Code Division Multiple Access CDA communication or using a frequency hopping technique such as that disclosed in the Bluetooth specification.

There is a ROM and a flash memory although any other type of non volatile memory e.g. EPROM or an EEPROM may be utilized in addition to or in place of the flash memory . An input controller has connected thereto a keyboard and a mouse . There are serial and parallel interfaces not shown connected to serial and parallel devices not shown . There is an IEEE 1394 device commonly referred to as a fire wall device connected to an IEEE 1394 interface not shown . The various elements of the computer are connected by a system bus . A disk controller is connected to a floppy disk drive and a hard disk drive . A communication controller allows the computer to communicate with other computers e.g. by sending e mail messages over a telephone line or a network. An I O Input Output controller is connected to a printer and a hard disk for example using a SCSI Small Computer System Interface bus. There is also a display controller connected to a CRT Cathode Ray Tube although any other type of display may be used including a liquid crystal display a light emitting diode display a plasma display etc.

Numerous modifications and variations of the present invention are possible in light of the above teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described herein.

