---

title: Real-time captioning framework for mobile devices
abstract: A system for providing caption information for one or more mobile devices includes a communication network, and one or more mobile devices connected to the communication network. The one or more mobile devices can include a cellular device, a personal digital assistant, or a wireless device. The system includes a captioning device to present caption data on a display, and a transcription device to transcribe data. The transcription device provides near real time delivery of the data transcription. The system uses the communication network to send text from the caption data to at least one of the mobile devices, while the system sends the caption data to one or more captioning devices simultaneously.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08014765&OS=08014765&RS=08014765
owner: Media Captioning Services
number: 08014765
owner_city: Carlsbad
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050125
---
This application claims the benefit of priority from U.S. Provisional Application entitled A Real Time Captioning Framework for Mobile Devices Application No. 60 554 896 filed Mar. 19 2004 by Richard F. Pettinato et al. the disclosure of which is incorporated by reference.

The present disclosure relates to media content in particular media content that is captioned for mobile applications and devices.

Traditional captioning devices such as televisions and display monitors combine text with a video broadcast in which the text represents a transcribed audio portion of the video. The captions can be either closed captions or open captions. For closed captions the caption data is embedded in a video signal and the captions are not displayed unless they are decoded. The text or caption data is embedded in line of the vertical blanking interval VBI . The VBI is an interval in a television signal that temporarily suspends transmission of the signal for an electron gun to move to the first line of a television screen for the next screen field. The VBI can be used to carry data such as a test signal or the closed captioning data. When captions are decoded they are displayed on the screen. Typically captions are decoded at the display device. Open captions are already decoded in the video signal and are displayed on screen such as subtitles in foreign films. In broadcast transmission systems caption data may be transmitted to an encoder that may include text and control codes.

Caption data may also be provided to the internet using transcribed data from broadcast sources such as broadcast radio or television signals. For instance a caption writer for a radio station may transcribe a broadcast program from the radio station to post on the radio station s web page. In another example a caption writer may caption the audio portion of a television signal and send the caption data to an encoder device at a broadcast facility for inclusion in the video transmission.

In one general aspect the techniques feature a system for providing near real time caption information for one or more mobile devices. The system includes a communication network for communicating to the mobile devices and a transcriber connected with the communication network. The transcriber is configured to transcribing an event to generate caption data in which the caption data includes transcribed data and control code data. The system is further configured for near real time transfer of the transcribed data over the communication network to the one or more mobile devices.

Advantageous implementations can include one or more of the following features. The system can be configured to transfer transcribed data to at least two mobile devices simultaneously. The communication network can include the Internet and at least one of the mobile devices includes a display to present the transcribed data.

The system can also have a device with captioning functionality and a display to present caption data. The system may have a decoder to decode the caption data for presentation on the device with captioning functionality. The system can be configured for near real time transfer of the caption data to the decoder. A data file may be used in saving and retrieving the transcribed data sent to the mobile device.

In another general aspect the techniques feature a method for sending near real time caption information to one or more mobile devices. The method involves transcribing an event to generate device generated caption data having control codes removing the control codes from the caption data to produce text data and sending the text data to one or more mobile devices over a communication network.

Advantageous implementations can include one or more of the following features. The method may involve sending the caption data to a captioning device while near simultaneously sending the text data to one or more mobile devices. The communication network may include but is not limited to any of the following a satellite channel a telephony channel an optical channel a wireless channel a cable channel and an internet channel.

The caption data can include voice data that is transcribed into the text data. The transcribing can involve using a transcription device to add control codes to the transcribed data. The method may include using the control codes to encapsulate the transcribed data and sending the encapsulated data to a caption target. The caption target may include a monitor or a television with closed captioning functionality.

The operation of removing control codes from the transcribed data may include using software to remove the control codes. The operation of transcribing data may involve using voice recognition software that transcribes voice data into the text based caption data. The method may also include displaying the text data on one or more mobile devices.

In another general aspect the techniques feature an article that includes a machine readable medium storing instructions operable to cause a machine to perform operations. The operations involve generating transcribed data from a transcription device sending text data from the transcribed data to a mobile device using a communication network and sending the transcribed data from the transcription device to a caption target. The text data is sent to the mobile device and the transcribed data is sent to the caption target simultaneously. The text data is sent to the mobile device and the transcribed data is sent to the caption target in near real time.

Advantageous implementations can include one or more of the following features. The transcribed data may include control code data for the caption target in which the caption target may have closed captioning functionality. The operations may also include removing the control code data from the transcribed data before sending the text data to the mobile device. The operation of sending text data from the transcribed data to the mobile device may involve sending the transcribed data with removed control code data to the mobile device.

The operation of removing the control code data from the transcribed data may use software that is configured to remove the control code data. The communication network may use a server. The server may be implemented in hardware or software.

In another general aspect the techniques feature an article that includes a machine readable medium storing instructions operable to cause a machine to perform operations. The operations involve transcribing audio data from a radio broadcast and sending the transcribed audio data to at least one mobile device using a communication network. The operation of sending the data involves near real time transmission of the transcribed audio data. The communication network is coupled to at least one mobile device.

Advantageous implementations can include one or more of the following features. The operations may also involve saving the transcribed audio data to a file in which the file is configured to be downloaded onto at least one mobile device.

A transcription device may be used in the operation of transcribing the audio data. The operations may also include using a software program to remove closed captioning control codes from the transcribed audio data prior to sending the transcribed audio data to at least one mobile device. The transcribed audio data may involve audio data that is transcribed into text data. The audio data may be voice data.

In one exemplary implementation a system includes a communication network such as the Internet and one or more mobile devices coupled to the communication network. The system includes a transcription device to transcribe data in real time or near real time real time with a small time delay . The transcribed data includes text data and control code data. The control code data is used by one or more captioning devices to display caption data. The control code data is removed from transcribed data and the mobile devices receive text data via the communication network. The system can simultaneously send transcribed data to one or more captioning devices while sending the text data to one or more mobile devices.

Details of one or more implementations are set forth in the accompanying drawings and the description below. Other features and advantages will be apparent from the description and drawings and from the claims.

The following detailed description makes reference to the accompanying drawings. Other embodiments of the present invention are possible and modifications may be made to the embodiments without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. Therefore the following detailed description is not meant to limit the invention.

Moreover for convenience in the ensuing description some explanations of terms are provided herein. However the explanations contained herein are intended to be exemplary only. They are not intended to limit the terms as they are described or referred to throughout the specification. Rather these explanations are meant to include any additional aspects and or examples of the terms as described and claimed herein and or as used by one of skill in the art.

The following describes various tasks techniques and systems relating to closed captioning for media content. The present disclosure describes methods and systems that involve a framework for sending real time caption data from a caption writer to one or more mobile devices through a communication network such as the internet while simultaneously having the ability to send caption data to traditional captioning devices such as a television or monitor that can display captioned information.

The caption writer refers to a person such as a stenographer who transcribes data from a source presentation or an event. The data may be from a live event such as a sporting event an academic presentation or a financial news report. The data can be audio and or video data that is transcribed into text data. The caption writer may also transcribe the data remotely in which the writer does not have to be physically present to perform the transcription. The writer may remotely listen to and or watch the event using a telephone and or a monitor or television set. The event may or may not be an event that is broadcasted such as an event using broadcast television or radio signals.

As shown in the captioning system can simultaneously send caption information to traditional captioning devices targets and mobile devices . The captioning targets receive transcribed data which includes text data entered by the writer and control code data for the captioning device . The mobile devices are connected to a communication network and receive text data and not the control code data. Typically the control code data is removed from the transcribed data prior to sending data to the communication network .

The transcribed data from the writer is sent to the transcription device that sends the transcribed data to an encoder . The encoder uses the control codes to encapsulate the transcribed data for presentation on a caption target . The caption target can refer to a monitor or a television with closed captioning functionality.

Instead of or in addition to sending transcribed data to an encoder the transcription device may remove the control code data from the transcribed data and send text data to a communication network to enable for one or more users to access the text data. Examples of communication networks include various forms or mediums of data communications such as a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN a wireless local area network WLAN and a personal area network PAN . Other examples of communication networks include a mobile communication network using a multiple access technology such as a cellular phone network with Code Division Multiple Access CDMA a satellite network and the Internet.

In sending the text data to the communication network the transcription device may have software to remove the control codes from the transcribed data before sending the data to the communication network . In removing the control codes the data that is transmitted to components includes text data. The text data can be sent to the communication network and can be displayed on one or more mobile devices such as computers cell phones and personal digital assistants PDAs . The communication network interacts with a server to communicate with multiple devices. The server may refer to one or more hardware servers or software servers such as a server program. The text data may be displayed as scrolling text data in which the text is updated as the mobile device receives text. The devices may be internet compatible devices and may be connected through a cellular phone network. As used herein a mobile device may also refer to any general purpose mobile machine that processes data according to a set of instructions that is stored internally either temporarily or permanently including but not limited to general purpose mobile computers laptop computers internet compatible mobile phones wired or wireless laptop computers. Mobile devices also include satellite based transmission devices smart client devices that actively fetch data and store data locally wireless devices a cellular or mobile telephone an electronic handheld unit for the wireless receipt and or transmission of data a media content playable device such as an MP3 player or the like. Each device may have a specific or unique internet address in which the communication network may direct data to one or more devices based on the device s internet address.

To provide for interaction with a user each of the mobile devices uses a display such as a cathode ray tube CRT or liquid crystal display LCD monitor which displays information to the user and a keyboard and or a pointing device such as a mouse or a trackball to serve as input to the mobile device. The mobile device may provide feedback to the user with any form of sensory feedback such as visual feedback or tactile feedback.

The communication network may include a back end component such as a data server or a middleware component such as an application server or a front end component such as a client computer having a graphical user interface portal or a Web browser through which a user can interact with an implementation of the systems and techniques described here. The mobile device itself may have a front end component that includes a graphical user interface. In general the communication network and or the mobile device may use any combination of such back end middleware or front end components.

The software also known as programs software tools or code in the captioning system of may include machine instructions for a programmable processor and can be implemented in a high level procedural and or object oriented programming language and or in assembly machine language. The mobile device may have an Application Programming Interface API . For example the mobile device may also run on a Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW platform an open source on line application development platform for wireless CDMA devices from Qualcomm Inc. of San Diego Calif. The BREW platform can allow application developers to write programs and scripts in various software languages such as C C JAVA and XML. The mobile device may have a software media player such as a Windows media player that can show the text data and or a video presentation of the transcribed event.

As used herein the term machine readable medium refers to any computer program product apparatus and or device used to provide machine instructions and or data to a programmable processor including a machine readable medium that receives machine instructions as a machine readable signal. The machine readable medium refers to magnetic discs optical disks memory Programmable Logic Devices PLDs and the like. The term machine readable signal refers to any signal used to provide machine instructions and or data to a programmable processor.

In the described system the caption writer can be located remotely from the source of the transcribed event. Also the data can be sent to a mobile device using the communication network such as the internet. Internet compatible devices with displays can present captioned text in real time or near real time. The transcribed data can be presented on a traditional caption target and a mobile device simultaneously.

The captioning system can send the data to multiple devices as well as sending the data to multiple devices simultaneously. Moreover the writer can transcribe the information of the event and the transcription device can send the data to one or more targets and or devices in real time or near real time. In one implementation a device can allow a user to save and retrieve any part of a captioned message on their device. Alternatively a user can download a saved text captioned message from a web site for subsequent viewing. For example if a user wants to read what happened in the last two minutes of a basketball game the user can log on to a website to access all or only a selected portion of the captioned play by play information.

In a writer transcribes the event data that they hear or see into a device that sends the data to a computer . The transcription device includes a computer with software to add control code data to the text produced from the writer . The event data may or may not be broadcasted over conventional television or radio channels. The data is sent from the computer to a communication network and then to an encoder . As described above the communication network may include a modem an internet channel and or a telephony channel. The encoder encaptions the data at the caption target so that the data is put into a format for presentation on a television or a monitor such as utilizing line of the VBI as described above. The caption target itself has a decoder to decode the encaptioned data from the encoder prior to presenting the text on the monitor.

Alternatively and or simultaneously software in the computer removes the control codes from the transcribed data and sends text data to a server . The server may be implemented in hardware or software. The server sends the text data to the mobile device . In one implementation the server may send the text data to the mobile device using a communication network such as the internet. The mobile device can receive the data from the communication network through a router such as a cable DSL Digital Subscriber Line router or a router in an enterprise or business environment.

The server can send the text data to the mobile device via an internet address. In one implementation the mobile device has a particular internet address. As the text data is routed through the internet the text data is routed to the internet address of a particular mobile device . In this aspect the mobile device is a client to the server .

Instead of being located in the computer the software or program to remove the control code data from the transcribed data can be distributed among one or more components of . In one implementation the control code data may be removed by software located in the device itself as described in . The transcribed data may then be sent to the caption target and or the text data may be sent to the mobile device without using the computer .

In another implementation both the caption target and the mobile device can receive the transcribed data with the control code data. The mobile device itself may have software to remove the control code data. The device can have captioning abilities without having to require control code removing software in another component of the system.

In an alternative implementation shown in voice recognition software can be used to generate caption information. Voice recognition software can be used instead of the writer and the transcription device . The voice recognition software can convert speech audio input into transcribed data output. The transcribed data can include control codes to be sent to the caption target . At the same time the voice recognition software can output the text of the transcribed data to be sent to the mobile device .

