---

title: Video on demand system with selectable options of configurable random-access control
abstract: The present invention provides a method for an interactive media services system to provide media to a user through an interactive media services client device. The client device is coupled to a programmable media services server device. The method includes the step of implementing an interactive media guide. Additionally, the client device is implemented to present the interactive media guide to the user. A system operator is provided an interface to the programmable media services server. Control options are provided within the interface to allow the system operator to configure a plurality of rental options available to the user. Finally the interactive media service system is implemented such that the plurality of rental options can be executed by the user in a requested active media session.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08037504&OS=08037504&RS=08037504
owner: 
number: 08037504
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20051220
---
This application is a divisional of application Ser. No. 09 590 520 filed on Jun. 9 2000 which is entirely incorporated herein by reference.

This invention relates in general to television systems and more particularly to the field of media on demand.

Historically television services have been comprised of analog broadcast audio and video signals. Cable television systems now receive broadcasts and retransmit them with other programming to users over land line networks typically comprising fiber optic cable and or coaxial cable. With the recent advent of digital transmission technology cable television systems are now capable of providing much more than the traditional analog broadcast video. In addition two way and advanced one way communications between a subscriber and a cable system headend are now possible.

In implementing enhanced programming the home communication terminal HCT otherwise known as the settop box has become an important computing device for accessing video services and navigating a subscriber through a maze of services available. In addition to supporting traditional analog broadcast video functionality digital HCTs or DHCTs now also support an increasing number of two way digital services such as video on demand.

Each HCT or DHCT collectively hereinafter DHCT is typically connected to a cable or satellite television network. The DHCTs generally include hardware and software necessary to provide the functionality of the digital television system at the client s site. Preferably some of the software executed by a DHCT is downloaded and or updated via the cable television network. Each DHCT typically includes a processor communication components and memory and is connected to a television or other display device such as a personal computer. While many conventional DHCTs are stand alone devices that are externally connected to a television a DHCT and or its functionality may be integrated into a television or personal computer as will be appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art.

To best utilize network bandwidth and provide video on demand functionality to the largest number of users video on demand services must offer different options for rental of video on demand titles. Providing rental options to a user that according to different levels of functionality and different lengths of time present complex problems in user interface and bandwidth management.

Additional problems exist in providing the flexibility for users to control the video on demand title presentation using VCR like functions i.e. rewind pause stop fast forward etc. . For example due to excessive use of the VCR like functions the user may not have time to watch a particular title in its entirety during the allotted rental period. Thus there is a need for efficiently handling how the user may operate video manipulation functions and still view the movie in its entirety before the rental duration expires.

If a user is enabled to use such functions as pause or stop functions that may cause a still image to be displayed on the display device a problem exists with images being burned into the display devices left unattended for substantial amounts of time. Thus there is a need for efficiently handling situations when the user may cause a still image to appear on the display without damaging the display device.

Another problem arises when a user receives a video on demand title but either stops pauses or otherwise prematurely interrupts or terminates presentation of the title. The problem pertains to the previously allocated bandwidth within the cable or satellite television system and the fact that it may be reserved for the user even during the time the user is not actually viewing the rented title. In order to free resources for more users attempting to view rented titles at the same time a need exists for efficiently managing allocated network bandwidth and handling user inactivity.

A problem also exists in providing rental options to a user according to different levels of functionality and different lengths of time. Historically hardware resources have provided little flexibility in enabling the cable provider to offer a variety of options for renting movies on demand.

The present invention provides a method for an interactive media services system to provide media to a user through an interactive media services client device wherein the client device is coupled to a programmable media services server device. The steps of the method include implementing an interactive media guide to be presented by the client device to the user. The interactive media services system is provided with information of a plurality of dynamic variables regarding an active session of the media. Finally the interactive media services system is implemented with the ability to configure the client device with a control options suite for the active session of the media.

Another aspect of the present invention provides a method for an interactive media services system to provide media to a user through an interactive media services client device. The client device is coupled to a programmable media services server device. The method includes the step of implementing an interactive media guide. Additionally the client device is implemented to present the interactive media guide to the user. A system operator is provided an interface to the programmable media services server. Control options are provided within the interface to allow the system operator to configure a plurality of rental options available to the user. Finally the interactive media services system is implemented such that the plurality of rental options can be executed by the user in a requested active media session.

Other objects features and advantages of the present invention will become apparent to one with skill in the art upon examination of the following drawings and detailed description.

The DNCS provides complete management monitoring and control of the network s elements and broadcast services provided to users. The DNCS uses a data insertion multiplexor and a data QAM to insert the in band BFS data into an MPEG 2 transport stream. The DNCS also contains a Digital Storage Media Command in Control DSM CC session and resource manager that works with other components of the DNCS in order to support the delivery of the MOD service to the user. The DSM CC session and resource manager processes user to network U N session signaling messages manages allocation of session related network resources and supports network management operations. The DSM CC session manager supports exclusive services such as MOD by providing the signaling interface to establish maintain and release client initiated exclusive sessions. The DSM CC session manager acts as a point of contact to the network for the DHCTs in the network to establish individual sessions. The DSM CC session manager also defines a resource descriptor structure which is used to request the network resources within a session.

The MOD application server communicates via the Ethernet connection to a service application manager SAM server contained on the DNCS . The SAM provides a model in which the user can access services available on the system. A service consists of an application to run and a parameter such as data content specific to that service. The SAM handles the lifecycle of the applications on the system including the definition initiation activation suspension and deletion of services they provide and the downloading of the application into the DHCT . Many services can be defined using the same application component with different parameters. The MOD application server defines its application to the SAM server and the SAM server instructs a broadcast file system BFS server to add the MOD application client executable code to the carousel not shown for distribution to the various DHCTs in the network .

The BFS server is a part of a broadcast file system that has a BFS client module in each DHCT in the network . Applications on both the headend and the DHCT can access the data stored in the BFS server in a similar manner to a file system found on disc operating systems. The BFS server repeatedly sends data for applications on a carousel not shown over a period of time so that the DHCT that is interested in any particular data may receive it when the user desires the data. Thus the BFS client contained in the DHCT that receives the broadcast from the BFS server can implement the application for the user.

The video on demand VOD content manager and VOD content servers deliver MPEG 2 content to a service group of QAM modulators that comprise service group number . The content manager is responsible for managing the content on the VOD content servers . The MOD application server utilizes the VOD content manager and VOD content servers to deliver the video and audio streams that make up the MOD services. The MOD application server is also responsible for controlling the VOD content manager and VOD content servers . The service group is actually a multiplex of QAMs that illuminate a particular DHCT . A network session manager not shown in a DNCS uses the service group to determine which QAM modulator has access to a particular DHCT . The QAM modulators that comprise the service group receive the MPEG 2 transport stream from the VOD content servers and convert it to an RF signal at a specified frequency channel . The QAM modulators of the service groups are also responsible for encrypting the transport stream and inserting other data and information into the stream.

The QPSK modem is responsible for transporting the out of band IP internet protocol datagram traffic between the distribution headend and a DHCT . Data from the QPSK modem is routed by headend router within the headend . The headend router is also responsible for delivering upstream application traffic to the various application servers .

In one implementation a memory portion of the DHCT includes flash memory and dynamic random access memory DRAM for storing the executable programs and related data components of various applications and modules for execution by the DHCT . Both the flash memory and the DRAM memory are coupled to the processor for storing configuration data and operational parameters such as commands that are recognized by the processor .

Basic functionality of the DHCT is provided by an operating system that is contained in flash memory . One or more programmed software applications herein referred to as applications are executed by utilizing the computing resources in the DHCT . The application executable program stored in flash memory or DRAM is executed by processor e.g. a central processing unit or digital signal processor under the auspices of the operating system . Data input by the application program is stored in DRAM and read by processor from DRAM as need be during the course of application program execution. Input data may be data stored in DRAM by a secondary application or other source either internal or external to the DHCT or possibly anticipated by the application and thus created with the application program at the time it was generated as a software application program in which case it is stored in flash memory . Data may be received via any of the communication ports of the DHCT from the headend via the DHCT s network interface i.e. the QAM or out of band tuners or as user input via receiver . A type of input data fulfills and serves the purpose of parameters as described below. Data generated by application program is stored in DRAM by processor during the course of application program execution.

The flash memory also contains a platform library . The platform library is a collection of functionality useful to applications such as a Timer Manager Compression Manager Database Manager Widget Toolkit String Managers and other utilities not shown . These utilities are accessed by applications so that each application does not have to contain these utilities thus resulting in memory consumption savings and a consistent user interface.

The SAM as discussed above includes a SAM server in headend and a SAM client in the DHCT . The SAM client is a part of the platform library . As a non limiting example an application to tune video programming could be executed with one set of parameters to view HBO and a separate set of parameters to view CNN. Each association of the application component tune video and one parameter component HBO or CNN represents a particular service that has a unique service ID.

An application client is the portion of an application that executes on the DHCT and provides the application s services to the user typically through a graphical user interface. Also contained in flash memory is a navigator application that provides a navigation framework for the user to access services available on the cable system. Examples of the services include in one implementation watching television and pay per view events listening to digital music and an interactive program guide each of which is controlled through separate applications in flash memory . The navigator also allows users to access various settings of the DHCT including volume parental control VCR commands etc.

Interactive program guide IPG Watch TV and pay per view PPV are all resident applications in flash memory . The IPG displays a program guide to the user and populates the guide with program data for selection. Watch TV enables a user to simply watch television while PPV enables other services to be organized into events and purchased as premium television services. These applications because they are in flash memory are always available to the user and do not need to be downloaded each time the DHCT initializes.

The applications that are stored in the DRAM may be applications that are loaded when the DHCT initializes or are applications that are downloaded to the DHCT upon a user initiated command using an input device such as the remote . In this non limiting example as shown in DRAM contains the following application clients an e mail application client a digital music application client a service guide application and a media on demand application client MOD discussed in more detail below . It should be clear that these applications are not limiting and merely serve as examples for this present embodiment of the invention.

The applications shown in and all others provided by the cable system operator are top level software entities on the network for providing services to the user. In one implementation all applications executing on the DHCT work with the navigator by abiding by several guidelines. First an application utilizes and implements the SAM client for provisioning activation and suspension of services. Second an application shares DHCT resources with other applications and abide by the resource management policies of the SAM client the operating system and the DHCT . Third an application handles all situations where resources are unavailable without navigator intervention. Fourth when an application loses service authorization while providing a service an application should suspend the service gracefully. The navigator will reactivate an individual service application when it later becomes authorized. Finally an application is configured so it does not respond to input commands reserved for the navigator . For instance as a non limiting example when user input commands are entered via a wireless remote control device or keyboard the application is configured so it does not have access to certain user input keys that are reserved by the navigator i.e. power channel volume etc. . However without any limitations to the aforementioned in certain circumstances certain applications during the course of program execution may reach a machine state in which input keys that would ordinarily be reserved may be employed for input by the application but mainly during that particular machine state. For instance an application may display a user interface that specifically requests input or selection from the user in which one or more of the reserved keys are used momentarily during that machine state.

The MOD application client in providing its service engages in a direct two way IP Internet Protocol connection with a VOD content server . The MOD application server is responsible for providing configuration and service data to the MOD application client such as the catalog of titles available for rental by the user.

To provide the MOD service to the user the MOD application client interacts with the MOD application server and other elements in the headend to provide the on demand service such as the VOD content server . Before describing the MOD application operation itself some of the system infrastructure used by the MOD application to provide the MOD services will be described. While the network platform to support video on demand is not the subject of this invention the method in which the MOD application utilizes this platform is novel. are flow diagrams that define the signaling interactions between the DHCT the DNCS the MOD application server and the VOD content server to set up maintain and tear down VOD sessions.

The first signal and scenario as shown in step in is the DHCT initialization scenario. The DHCT requests a configuration from the network and if the DHCT is verified as an authorized device on the network the DNCS sends back a confirmation with the parameters for the DHCT to operate on a network . This scenario is performed automatically whenever a DHCT is connected to the network. The MOD application client is not responsible for performing initialization however the operating system provides an application programming interface API which allows an application to query configuration parameters received in the U N ConfigConfirm message .

The MOD application server initialization scenario is used whenever a server is introduced to the network . The MOD application server makes a configuration request from the network that is verified by the DNCS with a configuration confirmation message along with parameters for the MOD application server to operate on the network .

The MOD application server may also receive update messages from the DNCS after the initial configuration has been completed. The DNCS periodically sends the configuration indication message as shown in to the MOD application server over an extended period of time. The configuration indication message contains the same message that was sent in the initial configuration with fewer parameters included. Although the MOD application server receives its message repeatedly from the DNCS the MOD application server needs to process the message if the transaction identification changes from previous messages.

If the VOD content server determines that it can deliver the service it sends a ServerAddResourceRequest message to the DNCS to reserve the network resources to deliver that service. The DNCS allocates the requested resources and sends to the VOD content server a ServerAddResourceConfirm message to indicate that the requested resources have been allocated. The VOD content server then responds to the service session indication message with a server setup response message that indicates that the VOD content server is ready to begin delivering the service using the resources allocated by the DNCS . VOD content server session setup response message may contain user data which is passed by the DNCS to the DHCT . The DNCS sends the ClientSessionSetupConfirm message to the DHCT that contains the resource descriptors not shown needed by the DHCT to receive the requested service. This message may contain the user data that was sent from the VOD content server . Finally the DHCT sends to the DNCS a ClientConnectRequest message indicating that the DHCT is ready to receive the requested service and the DNCS sends the VOD content server a connect indication message indicating that the DHCT is ready to receive that service.

The resource descriptors described above are used to define the resources which are allocated to a session. An interactive session has two resource views. VOD content server defines the resources that are used to deliver the service from VOD content server into the network . The MOD application client defines resources that are used in order for the DHCT to receive the service from the network .

The VOD content server resource descriptor view is used when the server is delivering an MPEG program over a transport stream that is directly connected to the network and does not require any signaling to set up the connection. The video on demand service architecture described above uses this type of connection.

For the MOD application server resource descriptor view two resource descriptors are used. The TSDownstreamBandwidth resource descriptor contains a transport stream ID field and a bandwidth field. The transport stream ID identifies the physical connection from the MOD application server to the network . This transport stream ID is typically assigned by a network operator when a new connection is installed. The downstream bandwidth resource descriptor also identifies in bits per second the amount of bandwidth to deliver a service. This amount of bandwidth will be reserved in the network for the duration of the MOD session with the DHCT that requests the service.

The MPEG Program resource descriptor is another VOD content server resource descriptor view. This resource descriptor identifies the MPEG Program that is carrying the service and used by the network to determine which program from the transport stream to route to the DHCT . The MPEG program also allows the application to assign association tags to each of the elementary steams in the program. These association tags may be used by the receiver to determine the use of each of the streams. The association tag is guaranteed to be maintained and to end in a session even if the MPEG program is remapped. The second resource view of an interactive session is the MOD application client resource descriptor view. This view is used for all services that use MPEG to deliver the downstream data. The MOD service architecture defined above uses this type of connection for all downstream connections. The resource descriptor TSDownstreamBandwidth contains a transport stream ID field and a bandwidth field. The transport stream ID identifies the QAM modulator in service group that is transmitting a service. This transport stream ID is assigned by a network operator not shown when a new QAM is installed. The downstream bandwidth resource descriptor identifies in bits per second the bandwidth at which a service will be delivered.

MPEG Program resource descriptor identifies the MPEG program hat is carrying the service. This resource descriptor is used by the DHCT to determine which program from a transport stream to decode. This descriptor also allows the MOD application client to assign association tags not shown to each of the elementary streams in the program. These association tags may be used by the DHCT to determine the use of each of the streams. The association tag is guaranteed to be maintained end to end in a session even if an MPEG program resource descriptor has been remapped.

Another signaling scenario supported by the present invention is the VOD content server in progress scenario. is a display diagram depicting the MOD application server in progress request message communicated from the VOD content server to the DNCS . The DNCS uses this message as an audit mechanism to determine if it is in sync with the VOD content server . The MOD application server periodically sends this MOD application server session in progress message to the DNCS . The message contains a list of all active sessions for that MOD application server and the DNCS compares this list to its list of active sessions for that particular application server . The DNCS takes appropriate action if the lists do not match.

The DNCS periodically initiates a MOD application client session in progress request as shown in scenario in . This message is used to periodically inform the network of the sessions that are active on a DHCT . The DNCS uses this message as an audit mechanism to determine if it is in sync with the DHCT . The DHCT periodically sends a client in session progress message not shown . This message contains a list of all active sessions for the DHCT . The DNCS compares this list to a list of active sessions for that DHCT and takes appropriate action if the lists do not match.

The present invention permits the DHCT to initiate a MOD session tear down scenario. is a display diagram depicting the procedure for tearing down a session using the client initiated session release scenario. A session that is active on that particular DHCT may be torn down by the DCHT . The initiate this process the DHCT sends a MOD application client release request to the DNCS . The DHCT sends the client release request after it has stopped using all resources for a session that it is attempting to tear down. The DNCS receives the client release request and initiates a MOD server release indication to the VOD content server . The VOD content server responds with a server release response to the DNCS which is then passed to the DHCT in the form of a MOD client release confirm message . The network does not release the resources provided for the session until the MOD server release response is received from the MOD application server .

A session tear down scenario may also be initiated by the MOD application server . is a display diagram of the process for a VOD content server to tear down a session. The VOD content server issues a server release request to the DNCS after it has stopped using all resources for a particular session that it is attempting to tear down. The DNCS initiates a client release indication message to the MOD application client on the DHCT which is responded to in the form of a client release response . The DNCS then initiates a server release confirm message to the VOD content server that initiated the tear down scenario. The network does not release the resources for the MOD session until the client release response message is received by the DNCS .

A MOD session tear down scenario may also be initiated by the DNCS . is display diagram of the DNCS initiated session tear down scenario. In so doing the DNCS initiates a server release indication message to the VOD content server providing the MOD session. The DNCS may also simultaneously release the client release indication message to the DHCT notifying the DHCT of the tear down sequence. The VOD content server that received the server release indication message responds by a server release response message and the DHCT responds to the client release indication message with a client release response message . The resource is attributed or assigned to the MOD session are not released until both the client release response message and the server release response message is received by the DNCS .

The VOD content server provides an API by which the application servers can register interest in session setup and tear down events. Events describing these events are sent to registered application servers and include the session ID and the user application data contained in the session setup request such as the MAC address of the DHCT the title ID and the rental option in the case of the MOD application. In this way the MOD application server can be notified when a VOD session is established with the VOD content server by the MOD application client . Additionally the MOD application server may use the API to request that the VOD content server tear down the session if the user of the DHCT is not authorized for the MOD service for billing reasons. The DHCT the VOD content server and the DNCS may each initiate a session status scenario to determine the status of both the network and the other components described above. is a display diagram of a client initiated session status scenario. This procedure is used by DHCT to query the DNCS for the sessions that the DNCS is maintaining for that DHCT . This procedure is also used to obtain detailed information about a session so that the DHCT may re establish a session after a reboot. The DCHT initiates a client status request message to the DNCS to determine the status of the network . The DNCS responds with a client status confirm message reporting the status to the DHCT .

The section described above is descriptive of one system for implementing the MOD service of the preferred embodiment of the present invention. The section below is descriptive of the MOD application client user interface flow for navigating and executing other aspects of the MOD service.

Returning to when the user tunes to the MOD channel the navigator asks the SAM for the service mapped to the channel which is a service provided by the MOD application. The navigator then uses the SAM to activate the MOD service. If the MOD application client is not resident in the memory of the DHCT the SAM uses facilities of the operating system to download the MOD application client using the BFS client . Once loaded in DHCT memory the MOD application client is executed.

An activate service event is then delivered to the MOD application client . Contained in the event is the parameter data defined for the service by the MOD application server when it was provisioned by the system operator. The parameter includes the URL for the MOD catalog on the BFS the IP address and port of the MOD application server and other system operator configurable parameters such as the initial browse by category to display the catalog screen a trailer channel to tune upon activation etc. as described in context below.

The first time the MOD application client is activated it connects to the MOD application server and retrieve information about the user. The MOD application client opens a User Datagram Protocol UDP socket and sends the MOD application server a request for current user information. The request includes a Media Access Control MAC address uniquely identifying the DHCT and thus identifying the user. The MOD application server then returns the requested user information including but not limited to current rental information and user configuration information. This information has been stored in the MOD application server database previously based on the MOD application client creating VOD sessions and from commands from the MOD application client over a UDP socket to store user configuration information. Both of these types of information are described in more detail in their relevant context below.

The MOD application client then checks its internal state to determine if the user currently has any current rentals . If not the MOD title catalog screen is displayed as in step .

Information about a MOD title highlighted in the current browse by list may optionally be presented to the user in the right portion of the MOD title catalog screen . As a non limiting example a first option includes a still photo along with programming information related to a highlighted MOD title in the current browse by list . As the user navigates through different MOD titles the still photo and the programming information change accordingly. As another non limiting example a second option for the right portion of the MOD title catalog display includes a long description that allows the user to obtain detailed information about the highlighted MOD title in the current browse by list . As still yet another non limiting example a third option includes presenting a streaming video portion in the location as described above for the still photo and program information similarly to option one described above. The streaming video may also be a reduced portion of a MOD title movie as a preview. The reduced portion of the MOD title may be any segment of the MOD title of length set by a system operator at headend . The video shown as a preview may either be the video of the title highlighted in the current browse by list or any other MOD title.

The button bar at the bottom portion of the title catalog screen includes options for the A B and C keys of remote unit . Continuing with this non limiting example pressing the A key activates another application known as the service guide not shown . Depressing the C key on the remote unit as shown in the button bar takes the user to a current rental screen. Finally depressing the B key brings up a browse by menu for the user to change the browse by list category and this is discussed in more detail below.

To present a preview of a MOD title in the reduced portion as described above the actual MOD title MPEG content contained on the VOD content server is delivered to the DHCT and displayed in portion . The preview is separate from a trailer in that a trailer is a pre edited portion of the MOD title separate from the MPEG content while the preview is the actual data stream of the MOD title. Thus option three as described above may be configured to provide either a trailer or a preview in portion

The MOD title catalog screen also allows the user to change the current browse by list to different catalog groupings. is a display diagram of the MOD title catalog screen with a browse by screen overlaid on top of the MOD title catalog screen . The browse by screen appears with choices for sorting all available MOD titles in a category selection portion a plurality of categories of browse by options. In a description portion of the browse by screen a brief description is displayed about a highlighted category in the selected category portion . The various categories are essentially filters of all the movies shown under individual title category listings in the browse by screen . As non limiting examples various browse by catalog categories include all titles actor action adventure adult comedy drama family rating new releases last chance specials among others. Once the user selects a category from the browse by screen the browse by screen disappears and the current browse by list displays the new set of MOD titles for the selected category. The user may alternatively exit the browse by screen without changing the title display by following instructions shown in a bottom portion of the browse by screen .

A separate browse by screen not shown allows the user to search the MOD title catalog for a desired MOD title. This embodiment includes a blank field where the DHCT accepts user input for a specific MOD title to search. The search request is transferred from the DHCT to the headend . Results of the search are returned to the DHCT and are presented to the user.

The titles presented in the MOD title catalog screen that are grouped in the various title categories are arranged by a system operator through an interface not shown at the headend . The interface is provided by the MOD application server . The interface enables the system operator to configure separate catalogs and also the various title categories within each catalog. Mapping of titles to category is 1 N and can be defined by the system operator via the MOD application server GUI.

Whenever a catalog or title category is updated or created the catalog manager of the MOD application server generates and updates the catalog file s using the BFS server . As described above the BFS server is in constant communication with a BFS client in the DHCT to provide updates and new applications to the DHCTs in the cable television system .

Table I is a header file that is a pseudo structure that describes the format of the MOD title catalog file as described above. Data types are indicated as follows ui8 unsigned 8 bit integer ui16 unsigned 16 bit integer ui32 unsigned 32 bit integer.

Upon addition of a new MOD catalog or title category to the BFS server the new files are immediately broadcast across the network at intermittent intervals enabling the MOD application client on each DHCT to receive the updated information. To notify the MOD application client that new catalog files are available the MOD application server uses the DSM CC on the DNCS to send a UDP pass thru message to the MOD application client via the operating system of the DHCT . Each MOD application client upon determining that a new catalog or an updated version is available uses the BFS client in the DHCT to download the files and store them in the MOD application client database not shown . The updated version of the files are implemented the next time the user activates the MOD title catalog screen . Alternatively the MOD application client may chose to wait until the user activates the MOD service to load the most recent version of the MOD catalog for display at that time.

Similarly when new MOD titles are available for sale or release a system operator adds the MOD titles to the MOD application server . The MOD application server provides both a graphical user interface GUI and an API interface to install a MOD title asset onto the system. Typically this is done by as a non limiting example inserting media such as a tape into the MOD application server and using the graphical user interface GUI to define the meta data about the title but this process can be automated via the use of APIs Application Programming Interfaces . The MOD title includes MPEG video assets for the title and optionally a trailer as well as meta data about the title. Meta data includes but is not limited to data about the title such as it s name description rating directors actors length etc. The MOD application server assigns a unique title ID and installs the added MOD titles to the VOD content server by transferring title ID and MOD title MPEG content. The VOD content manager adds the MPEG content to the VOD content servers . The MPEG content for each newly added MOD title may include not only the video or other media but may also include MPEG data for a trailer for the MOD title that may be later included on a trailer channel or in the MOD title catalog screen in portion as described above.

The system operator at the headend may configure multiple MOD services to display different MOD title catalog screens as mentioned previously each MOD service includes a URL for the catalog to be used by that service. The different services and thus catalogs may be constructed based on demographic information for different types of users according to geographic origin ethnicity age gender etc. provided such information is known about subscribers in the system. As part of the mapping of MOD services to channels provided by the SAM server the operator may assign different MOD services with different catalogs to different geographic hubs in the television network. As a non limiting example the MOD title catalog screen may predominately display MOD title categories tailored to Spanish programming and these MOD title catalog screens may be implemented in geographical areas where the interest in Spanish programming is high. Alternatively the system operator can create a separate MOD service with a title catalog of adult content separate from the main library of titles. This adult MOD service may then be offered on a separate channel as a premium service to subscribers interested in that content. Thus different MOD title catalog screens are maintained at the headend for presentation to users of varied interests.

Similarly the MOD application client on the DHCT may be configured by the user to display MOD title categories in the MOD title catalog screen according to interests for the individual user if so configured by the system operator. As a non limiting example users with interests in sports programming may configure the DHCT to display categories pertaining to sports programming in the MOD title catalog screen as opposed to a regular configuration. When configured via the MOD application server GUI to operate in this mode a single catalog contains all categories. Thus the BFS server at headend would continuously broadcast all MOD title catalogs but the DHCT of the user with interest in sports programming would display the MOD title catalogs and MOD title categories pertaining to sports programming. The DHCT may still download all MOD title categories so the user may still view MOD titles under those categories also but separate action would be taken to display those categories. The list of categories desired for each individual user can be stored in non volatile memory NVM not shown on the DHCT if available. Preferably the list of categories is transmitted over a UDP IP socket to the MOD application server by the MOD application client using facilities of the digital television network . The MOD application client then requests user information once after it is first initialized as described previously. A settings graphical user interface offered by the MOD application client if enabled by the system operator in the MOD service parameters can be accessed by the user to set the list of categories that they desire be displayed. In navigating the MOD title catalog screen to select a MOD title to purchase the user may opt to preview a MOD title contained in the MOD title catalog screen . A preview of a MOD title enables the user to view a portion of the MOD title video stream substantially less than the entire title length. The preview may not necessarily start at the beginning of the MOD title but rather may be any segment or segments of the MOD title. The portion of video contained in the preview may be configured by the system operator at the headend through an interface . The interface enables the system operator to set the length and starting point of the preview. The preview is displayed by the MOD application client setting up a session with the VOD content server for the specified title ID starting at the specified Normal Play Time NPT location. VOD stream control mechanisms i.e. fast forward rewind pause are typically disabled during the preview. Once the user has viewed the entire preview the user chooses whether to rent the MOD title just previewed. If not then the DHCT returns to the MOD title catalog screen for further navigation or exit.

Returning to once the user navigates through the MOD title catalog screen and chooses a MOD title for purchase DHCT presents the user a title purchase option as shown in step . is a display diagram of a rental option screen as one embodiment of the title purchase option described in step . Descriptive information about the selected MOD title is shown to the user in a center portion of the display . Contained in this descriptive information is one or more rental options including both the rental period and rental price for the selected MOD title. In one rental option the rental period may be the MOD title length thereby requiring the user to immediately rent the MOD title and view it in its entirety at the time of rental. In another rental option the rental period in the descriptive portion of the display may be some integer multiplier of the MOD title length. As a non limiting example the rental period as configured by the system operator at the headend may be set to 2 times the MOD title length so a two hour movie would enable a rental period of four hours. As yet another rental option the rental period may be set to a specific period of time such as a period of hours days or weeks. The price of the rental is included in the descriptive portion of the display and may vary according to the popularity of the MOD title the length of rental and other variables as discussed in more detail below. Finally if the user desires to rent the selected MOD title shown in the rental option screen the user may depress a button on the remote as directed in the rental option button bar . A cancel option may similarly be presented in the rental option button bar that returns the user to the MOD title catalog screen . If more than one rental option is provided for the title the rental option screen includes a scrolling list of rental options.

An additional rental option that may be presented to the user in rental option screen includes as a non limiting example providing the user limited or unlimited control of VCR like stream control functions i.e. stop fast forward rewind pause etc. . The rental price of the MOD title may be based on the amount of control the user has in implementing the MOD functions. Thus the user may pay a higher price to rent a MOD title with full functionality as opposed to renting a MOD title with no functionality since bandwidth for the MOD title would be used for a shorter period of time if the user did not have the ability to stop rewind or pause the MOD title.

Still yet another rental option that may be purchased by the user from the rental option screen is the ability to view a MOD title multiple times during the rental period rather than merely once. As a non limiting example the rental options screen may include an option that enables the user to view the purchased MOD title a set number of times greater than one during the rental period or even an unlimited number of times during the rental period.

As another rental option the user may select to view a MOD title without any promotional advertising. As a non limiting example a user upon selecting such an option may view a MOD title without any movie trailers that are commonly shown in movie theaters prior to the feature presentation. As another non limiting example the MOD title may be presented to the user without any advertising logos brands or other marks that might otherwise be included in the presentation of the MOD title.

A MOD application server graphical user interface GUI allows the system operator to define any number of rental options such as those mentioned above. Defined in the catalog is the information about each rental option description price VOD stream control mechanisms enabled trailers enabled advertising enabled etc. such that the MOD application client can enforce the chosen rental option for a title. The system operator can assign via the GUI any number of rental options to a given title including a default list of rental options that is assigned to a title when it is installed.

As still yet another rental option the user may have the option to change the language setting of the purchased MOD title to one of any other available languages from the default setting. The MPEG data stream of the MOD title as delivered to the DHCT may include two or more language audio tracks such that the DHCT may be configured to play an alternately chosen language according to the preference of the user. As a non limiting example a French speaking user may configure by an interface not shown presented by the MOD application client to present the purchased MOD title in French language audio as opposed to for example and English language default setting. Additionally the DHCT may upon the user initially configuring the language set the default for future presentations to the newly selected language. Alternatively the MOD application client may access the language settings of the navigator and present all purchased MOD titles according to that language setting provided the chosen language is one included in the MPEG audio track of the MOD title.

Once the user purchases a particular MOD title from the rental options screen but prior to presentation of the title the MOD application client determines if the title is blocked by its particular rating as shown in step . To determine if a particular MOD title is blocked because of its rating the user should have previously entered a setting in the DHCT defining what types of ratings would be acceptable for viewing. In the preferred embodiment this information is maintained by the resident navigator application and made available to other application clients via an application programming interface API . The MOD application client accesses the pre configured rating parameters for comparison to the rating information contained in the catalog for the subject MOD title being purchased. As a non limiting example if a user configured the DHCT to prevent any movie with an R rating from being viewed or purchased the MOD application client would not allow any movie with such rating to be purchased or viewed unless specifically overridden by the user. In this non limiting example parents may choose to block MOD titles with R ratings to prevent children from accessing the MOD titles while allowing the parents to access the blocked titles upon entry of a proper PIN. Thus if the MOD application client determines in step that the selected MOD title is blocked by its rating the application client allows the user to unblock the title on a proper PIN entry as shown in step . In the preferred embodiment the MOD application client uses the blocking PIN number stored in the settings with the navigator application. As such a user can configure a single parental control PIN that is shared among applications. The user is allowed to escape or cancel from the PIN entry screen for overriding the title blocking according to rating as shown in step . If the user chooses to escape the PIN entry screen or enters an improper or incorrect PIN as shown in step the MOD application client returns the user to the MOD title catalog screen where the user reinitiates the MOD purchase sequence described above.

In another embodiment the user may configure the MOD application client through a graphical user interface menu not shown to block certain MOD titles grouped under certain themes. As a non limiting example a user may configure the DHCT to block all MOD titles under an Adult Programming theme if such a theme was included in the browse by category list . If the user attempted to access the Adult Programming theme the DHCT would present a PIN entry screen similar to the PIN entry screen shown in . Thus the user would be asked to enter the correct PIN as described above to access the blocked Adult Programming theme. Information for the categories set by the user as blocked may be stored in NVM by the MOD application client if space is available on the DHCT . Alternatively the MOD application client may send a UDP IP message to the MOD application server to store the blocking information for the particular user in the MOD application server database not shown .

In yet another embodiment the user may configure the MOD application client to block rental of MOD titles according to some pre set limits on media service. As a non limiting example the DHCT may block presentation of MOD titles after a certain number of successful requests have been made in a given time period. Thus a user may configure the DHCT to allow five MOD title rentals in a month to control costs. In another non limiting example the user may limit the rental of MOD titles after a certain number of requests of a particular type of media has been ordered. Thus the DHCT may limit rental of all MOD titles after the user has ordered five premium priced MOD title rentals. Additionally the user in another non limiting example may limit rental of all MOD titles after a specific monetary value has been expended in a given time period. Thus the user may set a 50.00 per month for MOD title rental and after that amount has been spent the DHCT blocks further rental attempts unless the user overrides the blocking process by entering the PIN. In each of these non limiting examples the user can override the block placed on the rental by entering a proper PIN as described above. All of this user configured blocking information is stored in the MOD application server database not shown as described for previous user configurations.

If the MOD application client determines that the selected MOD title is not blocked by any of the aforementioned parameters as in step or the user overrides the blocking process as in step the MOD application client presents the user with a title rental access PIN entry screen as in step . is a display diagram of a title rental access PIN entry screen presented to the user requesting PIN confirmation of purchase of the MOD title previously selected. Similarly as above the PIN may consist of any alphanumeric character or other non alphanumeric character. In one embodiment the MOD application client retrieves the value of the PIN from the API of the navigator application on the DHCT such that a single purchase PIN can be used for the user across multiple applications that deal with purchases. The center portion of the title rental access PIN entry screen includes a message requesting PIN entry and several blocks representing the requisite number of characters to be entered. The user may enter the PIN to access a blocked title with the remote . Upon entry of each character an asterisk may appear in each block signifying entry of a character. Once the user enters the PIN the user may request acceptance of the PIN by inputting the A key on remote as instructed by the PIN entry button bar . The user may also cancel the PIN entry override process as in step by entering the C key on remote as instructed by the PIN entry button bar . If the user enters in an improper PIN number in step the MOD application client returns the user to the present title catalog screen as previously discussed.

After the user has selected the desired MOD title for purchase the MOD application client causes the DHCT to present the user a please wait message as in step while the MOD service is being established as described above. is a display diagram of the please wait barker presented to the user while service is established from the headend to the user s DHCT . Establishing service entails setting up a VOD session with the specified VOD content server identified for the title in the catalog. The barker merely is a pop up window that appears for the duration of the delay that may typically last a few seconds.

Returning to while the please wait barker is presented to the user a determination is made whether the MOD session can be established as shown in step . The session is established as discussed above if the resources of the system are available. If resources are unavailable at the time the user desires to view the MOD title a message is presented to the user stating that the MOD service request cannot be fulfilled at that time as in step . is a display diagram of the MOD service unavailable barker presented to the user indicating that the purchased MOD title cannot be presented at the requested time. In the embodiment shown in the user is informed to try again later however in another embodiment the user may be provided an opportunity to receive the MOD service at some point in the future by reserving the selected MOD title for a set future time. From the MOD service unavailable screen the user is presented with the title catalog screen upon entering a cancel command as instructed in a bottom portion .

If a session is available for transmitting the MOD title from the VOD content server to the DHCT the user is presented a help screen actual help screen not shown with the title purchased as in step prior to presenting the MOD title on display . This screen may include instructions about how the remote unit controls the presentation of the MOD title if such functions i.e. stop fast forward rewind pause etc. are enabled. Thereafter MOD application client directs the operating system in the DHCT to tune the MPEG program specified in the session resource as in step . The DHCT then presents the user the video associated with the purchase title with additional MOD VOD stream control i.e. stop fast forward rewind pause etc. as in step if the additional support functions are enabled by the chosen rental option.

In one embodiment before the rented MOD title is actually presented to the user promotional material may be presented to the user prior to the rented MOD title. Associated with a rental option may be a set of movie trailers each with their own asset ID. The MOD application client initiates a session for each of them with the specified VOD content server . Typically the VOD stream control functions are disabled during trailers as specified by the system operator in the rental option. The movie trailers are similar to movie trailers shown in movie theaters prior to the presentation of the feature presentation and are comprised of pre edited segments of the entire movie or MOD title. Depending on the theme category of the rented MOD title the MOD application server may provide a sequence of movie trailers in the same theme as the rented MOD title. As a non limiting example the sequence of movie trailers may be coming attractions of MOD titles soon to be offered by the cable service provider.

In another embodiment the DHCT enables the user to reserve rental of a future MOD title presented as a trailer prior to the rented MOD title as described above. In this embodiment the reservation of future rentals would be made at a time when the MOD title to be rented in the future is not currently available. Thus in a non limiting example the user upon viewing a sequence of trailers of coming attraction MOD titles may immediately reserve rental of one of the MOD titles shown in the trailer sequence for future viewing after the MOD title has been made available for rental. This advance rental provides the user priority for the time reserved for future viewing and insures that the system resources are available for at least fulfilling this rental request. Another non limiting example enables the user to simply request notification of future release of a MOD title included in a sequence of trailers presented prior to the presentation of a rented MOD title. Thus the user may receive a notification barker not shown instructing the user that the MOD title is now available for rental at the convenience of the user. In this non limiting example bandwidth is not reserved for the user at a given time but instead the user is prompted that a previously unavailable MOD title is now available for rental. Consequently each reservation or request about a MOD title made by a user is communicated from the DHCT to the headend and stored in a memory not shown . The future title reminders are transmitted to the MOD application server by the MOD application client via the UDP socket as described previously for other user customizations.

When the end of the MOD title is reached or the time allotted for viewing the MOD title has expired the DHCT presents the user denoting that the rental period is over or that the MOD title has ended as in step . is a display diagram of the rental period end screen presented to the user when the duration of the rental period has expired. Upon entering the cancel command through remote as instructed by the rental period end screen the user returns to the MOD title catalog screen .

As an additional alternative the user may prematurely end rental of the MOD title prior to expiration of the rental duration by stopping play of the MOD title and choosing an option to terminate the rental. is a display diagram of the end movie rental screen presented to the user when providing the opportunity to prematurely end rental of a MOD title prior to expiration of the rental duration. If the user selects the SEL key on the remote as instructed in the end movie rental screen the rental of the selected MOD title is terminated and the user is returned to the MOD title catalog screen where the user may opt to exit the MOD application completely. If the user selects the cancel option as provided in the end movie rental screen the user is returned to the presentation of the MOD title. If the user prematurely cancels the rental of the MOD title before a pre configured time set by a system operator at the headend through a GUI the user will not be charged for rental of the MOD title. As a non limiting example the user may decide after watching a purchased MOD title for three minutes to cancel the rental. If the pre configured time to cancel without charge had not expired the user would not pay for the MOD title rental.

The MOD application client may also present the user other barkers informing the user of other conditions prior to and during rental of a MOD title depending on specific situations that may occur. If as a non limiting example a problem occurs during delivery of the MOD title to the DHCT that causes an interruption in the service a message may be presented to the user instructing the user of the problem. is a display diagram of the MOD service problem barker presented to the user informing of the user of a problem in the delivery of the purchased MOD title. The MOD service problem barker may include a cancel option enabling the user to exit the MOD application completely and implement other services while the MOD service is temporarily disabled.

If upon attempt to initially access the MOD channel the system operator has defined a conditional access descriptor regulating access to the MOD service and the navigator application on the DHCT determines that the conditional access package has not been transmitted to the DHCT the navigator will display an unauthorized barker instead of activating the MOD service.

If during session setup the MOD application server is notified of a VOD session setup for a particular title and rental option for which the user has been designated by the billing system used by the system operator as unauthorized the MOD application server will use an API of the VOD content server with whom the session was created and ask that the session be torn down because it is not authorized. When the MOD application client is notified that the session has been torn down because the user is not authorized the DHCT may present the user a MOD rental not authorized barker informing the user that the user is not authorized to receive MOD rentals and to contact the system operator. is a display diagram of the MOD rental not authorized barker . As a series of non limiting examples reasons for unauthorization of MOD service access may include failure of the user to pay a prior service bill user election to not receive MOD service system incompatibility or other reasons configured by the system operator at the headend . The VOD rental not authorized barker includes a cancel option enabling the user to return to the MOD catalog.

Returning to the user upon accessing the MOD application client may already have current rentals. The first time the MOD application is activated it retrieves the information about the user s current rentals in the request for user information described previously. The purchase related information includes a list of title IDs for current rentals and a session ID for each if the MOD application server knows that the session has not been torn down by the DNCS or the VOD content server . Also returned are any user configurable parameters that have been stored by the MOD application server in its database in response to configuration settings made available via the MOD application client .

Once the MOD application client determines that the user has a current rental it checks with the DNCS to see if the session for that rental is active using the session status request described previously. If the session is active upon this determination in step the MOD application client causes the DHCT to present the user a current rental screen. If the session is not active another MOD session may be established. In a non limiting example the user is enabled to rent multiple MOD titles at a given time in which case the session for the most recently viewed title would be established. In another non limiting example the user may be activating the MOD application client at some time subsequent to a previous rental for completion of viewing of the previously rented MOD title. In another non limiting example the user may be re activating the DHCT and VOD application client after a power outage that interrupted presentation of the previously purchased MOD title.

In a play status indication is provided depicting a bar graph indication of the point in the MOD title where viewing was last stopped. A Play From option graphic is included which enables the user to select the re commencement point of the MOD title presentation. In a Time Remaining indication is provided which depicts bar graphs for both the playing time previously viewed time of the MOD title and the remaining rental period. A Play Selector option similar to the Play From option in is provided to enable the user to select a recommencement point or even to end the rental completely.

As discussed above and as shown in step of the MOD title may be presented to the user with VCR like stream control functionality. VOD stream control functionality includes the ability to fast forward rewind pause stop etc. Whether a user may utilize these MOD support mechanisms may be determined by the system operator in configuring MOD rental options as described previously and further by the user in selecting between multiple rental options where some options include VOD stream control functionality and others do not. As a non limiting example a system operator at the headend may configure using the MOD application server GUI whether presentation of MOD titles includes MOD support functionality through an interface at the headend . In both image area is provided which may be configured as a still image where the MOD title was previously stopped.

If the user enters depresses a key on remote representing a rewind function a rewind banner as described in block is presented on display and the DHCT presents a rewind video stream. As described with the fast forward stream above the rewind video stream may or may not be a separate video stream from the real time video stream. When the user returns to playing the video stream in real time the rewind banner is removed.

At any time in the presentation of the MOD title on the display the user may stop the presentation of the video stream. Upon entry of a stop command on remote the DHCT presents a stop banner as described in block and the presentation of video on display is stopped by directing the VOD content server to stop the stream. After the video is stopped the DHCT presents the MOD current rental screen as described above and shown in . As described below the MOD application client may activate a screen saver after the MOD current rental screen has been displayed on the display for a pre configured amount of time to prevent the image of the MOD current rental screen from becoming burned into the display .

Depressing a key on remote representing a play function causes the DHCT to display a play banner on the display as described in block . Upon presenting the play banner the video is played at real time speed as discussed above and the play banner is removed after a few seconds thereafter as depicted in block .

If the user desires to pause the playing of the MOD title a command on remote may be initiated by depressing a key representing pause. When the MOD application client on the DHCT receives the command to pause the presentation of the MOD title on display the pause banner is presented as depicted in step the pause command is sent to the VOD content server and a freeze frame image of the video where it was stopped in the video stream is presented on the display . After the video stream has been paused for a pre configured amount of time block depicts that the pause banner is removed and the video is stopped. A stop banner is presented similarly as described above in reference to block . The MOD application client may activate a screen saver after the MOD current rental screen has been displayed on the display for a pre configured amount of time to prevent the image of the MOD current rental screen from becoming burned into the display . The screen saver function is described in more detail below.

Other inputs on the remote or other input device may also represent functionality that is applicable to the presentation of a MOD title as shown in block . Upon entry of one of these other keyed inputs a banner may appear on display indicating the appropriate action corresponding to the input. As a non limiting example pressing the INFO button on the remote directs the MOD application client to display a graphic showing the elapsed time in the movie and the rental time remaining.

If a still image is maintained on the display for a pre configured amount of time the MOD application server may invoke a screen saver function to protect the display from a burn in effect that can occur if an image remains on a display too long. The still screen as a non limiting example may be the current rental screen as described above in regard to the stop and pause functions or the still screen may be any other image that does not change with time. The system operator at the headend may configure the MOD application to include a screen saver that may be activated after a set time has expired. The screen saver may comprise a sequence of still screens that may be advertisements announcements or other information capable of display on a still screen. The sequence of still screens may be displayed in a rotation that enables each screen to be displayed for some configurable time period before the next still screen is displayed. is a diagram of a non limiting example of a sequence of still screens that may comprise a screen saver operation. In this non limiting example a series of still screens rotate in succession.

In another embodiment the screen saver is presented as a video stream that as a non limiting example is a set of movie trailers of movies currently available for rental in the MOD title catalog screen . In this non limiting example the DHCT tunes the MPEG stream containing the trailers with the frequency and program number being passed to the MOD application client in the service parameter data. Thus in this non limiting example if the user has stopped the presentation of the MOD title and walked away the DHCT after a pre configured amount of time tunes the display to a channel of movie trailers. The movie trailers as described above are pre edited segments of MOD titles movies etc. that are for example new releases or coming attractions and are continuously presented until the user presses a key on remote . Upon hitting any remote key the user is returned to the previous point where the user left off in the MOD application the MOD current rental screen which appears when the user stops the presentation of a MOD title .

In yet another embodiment the screen saver may be configured by the system operator through an interface on the MOD application server at the headend to be some type of moving image. As a non limiting example the system operator may configure the MOD application to display a logo of the cable service provider to the user as the screen saver.

Because of the possible limited resources available for MOD title presentation i.e. bandwidth number of streams supported by VOD content server number of streams per title number of VOD content servers etc. the user is typically offered a limited amount of time to view the rented title. This period is described above in regard to the rental options screen . Rented duration time is typically longer than the length of the MOD title to allow the user to use the VOD stream control mechanisms described above but that may not always be the case. As a non limiting example the user via a chosen rental option may purchase a MOD title to be displayed in its entirety without any interruption generation by the user similar to a conventional movie theater. However it is more common that the rental period is longer that the MOD title length to enable access to the VOD stream control mechanisms. Different play options enable the user to implement the VOD stream control mechanisms while still having the opportunity to view the MOD title in its entirety.

In one embodiment the user is informed by a display barker not shown at the beginning of the presentation session of the purchased MOD title of the time to finish the viewing of the MOD title. However the user has full and free control of the VOD stream control mechanisms as described above and in throughout the rental duration. It is the responsibility of the user to view the program before the expiration of the rental duration. Thus if the user rewinds the video stream to a point where the new time remaining to play the remaining video stream is greater than the remaining rental duration and plays from that point the user will not be able to view the entire MOD title. Similarly if the user stops the presentation of the MOD title and commences playing the MOD title such that the remaining presentation time is greater than the remaining rental duration the user will not be able to view the entire MOD title. No other message is presented to the user other than the initial display barker and the rental period end screen once the rental duration is complete.

Another embodiment is that the user is afforded full and free control of the VOD stream control mechanisms as described above and as shown in throughout the rental duration. If the time remaining in the rental duration becomes equal to the remaining length of the MOD title a warning barker not shown is presented to the user informing the user that the time remaining in the rental duration is insufficient to view the remaining MOD title to completion. After the user has been alerted by the warning barker the user may still activate the VOD stream control mechanisms but the entire MOD title cannot be viewed in its entirety. An alternative embodiment to this embodiment affords the user an opportunity to purchase additional rental time for viewing the remaining MOD title. A extra time purchase barker not shown may be presented to the user as part of the warning barker enabling the user to purchase sufficient additional time to complete viewing the MOD title.

Still another embodiment allows the user to utilize the VOD stream control mechanisms during a MOD period that is the calculated difference between the remaining rental duration and the remaining presentation length. While the MOD period is not equal to zero the user is enabled to utilize all VOD stream control mechanisms as described above however when the MOD period does expire become zero the user is no longer enabled to use certain VOD stream control mechanisms unless the MOD period again becomes greater than zero. As a non limiting example if the MOD period expires the rewind stop and pause functions would no longer operate because otherwise the user would not be able to view the MOD title in its entirety because the remaining rental duration is insufficient. The user could still use the fast forward function since this would operate to make the remaining rental duration greater than the remaining title length i.e. a MOD period greater than zero . Thus once the user fast forwards the MOD title thereby making the MOD period greater than zero the previously inoperative VOD stream control mechanisms i.e. stop rewind and pause would operate again.

If the user tunes to a channel other than the MOD channel that is presenting the purchased MOD title or if the user powers off the DHCT the stop mode is automatically entered. In one non limiting example if the MOD period does not expire before the returns to the MOD channel of the MOD title presentation of the MOD title resumes where it was stopped. In another non limiting example if the MOD period does expire before the user returns to the MOD channel presenting the MOD title the MOD title resumes streaming to the DHCT even though the DHCT is tuned to another channel and the user is alerted by a resume barker not shown of the MOD title presentation resumption. If in another non limiting example the user returns after expiration of the MOD period the presentation of the MOD title is resumed at the point in the MOD title such that the MOD title ends at the end of the rental duration thereby causing a middle portion of the MOD title to be unviewed by the user. Regardless of the different embodiments involving the MOD period if the user returns to the MOD channel after the rental duration has expired the MOD title catalog screen is displayed and no portion of the MOD title is viewed.

Calculation of the MOD period remaining title length and rental period remaining are determined as follows. The MOD application client stores in memory on the DHCT the time at which the MOD title is purchased. It also stores the rental option which includes the rental duration. Thus at any time the MOD application client can calculate the time remaining in the rental period.

The VOD content server provides an API for the MOD application client to request the normal play time NPT value of a video stream being played. Based on this information and the duration of the title stored in the catalog the MOD application client can calculate at any given time the remaining title length. Alternatively the MOD application client can calculate the NPT based on the time of the last stream control operation and the rate at which the VOD content server is playing the stream.

The MOD application client can then calculate at regular intervals such as once per minute the VOD period equal to the rental time remaining minus the remaining title length. During the rewind stream control operation this calculation is done more frequently based on the rate of rewind that was specified to the VOD content server . In this case the MOD application client can calculate the NPT based on NPT at initiation of rewind rate of rewind and duration of the rewind operation. This allows the MOD application client to recompute the VOD period at a constant interval of for example 60 NPT seconds. As a non limiting example if the rewind rate is 30 times the normal play rate the VOD period would be recalculated every 2 seconds 60 seconds divided by 30 to be effectively reevaluating the VOD period every 60 seconds of movie being streamed out of the VOD content server.

Alternatively the MOD application client can pre compute the point in the stream during rewind that will cause the VOD period to drop below zero and request that the VOD content server stop rewinding the stream at that point.

The system operator may configure using the MOD application server GUI parameters that determine when a session ends if the user interrupts the presentation of a MOD title. In one embodiment the system operator may via an interface not shown configure a session to be maintained for the entire rental duration even during the portion of the rental period when the user is not viewing the MOD title. This non limiting example maintains the bandwidth for the user regardless of other system constraints or requests. In another embodiment the system operator through the interface at the headend may configure the session providing the MOD title to be torn down after a pre configured time. The pre configured time may be based upon certain user input or some user inactivity. As a non limiting example if the user stops the presentation of a MOD title and the pre configured time of inactivity expires the session established to deliver the MOD title to the DHCT of the user may be torn down as described above. When the user returns to the MOD channel the MOD application client determines that there is a current rental but that no session exists. It then follows the steps described previously to set up a session with the VOD content server . If this session fails and the rental period is still active the MOD application client retrys the session setup and different intervals based on the reason for the session setup failure. Additionally a problem barker is displayed informing the user that the MOD service cannot be re established and that the MOD application is retrying.

If DHCT power is lost during MOD title viewing one of two scenarios may occur. First for a power glitch whereby the DHCT immediately reboots and the user subsequently tunes to the MOD channel the session for the MOD title will still be playing. Thus the MOD application client will discover from the MOD application server that the user has a current rental and will then verify with the VOD content server that the session is active. Hence when the MPEG frequency and program information is retrieved from the DNCS session and resource manager for that session the stream will have been playing during the elapsed power outage time and the user will rewind the movie to view the portion they missed.

For a longer term power outage the session and resource manager in the DNCS will determine that the DHCT is no longer responding to the session status request as described previously. The session will be torn down and the MOD application server will be notified of the session tear down and record the fact that there is no session for that user and title in the database. Then when the DHCT is powered up and the MOD service activated the MOD application client will be told that no session currently exists for the current rental.

A system operator interface may enable the system operator to configure presentation of promotional information such as movie trailers or previews upon user requests for information about a MOD title. As described above in regard to the system operator may configure the MOD title catalog display to present an option for the user to view a preview or trailer of the MOD title if the user requests INFO about a particular MOD title. The preview or trailer may be configured through the interface to appear in a reduced portion of the MOD title catalog screen or in a full screen format.

Additionally a system operator interface not shown for promotional information may enable a system operator to configure different areas of various screens as described above for example the MOD title catalog screen . In one embodiment the system operator can configure brand graphics to appear on the display screens mentioned above. Brand graphics may include graphics identifying the cable service provider. As a non limiting example a brand graphic in identifies the cable service provider as Victory Cable. In this non limiting example the brand graphic includes an image logo with the identifying information Victory Cable. Thus the system operator through an interface can cause the brand graphic to be shown on any MOD display screen wherein the brand graphic is a separate image file typically stored on BFS server that is accessed whenever a user activates the MOD application.

In similar fashion the system operator may include advertising graphics not shown that are files placed on the BFS server by the MOD application server and are similarly accessed when a user activates the MOD application. Advertising graphics as known in the art refer to promotional information about an entity other than the cable television provider. Thus in a non limiting example the advertising graphics may be graphics for merchants who purchased advertising through a particular cable television provider to have the merchants advertising graphics displayed whenever the user accessed the MOD application. In this example the merchant could be a popcorn provider and the graphic that appears in the MOD display screens i.e. the MOD title catalog screen could be an image of popped popcorn with descriptive text.

In an alternative embodiment the advertising graphics that appear in the MOD screens may be provided by an external operator located at another physical location apart from headend . The system operator in this embodiment configures the MOD application through the interface to implement advertising graphics in the MOD display screens broadcast to the DHCTs from the BFS that are stored externally to the cable television system . As a non limiting example advertising graphics stored externally to the cable television system may be accessed by a universal resource locator URL for example across the Internet for implementation in the MOD display screens. Thus each time the MOD application client attempts to retrieve an advertisement according to a pre configured URL a different advertisement graphic may be obtained from the external provider of the graphic so the user always sees different advertisements. In this embodiment APIs application programming interfaces are provided to the external advertising graphic providers to enable compatibility with the MOD display screen configurations. Moreover this embodiment enables advertisements to be quickly updated and tailored to the interests of an individual user or group of users.

A user may access the MOD application client as described above from a trailer channel if the user desires to purchase the MOD title corresponding to a particular trailer on the display. This configuration of the MOD service is indicated to the MOD application client in the service parameter. Upon being activated in this mode the MOD application client uses facilities of the operating system to tune to the specified QAM frequency and MPEG program to display the trailers. The title ID about which trailer is currently playing is carried in an MPEG private data PID synchronous with the MPEG video and audio. The MOD application client upon a user input initiated during a particular trailer presentation would set the display to the MOD title catalog screen with the MOD title corresponding to the particular trailer highlighted. The user could then purchase that particular MOD title in a manner as described above.

As an alternative embodiment the trailer channel may actually be a plurality of trailer type channels configured according to style genre theme etc. As a non limiting embodiment the MOD application server may be configured to support a comedy trailer channel wherein all trailer advertise MOD titles that are comedies a drama trailer channel for dramatic MOD titles etc. Just as above the user upon viewing a trailer in any one of these trailer channels may upon input by remote go to the MOD title catalog screen with the MOD title corresponding to the trailer highlighted for purchase.

The present invention describes the MOD application server and client as a system that delivers media to the user of the DHCT where the media described is typically movies however it is not the intent to limit the present invention merely to a system that delivers video i.e. movies only. It should be clear that the MOD application may be implemented to deliver any type of visual and aural media to the user of the DHCT . As a non limiting example the headend and DHCT may be implemented by the MOD application to provide music on demand stock quotes on demand television programs on demand etc. The MOD application server in this alternative embodiment is a media on demand server that manages all media type requests as demanded and coordinates the appropriate components in the headend to provide the service on demand. Thus the VOD content manager would operate to provide the video on demand service and other media type content managers may be employed i.e. Stock quotes on demand content manager etc. would provide that media type on demand. Thus video on demand is but one type of media that is deliverable on demand in the manner consistent with the present invention.

The MOD application which comprises an ordered listing of executable instructions for implementing logical functions can be embodied in any computer readable medium for use by or in connection with an instruction execution system apparatus or device such as a computer based system processor containing system or other system that can fetch the instructions from the instruction execution system apparatus or device and execute the instructions. In the context of this document a computer readable medium can be any means that can contain store communicate propagate or transport the program for use by or in connection with the instruction execution system apparatus or device. The computer readable medium can be for example but not limited to an electronic magnetic optical electromagnetic infrared or semiconductor system apparatus device or propagation medium. More specific examples a nonexhaustive list of the computer readable medium would include the following an electrical connection electronic having one or more wires a portable computer diskette magnetic a random access memory RAM electronic a read only memory ROM electronic an erasable programmable read only memory EPROM or Flash memory electronic an optical fiber optical and a portable compact disc read only memory CDROM optical . Note that the computer readable medium could even be paper or another suitable medium upon which the program is printed as the program can be electronically captured via for instance optical scanning of the paper or other medium then compiled interpreted or otherwise processed in a suitable manner and then stored in a computer memory.

The flow charts described above and shown in the figures of the present invention show the architecture functionality and operation of a possible implementation of the present invention. In this regard each block represents a module segment or portion of code which comprises one or more executable instructions for implementing the specified logical function s . It should also be noted that in some alternative implementations the functions noted in the blocks may occur out of the order.

It should be emphasized that the above described embodiments of the present invention particularly any preferred embodiments are merely possible examples of the implementations merely setting forth for a clear understanding of the principles of the inventions. Any variations and modifications may be made to the above described embodiments of the invention without departing substantially from the spirit of the principles of the invention. All such modifications and variations are intended to be included herein within the scope of the disclosure and present invention and protected by the following claims.

