---

title: Browser security notification
abstract: Tools are described that notify a user of a security risk in a network browser. The tools can determine that a security setting of a network browser poses a security risk and notify the user of this risk. In some situations the tools also enable a user to reduce the security risk with a single user action. This single user action can alter one or multiple security settings responsible for the security risk.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08074272&OS=08074272&RS=08074272
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 08074272
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050707
---
When set properly a network browser s security settings can help protect the browser and its user and computer from malicious code. A browser s security settings can be altered however. Malicious code may alter a browser s security settings to misuse the browser. Users may also alter these settings. A user can alter settings in response to an application or website instructing the user to change his or her settings to improve the browser s performance for instance.

Security settings altered to reduce a browser s security can place the computer on which the browser operates a user and the network browser at risk. For example a browser having improper security settings can permit malicious code to track a user s use of his or her browser and invade the user s privacy.

Tools are described that notify a user of a security risk in a network browser. The tools can determine that a security setting of a network browser poses a security risk and notify the user of this risk. In some situations the tools also enable a user to reduce the security risk utilizing a single user action. This single user action can alter one or multiple security settings responsible for the security risk.

This Summary is provided to introduce a selection of concepts in a simplified form that are further described below in the Detailed Description. This Summary is not intended to identify key or essential features of the claimed subject matter nor is it intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter.

The same numbers are used throughout the disclosure and figures to reference like components and features.

The following document describes system s and or method s tools for notifying a user of a security risk in a network browser. In one embodiment the tools determine that a security setting of a network browser poses a security risk and notifies the user of this risk. In another embodiment the tools notify a user of a security risk and enable the user to reduce this security risk with a single user action. This single user action can alter one or multiple security settings responsible for the security risk.

Before describing the tools in detail the following discussion of an exemplary operating environment is provided to assist the reader in understanding where and how the tools may be employed. The description provided below constitutes but one example and is not intended to limit application of the tools to any one particular operating environment.

The predetermined settings risk table maps possible security settings for the network browser with a security risk assessment for these settings. Particular settings may be assigned a risk level of unsafe or safe. Those given an unsafe risk level can be those settings that permit a user s browsing experience to be damaged a user s computer to be damaged and the like. This table enables a Boolean assessment of risk two levels unsafe and safe though it may also enable a range of assessment such as three or more levels. For relatively unsophisticated users two levels may be appropriate so as not to confuse them. For some other users like information technologists many levels may be more appropriate.

The communication network enables communication between the computer and the network computer and may comprise one or more of an intranet such as a company s internal network the Internet and the like. Network computer is shown comprising one or more network processor s and network computer readable media . The network processor s are capable of executing the network computer readable media.

Referring to an exemplary process for notifying a user of a security risk is shown. The process is illustrated as a series of blocks representing individual operations or acts performed by elements of environment . This process is directed to these elements to aid the reader in understanding particular embodiments of the tools and is not intended to limit application of the tools to this environment. This process can be implemented in any suitable hardware software firmware or combination thereof. In the case of software and firmware this process represents sets of operations implemented as computer executable instructions.

Any of blocks and may be performed prior to block . Block may act in response to any of these blocks or otherwise. In one embodiment for instance block acts responsive to a call requesting a security risk of the browser.

Block receives an indication that a security setting for a network browser has been altered. The security setting may have been altered by a user another application or malicious code. Block receives an indication that a network browser has been started such as on startup responsive to a user opening the browser. Block receives a user s selection to view a network browser s security settings or security risks. This selection can be received through a control panel for the network browser or though a user interface related to the network browser s security some of which are described below.

Block determines whether one or more security settings of a network browser pose a security risk. Block may do so without user interaction such as automatically following blocks or .

In an embodiment described with elements of environment security module compares the network browser s altered security settings with predetermined settings risk table . Each of the altered security settings corresponds to a risk assessment in table . The security module can assign a risk level of unsafe to the network browser s security settings if any of its settings correspond to an unsafe risk in table .

By way of illustration consider an exemplary predetermined settings risk table shown in . Table is broken down into potential actions zones and possible security settings for these actions in their zones. Security settings and actions are shown categorized in zones though this is not necessary. Zones may help a user understand actions based on where or how these actions can be performed.

The security settings for each action in each zone are marked E for enable the action P for prompt a user for permission to enable the action and D for disable the action. Some action zone settings are left blank because an assessed security risk does not depend on the setting for these actions in their respective zones. Security settings on the left of each zone are considered safe settings. These safe settings may match default settings for the browser e.g. default security settings . The safe settings are shown at for Internet zone for local intranet for trusted zone and for restricted zone

The security settings on each zone s right are considered unsafe if any are marked . The unsafe settings are shown at for Internet zone and for restricted zone . As shown a security setting enabling the following actions in the Internet zone are considered unsafe downloading signed ActiveX controls downloading unsigned ActiveX controls initializing and scripting ActiveX controls not marked as safe installing desktop items launching applications and unsafe files and launching programs and files in an IFRAME. Also as shown all actions in restricted zone are consider unsafe if they are enabled or prompted except for launching programs and files in an IFRAME. For this action in the restricted zone a prompt security setting is considered safe and an enable security setting unsafe.

Also by way of illustration consider exemplary altered security settings shown in . These security settings are shown for clarity in a format similar to that of table shown in . Possible actions are marked at and zones at and which mirror those of template of . Here the security settings for network browser are shown and differ from default security settings .

Security module compares the network browser s current security settings here altered settings with predetermined settings risk table . The security module determines that three security settings are unsafe by comparing the security settings shown in with those of the table shown in . These unsafe security settings are shown in a first unsafe setting a second unsafe setting and a third unsafe setting . The first and second unsafe settings enable download of signed and unsigned ActiveX controls in the Internet zone. The third unsafe setting enables a file if a user gives permission responsive to a prompt to be downloaded in the restricted zone. Based on this determination the security module assigns an unsafe risk for network browser s altered security settings. The security module can assign an unsafe risk to each of the three unsafe settings the zones affected by the unsafe settings Internet zone and restricted zone and the entire set of security settings for the browser.

Block notifies a user of a potential problem by notifying the user that one or more security settings pose a security risk. Block may inform a user without the user s interaction such as responsive to a user starting up the browser e.g. block or an alteration to the browser s security settings e.g. block .

Block can act through user interface of security module to inform a user through various audio and or visual interfaces. Four exemplary visual interfaces are provided below.

Referring to a dialog notification interface or an information bar notification interface notifies a user that a network browser s security settings are at an unsecure level. Interface or informs the user through text at or Your security settings are at an unsecure level. or Your security level is at severe risk. and a graphic warning or . These interfaces may do so responsive to the tools determining that a security setting poses a security risk such as the first second or third unsafe settings and shown in .

Block can provide the notification interface in response to a network browser being started e.g. block . Dialog notification interface comprises an option to ignore the warning and continue startup this is implicit in information bar notification interface . A user can ignore the dialog s warning by selecting ignore control .

Responsive to a user selecting or clicking on the information bar notification interface additional controls are presented with options interface . The options interface and the dialog notification interface enable a user to fix the security problem through a restoration control or proceed to an internet options user interface e.g. interface of by selecting internet options control or or proceed to a help dialog providing security settings information by selecting information control or

Referring to a security settings interface provides information about a network browser s security settings. Block can provide this interface responsive to a user selecting information control or or an alteration to a security setting determined to pose a risk. Here the information about the security settings is oriented into the four zones described previously. The security settings interface informs a user that one or more security settings in the Internet zone and the restricted zone pose a security risk. This is done with graphic warnings . Security module can provide these warnings responsive to determining that two security settings in the Internet zone and of and one security setting in the restricted zone are unsafe.

Security settings interface also enables a user to fix security problems all at once or based on a zone. The user may do so through selecting a restore zone to safe level control or restore all zones to safe level control . Interface also enables a user to proceed to a custom user interface by selecting a zone custom control here marked at . These are discussed in greater detail below.

Referring to a custom security settings interface is shown. Block here user interface can provide this interface responsive to a user s selection to view settings or risks e.g. block such as through a control panel not shown or zone custom control of .

Custom settings interface provides a scrollable list of security settings for the Internet zone. The security settings that pose a security risk are highlighted shown with shading at . These security settings are those noted above as posing a risk namely first and second settings and of . These settings enable download of signed and unsigned ActiveX controls in the Internet zone.

User interface informs the user of the settings that pose the security risk the current setting and or the safe setting. This is shown by example in interface . The settings that pose the risk are marked and corresponding to and of . The current setting is Enable which is shown at and . The safe recommended setting is Disable for downloading signed ActiveX controls indicated at or Prompt also safe but not recommended here indicated at . The recommended and safe setting is Disable for downloading unsigned ActiveX controls indicated at . Interface enables alteration of the settings by selecting buttons such as disable buttons and . Interface also provides a selectable reset settings control to restore settings to a medium security level which is considered safe.

Block enables a user to reduce the security risk. Block can do so through a single user action such as pressing an enter key or clicking on a control. Block can also enable this reduction in security risk by enabling a user to alter security settings one by one or in groups.

In the illustrated interfaces described above user interface enables a user to reduce a network browser s security risk with a single click on control or control control button button or control . By selecting any of the controls or a user may reduce or eliminate a security risk for multiple security settings.

For all three unsafe security settings and block enables the user to reduce or eliminate the risk posed by these settings with a single user action. User interface for instance enables a user to select restoration control or in notification interfaces or respectively restore all to safe control in security settings interface or selectable reset settings control in custom settings interface . For security settings of a particular zone e.g. either and or block enables a user to reduce or eliminate risk by selecting restore zone to safe level control of the security settings interface.

Block alters one or more security settings to reduce a network browser s security risk. Block can do so responsive to a user s interaction such as in response to a user selecting a control to alter security settings to a safe level.

Responsive to the user selecting to make network browser s security settings safe security module changes the security setting of E shown at and in to D and the security setting of P at to D .

The above described tools notify a user of a security risk in a network browser. They may also determine whether there is a security risk and enable a user to reduce this risk. In so doing a user may be able to avoid or cure security risks in his or her network browser that may damage the browser or otherwise comprise his or her computer system. Although the tools have been described in language specific to structural features and or methodological acts it is to be understood that the subject matter defined in the appended claims is not necessarily limited to the specific features or acts described. Rather the specific features and acts are disclosed as exemplary forms of implementing the claimed system method and or computer readable media.

