---

title: System and method for using television information codes
abstract: A system and method for using information codes for recording television programs. Information codes may be published in magazines, newspapers, and the like, much like VCR Plus+™ codes. When a user desires to record one or more television programs based on information codes, the user selects an appropriate command button on his or her input device, and enters the information code that identifies a desired filter category (e.g. an actor filter represented as “01”) followed by a desired filter identifier (e.g. Richard Gere represented as “1234”). A processor receiving the user input searches an electronic program guide database for programs matching the filter information. The identified programs are then stored in a record memory for recording at an appropriate time. The identified programs may be further displayed for verification prior to storage in the record memory. Programs recommended to the viewers may also be identified via information codes.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08806533&OS=08806533&RS=08806533
owner: United Video Properties, Inc.
number: 08806533
owner_city: Santa Clara
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051007
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 617 025 filed on Oct. 8 2004 the content of which is incorporated herein by reference.

This invention relates generally to television systems and more particularly to a system and method for using information codes for recording television programs.

One popular mechanism for recording television programs is via a VCR Plus system developed by the Gemstar Development Corporation. In order to record a television program using a VCR Plus equipped system a user accesses television program listings from a newspaper magazine or web site. If a desired program listing is associated with a VCR Plus PLUSCODE number and the viewer has a video recorder equipped with a VCR Plus system the viewer may enter the PLUSCODE into the video recorder and the video recorder will be programmed to record the selected program when it airs. In this system a PLUSCODE number has encoded in it the channel time date and length for the program associated with the PLUSCODE number. A VCR Plus equipped VCR decodes the PLUSCODE number into the encoded channel date time and length and then uses the channel date time and length to record the program. The VCR Plus system and related technology is described in more detail in U.S. Pat. No. 5 307 173 which is incorporated by reference as if set forth herein in full. Although PLUSCODE numbers greatly facilitate the recording of individual television programs when a viewer wants to record multiple television programs he or she must generally individually enter the PLUSCODE numbers for each desired television program one at a time. There could be however a common characteristic identifying the programs desired to be recorded by the viewer. For example the programs could all have a particular actor share a particular theme or the like. Accordingly there is a need for selecting television programs for recording based on codes that identify particular characteristics of the television programs.

According to one embodiment the present invention is directed to a video recording system that includes a data store storing electronic program guide EPG data for a television program the EPG data including for the television program an associated filter criteria a user input transmitting an information code including a particular filter criteria wherein the particular filter criteria is not human readable from the information code a microprocessor coupled to the data store and the user input the microprocessor receiving and decoding the information code including the particular filter criteria comparing the particular filter criteria in the decoded information code with the filter criteria included in the EPG data for the television program and storing the television program for recording based on the comparison.

According to another embodiment the present invention is directed to a computer implemented method for selecting video programs for recording. The method includes storing electronic program guide EPG data for a television program the EPG data including for the television program an associated filter criteria receiving from a user input an information code including a particular filter criteria wherein the particular filter criteria is not human readable from the information code decoding the received information code comparing the particular filter criteria in the decoded information code with the filter criteria included in the EPG data for the television program and storing the television program for recording based on the comparison.

According to a further embodiment the present invention is directed to a method for recording video programs in a data communications network including a web server hosting a website and a television system including a video recorder coupled to the web server. The method includes displaying information on one or more recommended video programs on the website selecting from the website one or more of the recommended video programs transmitting from the website to the television system a command to record the selected one or more of the recommended video programs the selected one or more of the recommended video programs being identified via one or more information codes and automatically invoking the video recorder to record the selected one or more of the recommended video programs.

In general terms an embodiment of the present invention is directed to a television system configured to search for television programs based on information codes also referred to as filter codes or filters entered by a user. According to one embodiment of the invention information codes are published in newspapers magazines web sites or other places where VCR Plus PLUSCODE numbers would normally be published. Like PLUSCODE numbers information codes may be used to easily program a video recorder to record one or more television programs matching the information codes. Unlike a PLUSCODE number that identifies a single television program based on channel date time and length information however an information code may identify various programs based on an actor program content rating theme category genre program package or the like. For example entry of an information code identifying a particular program package such as for example the Summer Olympics or the World Cup program package may cause the VCR to record all programs in the identified program package without having the user manually program the recording of each television program individually. Information codes are typically numeric or alphanumeric codes that are not human readable. More specifically without having or memorizing a table matching code numbers or letters to categories and category IDs a human would not know what category or category ID are represented by a particular information code.

According to one embodiment of the invention the television system is configured with an electronic program guide EPG database storing EPG data for broadcast television programs video on demand programs and the like collectively referred to as television programs . Such EPG data includes but is not limited to program titles channel information date and time information program descriptions information codes PLUSCODE numbers and the like. Although the EPG database is illustrated as residing in the television a person of skill in the art should recognize that the database and associated program instructions for interacting with the database may reside in any other device associated with the television system.

According to one embodiment of the invention viewer input data is provided to the television system via a viewer input device . The viewer input device may take the form of an IR remote control a keyboard a keypad a joystick a mouse a track ball a touch pad or any other input device conventional in the art.

Many different transmission schemes are available for providing the EPG data to the television system . For example the EPG data may be provided via cable satellite and or over the air OTA broadcast. EPG data may also be provided via coax cables telephone lines fiber optic cables and the like. EPG data may be communicated over private networks point to point connections or public networks like the Internet.

According to the illustrated embodiment the output of the video recorder is connected to the other input of the switch . The output of the switch is connected to one input of a conventional picture in picture PIP integrated circuit chip . The output of the PIP chip is connected to a video input of the television .

The television system also includes a microprocessor coupled to a read only memory ROM and the EPG database . The ROM stores an operating program for controlling the operation of the microprocessor.

According to one embodiment of the invention the EPG database is contained in an updatable memory such as for example a RAM. The EPG data may be updated by a continuous data link in a vertical blanking interval VBI or digital video broadcast data of a television channel broadcast to the television system in a well known fashion or any other manner as discussed above in connection with .

A video processor coupled to the microprocessor controls the display of EPG data on the television . When the viewer wishes to see television program schedule information or information regarding to news sports or local events and businesses the microprocessor recalls a portion of the relevant data from the EPG database and couples it to video processor where the program listings are formatted for display. According to one embodiment of the invention the information stored in video processor is a bit map of what is displayed on the screen of television .

The microprocessor is further coupled to the tuner for channel change to the video recorder for play record selection and start stop to the switch for selection of one of its inputs and to the PIP chip for selection of the mode of PIP operation.

According to one embodiment of the invention the viewer input device controls the microprocessor by cursor movement on the screen of the television . In this regard the microprocessor and video processor are coupled to a cursor position register identifying a cursor position on the screen. According to another embodiment of the invention the viewer input device controls the microprocessor by selection of particular keys on the viewer input device.

According to one embodiment of the invention the television system includes a decoder coupled to the microprocessor for decoding encoded data transmitted by the viewer input device . Such encoded data include PLUSCODE numbers or information codes identifying a type of television program to record. According to one embodiment of the invention the decoder is coupled to a clock allowing the decoding to be a function of the clock. This helps lend a measure of security to the decoding technique and makes it harder for others to replicate the information codes. According to this embodiment the encoding is also a function of a clock. The encoding and decoding of information codes may be performed in a manner similar to the encoding and decoding of PLUSCODE numbers as is described in further detail in U.S. Pat. No. 6 466 734 the content of which is incorporated herein by reference. In one embodiment I codes are also decoded. I codes as described in more detail in the 734 patent do not include an embedded date so that the same I code can be used to record a program broadcast for several days at the same time on the same channel on any of these several days. Thus as long as the I code is entered into the VCR Plus system on any day on which the program is broadcast the VCR Plus system will record the next broadcast of the program during the twenty four hour period following entry of the I code. In one embodiment I codes are distinguished from PLUSCODE numbers G codes by an escape code comprising a single leading zero.

According to one embodiment of the invention the decoder is implemented as a microcontroller with an embedded RAM and ROM not shown for program and table storage. The decoder and or clock may reside in the television video recorder or any other suitable device associated with the television system . In another embodiment instead of using a separate microcontroller for the decoder decoding instructions may be stored in memory already resident in the television system such as for example in the ROM .

According to one embodiment of the invention the EPG data received by the television system is stored in the EPG database as show information package SIP structures. Organization of an EPG database containing SIP structures is described in further detail in WO 99 65242 the content of which is incorporated herein by reference. According to another embodiment of the invention the EPG database may be organized as schedule data structures and theme data structures linked by handles and handle tables as is described in further detail in U.S. Pat. No. 6 002 394 the content of which is incorporated herein by reference.

Following the SIP header are program data blocks that contain information specific to a particular television program. Information contained in each program data block includes for example information for calculating the start time of the television program a duration of the program a title of the program a description of the program and a PLUSCODE number.

In addition to the above the program data block includes filter information used for filtering television programs based on information codes provided by a user. The filter information may include a total number of filters associated with the television program a filter category and a corresponding filter identifier ID for the filter category. The filter category and corresponding filter ID together identify a particular filter associated with the television program.

According to one embodiment of the invention the filter category may indicate an actor filter content rating filter theme filter category filter genre filter program package filter or the like. The filter ID may indicate a particular filter within the filter category . For example Tom Cruise Richard Gere Uma Thurman all belong to an actor filter category. Thus if 01 indicates an actor filter and 1234 indicates Richard Gere a television program containing Richard Gere as an actor may store as a filter category the code 01 and as a corresponding filter identifier the code 1234. 

Following the escape code is a filter category and a filter ID . The filter category and filter ID that are entered by a user as part of an information code are similar to the filter category and filter ID in a SIP structure . In the illustrated embodiment the filter category is an integer between 0 and 9. The filter ID is a combination of one or more integers whose values also range between 0 and 9. A person of skill in the art should recognize that the number of integers used to define the filter category and ID may vary based on the total number of filter categories and IDs to be defined.

In an alternate embodiment the filter category and ID are compressed to form the information. In a process similar to the process for PLUSCODE numbers and I codes filter categories and IDs are each represented in binary numbers with a set number of bits. In one embodiment the filter category is represented by a 7 bit binary number CCCCCCCthat can represent 128 different categories and the category ID is represented by a 22 bit binary number II. IIthat can represent 4 194 304 different category IDs. The most common categories are assigned the lowest numbers having zeros in the most significant bits such as C C. Similarly the most common category IDs are assigned the lowest numbers having zeros in the most significant bits such as I I. The category and category ID bits are then mixed in a predetermined pattern such as II. . . IICICIICICIICICICbefore being converted back into a decimal number that will be 9 decimal digits or less 2 536 870 912 a 9 digit decimal number . A category with a code less than 32 decimal will have zeros in the two most significant bits C C and a category ID with a code less than 256 decimal will have zeros in the 14 most significant bits I I . Thus an information code for a category code less than 32 decimal and a category ID with a code less than 256 decimal will have mixed binary representation with leading zeroes in the most significant 16 bits leaving only 13 bits containing meaningful bits. When this mixed binary number is converted into a decimal number the leading zeroes can be dropped without changing the value of the code and a 13 bit binary number will convert into a decimal number of no more than 4 digits. Thus using the mixed binary number the combinations of the most common categories and category IDs results in information codes with the least number of decimal digits to make entry of the codes easier and reduce input errors.

In another embodiment the information code generated using the mixed binary number or not is encrypted by any known encryption method including but not limited to encryption methods that are time or date dependent.

The encrypted and or mixed binary information codes are decoded in the opposite manner as they are encoded.

The process starts and in step the microprocessor receives a VCR Plus command transmitted by the input device . This may be done for example by the user selecting the VCR Plus button on the input device . If however the input device includes a separate information code button switch or the like the information code button is selected to cause the transmitting of an information code command. For purposes of this example however it is assumed that the user has selected a VCR Plus button.

The microprocessor decodes the VCR Plus command and in response invokes the video processor to display in step an input screen on the television for allowing the user to enter a desired PLUSCODE number or information code. The input screen may display for example underscore characters equal to the total number of code digits expected to be entered by the user. As the user uses the input device to enter the digits of the code each digit is displayed on the portion of the screen marked by the underscore character for visual verification by the user.

The input screen may then prompt the user to select the frequency in which one or more programs matching the code are to be recorded. For example the user may be able to select to record once daily or weekly. Selection of an Enter button on the input device transmits the entered code along with the frequency and other associated information to the microprocessor .

The microprocessor in step receives the entered code and in step invokes the decoder to decode the received code. In step a determination is made as to whether the code includes an escape code. If the answer is NO the code is a PLUSCODE number the PLUSCODE number is decoded into the encoded channel date time and length and information on a program matching the decoded PLUSCODE number information is retrieved in step .

Otherwise if the code includes an escape code the user has entered an information code instead of a PLUSCODE number. If the escape code corresponds to an information code the microprocessor thus proceeds to retrieve in step the filter category and filter ID following the escape code. According to one embodiment of the invention the filter category and filter ID are stored in memory and retrieved for matching upon reception of an EPG signal.

If the escape code corresponds to an I code or other type of codes supported by the VCR Plus system such codes are decoded according to the type of code indicated by the escape code not shown .

In step the microprocessor searches the EPG database or an EPG signal for SIP structures containing a matching filter category and ID and retrieves program information contained in the matching SIP structures. In step information on the retrieved program s is displayed on the television for verification. In this regard the user may review information on the retrieved programs such as for example the program title description time date and length and scroll down the list of programs using the input device to delete programs that he or she does not wish to record.

In step a determination is made as to whether the user is finished with the verification process. The user may indicate that he she is finished by selecting an accept button via the input device. In step the programs accepted by the user are stored in a record memory such as in the RAM. The information stored in the record memory may be for example the dates times and lengths of the programs to be recorded as retrieved from the corresponding SIP structures. The video recorder is then invoked for recording the stored programs at the indicated dates and times for the indicated lengths of time.

According to one embodiment of the invention programs may be recommended to a viewer for recording and or viewing. Such recommendations may be accessible to the viewer over the Internet by accessing a website hosted by the server . One such exemplary website may be the TV Guide website hosted by Gemstar TV Guide International Inc. In this regard the television system is configured to communicate with the server over the cable box satellite box or other input device . The viewer may use the television system to access the website hosted by the server or alternatively may use a personal computer or other computing device for the access.

Regardless of the manner in which the website is accessed the viewer may select to record one or more recommended programs directly from the website and the video recorder may then be programmed to record the selected program s . In this regard one or more information codes are assigned to the recommended programs to identify them for recording. According to one embodiment of the invention each recommended program is assigned a unique information code. This may be achieved for example by using the filter category of the information code to indicate that the program is in a recommended category. Each filter ID may then identify a different recommended program. This allows the viewer to individually select the recommended programs to be recorded.

According to another embodiment of the invention the viewer may record the recommended programs based on their themes or categories. This may be achieved for example by using the escape code portion of the information code to designate the programs to be recorded as being recommended programs. For example escape code 11 may be used to indicate that the codes that follow are codes for recommended programs. The numbers following the escape code may then be associated with a filter category and filter ID to allow programs having the same category or theme to be identified with the same information code. Alternatively no separate escape code may be used to distinguish the recording of recommended programs.

According to a further embodiment of the invention all currently recommended programs are assigned one information code. Upon providing this one information code all the currently recommended programs are selected by the television system for recording.

In order to program the video recorder to record one or more of the recommended programs the viewer selects a record option from the website and identifies one or more information

codes of the program s to be recorded. The record command along with one or more information codes associated with the selected program s are transmitted to the television system . The microprocessor included in the television system processes the information code s for recording the associated program s as is described above with respect to .

According to one embodiment of the invention the recommendations may also be provided in printed form in newspapers or magazines. The recommendations may further be transmitted to the television system on a periodic basis by for example a head end or broadcasting center. The recommendations may be stored in the EPG database and displayed on the EPG guide when the user indicates he or she wishes to view the recommendations. According to one embodiment of the invention the recommendations are customized based on view preference information.

Although this invention has been described in certain specific embodiments those skilled in the art will have no difficulty devising variations to the described embodiment which in no way depart from the scope and spirit of the present invention. Moreover to those skilled in the various arts the invention itself herein will suggest solutions to other tasks and adaptations for other applications. It is the applicants intention to cover by claims all such uses of the invention and those changes and modifications which could be made to the embodiments of the invention herein chosen for the purpose of disclosure without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. Thus the present embodiments of the invention should be considered in all respects as illustrative and not restrictive the scope of the invention to be indicated by the appended claims and their equivalents rather than the foregoing description.

