---

title: Information processing method
abstract: An information processing apparatus, an information processing method and a computer-readable medium for use with a virtual reality environment are provided. The information processing apparatus includes a sensing-area setting means for setting an area used to sense information on objects, and a transmission-area setting means for setting an area used for transmitting information on an object. The transmission area may be set wider than the sensing area. Thus, according to the present invention, information on an object can be reported to another object located at a remote position with a higher degree of reliability.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=06982709&OS=06982709&RS=06982709
owner: Sony Corporation
number: 06982709
owner_city: Tokyo
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050412
---
The present application is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 389 803 filed on Sep. 3 1999 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 933 938 the disclosure of which is herein incorporated by reference.

In general the present invention relates to an information processing apparatus an information processing method and a presentation medium. More particularly the present invention relates to an information processing apparatus an information processing method and a presentation medium which allow information on an application object abbreviated hereafter to an AO in a 3 dimensional virtual space to be reported to an avatar.

In a 3 dimensional virtual space on the Internet a plurality of objects are provided with information on a position and a Dive system is known as a system which allows the objects to share the information on position. Details of the Dive system are described in a reference entitled DIVE A Platform for Multi user Virtual Environments authored by C. Carlsson and O. Hagsand 18 6 Computers and Graphics pages 633 669 1993 .

In the Dive system however the information is shared among all objects existing in the world so that as the number of objects rises there is raised a problem of an increased number of messages an increased amount of information exchanged among the objects.

In order to solve this problem an area referred to as an aura is defined for each object. An aura is a spatial area perceivable by an object defined for each object in which the object is capable of sensing other objects. Since only objects placed in the same area share information the amount of information shared by objects can be suppressed even if the number of objects existing in the world increases. Details of this aura technique are described in a reference entitled Virtual Society Extending the WWW to Support a Multi user Interactive Shared 3D Environment authored by Yasuaki Honda et al. Proceedings of VRML 95 pages 109 to 116 ACM Press 1995 . Details of the aura concept are described in a reference entitled A Spatial Model of Interaction in Large Virtual Environments authored by S. Benford and L. Fahlen in September 1993 in proceedings of G. DeMichelis et al. Eds. presented to a Third European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work pages 109 to 124 Kluwer Academic Publishers .

By the way an AO application object also exists in a 3 dimensional virtual space. An AO is a program having a variety of additional functions in the 3 dimensional virtual space. The program is executed on an AO server.

In the technique utilizing the aura as described above however when acertain object including an avatar wants to sense an AO such as a clock tower which is far away from the object there is raised a problem that the object is not capable of sensing the AO if the AO is located outside the aura of the object.

The present invention allows information of an AO in a 3 dimensional virtual space to be reported to an avatar. According to one aspect of the present invention there is provided an information processing apparatus for management of information on objects placed in a 3 dimensional virtual space the information processing apparatus including a sensing area setting means for setting a sensing area used for a sensing object to sense information on one or more sensed objects within the sensing area and a transmission area setting means for setting a transmission area used for a transmitting object to transmit information to one or more receiving objects within the transmission area.

According to another aspect of the present invention there is provided an information processing method for management of information on objects placed in a 3 dimensional virtual space the information processing method including the steps of setting a sensing area used for a sensing object to sense information on one or more sensed objects within the sensing area and setting a transmission area used for a transmitting object to transmit information to one or more receiving objects within the transmission area.

According to a further aspect of the present invention there is provided a computer readable medium for presenting a program executable by a computer to operate an information processing apparatus for management of information on objects placed in a 3 dimensional virtual space the program to carry out processing including the steps of setting a sensing area used for a sensing object to sense information on one or more sensed objects within the sensing area and setting a transmission area used for a transmitting object to transmit information to one or more receiving objects within the transmission area.

According to the present invention the transmission area may be set wider than the sensing area. This allows information on an object to be reported to another object located at a remote position with a higher degree of reliability.

A better understanding of the features and advantages of the present invention will be obtained by reference to the following detailed description and accompanying drawings which set forth illustrative embodiments in which the principles of the invention are utilized.

Additional features and advantages of the present invention are described in and will be apparent from the following Detailed Description of the Invention and the figures.

As shown in client PCs personal computers to are connected to the Internet through IPs Internet connection service providers to respectively. In each of the client PCs to a VRML browser and a WWW browser are installed and ready to be operated.

The client PCs to each have two functions namely a 3D client function and a 2D client function. The function for a 3D client is used to notify a shared server periodically or if necessary of data such as information on the location of the client PC to receive information shared by other 3D objects from the shared server supplied thereto and to display the information. On the other hand the function for a 2D client is executed to transmit a request for information to a WWW server in accordance with an HTTP to receive a response to the request from the WWW server and to display mainly 2 dimensional information. When a URL is included in information received from the shared server the 3D client issues a request for an access to the URL to the 2D client. At this request the 2D client makes an access to the URL in actuality to the WWW server to download data such as the shape of an object and forward the data to the 3D client.

A LAN Local Area Network is connected to the Internet through a router . Connected to the LAN are the WWW server a WLS World Location Server the shared server AO Application Object servers and a mail server and a communication server . The WWW server has hard discs HDDs and whereas the other servers to have HDDs to respectively.

It should be noted that the AO server has a program for communicating with the shared server to present for example an application object AO such as a robot or an electronic pet which moves autonomously in a virtual space. Much like the 3D client function the AO server communicates with the shared server to report information on itself and to receive information shared by other 3D objects.

The communication server is connected to a telephone or a facsimile through a public telephone line network and is radio connected to a PHS Personal Handyphone System terminal through a PHS service provider and to a pocket bell terminal through a pager service provider .

Connected to a microphone as well as right and left speakers and a sound processing circuit inputs a sound from the microphone or outputs sounds such as music and sound effects to the speakers and . A modem or other interface device connected to the Internet is used for exchanging data with the Internet . An UO input output interface receives operation signals from a mouse and a keyboard . A graphics circuit includes an embedded VRAM for storing picture data completing various kinds of processing. The graphics circuit reads out data from the VRAM outputting the data to a CRT monitor .

A WWW browser such as Netscape Navigator a Java interpreter and the Community Place Browser are loaded into a RAM to be executed by the CPU . Netscape Navigator is a WWW browser running under the Windows 95 a trademark of Microsoft Corp. and the Community Place Browser is a VRML2.0 browser developed by Sony Corporation the assignee of the present application.

The VRML 2.0 browser implements QvLib which is a library or a parser for interpreting the VRML syntax developed and gratuitously released by Silicon Graphics Inc. and RenderWare which is a software renderer developed by Criterion Software Ltd. UK or a parser and a renderer having capabilities equivalent to those of QvLib and RenderWare respectively.

As shown in the Community Place Browser exchanges various kinds of data with the Netscape Navigator serving as a WWW browser in accordance with a NCAPI Netscape Client Application Programming Interface a trademark . The Netscape Navigator browser receives an HTML file and VRML contents including a VRML file and a script program written in the Java language transmitted by the WWW server by way of the Internet storing the HTML file and the VRML contents in the local HDD . The Netscape Navigator browser processes the HTML file displaying a text and a picture obtained as a result of the processing on a CRT monitor . On the other hand the Community Place Browser processes the VRML file to display a 3 dimensional virtual space on the CRT monitor and changes behaviors of objects in the 3 dimensional virtual space and other display states in accordance with a result of execution of the script program by the Java interpreter.

It should be noted that the other client PC and PC each have the same configuration as the client PC even though the configurations of the PC and PC are not shown explicitly in the figure. Next the operation of the embodiment described above is explained by referring to . In the state shown in first of all a homepage on a web site providing VRML contents is browsed by using the WWW browser as shown by reference number A. In this example the homepage is accessed at . Then the user of the client PC or PC downloads VRML contents including a VRML 2.0 file and a script program written in the Java language to enable autonomous motions in a VRML space as shown by reference number A. It is needless to say that VRML contents can also be obtained by letting the CD ROM drive read out the contents from the CD ROM disc .

Then the Community Place Browser serving as a VRML 2.0 browser in the client PC or PC interprets and executes the VRML 2.0 file downloaded and temporarily stored in the local HDD as shown in and as indicated by reference number A an inquiry about the URL of the shared server is transmitted to the WLS in accordance with a VSCP Virtual Society Server Client Protocol . Upon receiving the inquiry the WLS searches a shared server URL management table stored in the HDD for the URL inquired and transmits the URL of the shared sever to the client PC or in response to the inquiry as indicated by reference number A. The URL thus found is used to connect the client PC and to the shared server as shown in . As a result a shared message on attributes of a shared 3D object such as the position and the motion thereof is transmitted by way of the shared server as indicated by reference number AS and the shared message is forwarded to other client PC as indicated by reference number A. In this way a multi user environment is implemented.

For a detailed description of the above connection procedure refer to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 08 678 340. While the 3 dimensional virtual space is used under a multi user environment in this case the 3 dimensional virtual space may be used under an environment other than a multi user environment as well. That is to say the 3 dimensional virtual space may be used under an environment which is referred to hereafter as a single user environment for the sake of convenience. In a single user environment the avatar of another user is not allowed to appear in the 3 dimensional virtual space and the avatar of the user herself himself is not allowed to appear in the 3 dimensional virtual space of the client PC of a user other than this particular user initiating the pieces of processing indicated by reference numbers A and A. For the sake of convenience the avatar of another user and the avatar of the particular user are referred to as a drawn avatar and a pilot avatar respectively. In order to establish a single user environment it is not necessary to carry out the pieces of processing indicated by reference numbers A to A.

Next an aura is explained by referring to . As shown in the figure an aura with a spherical shape having a predetermined radius is formed around a pilot avatar with the center of the sphere coinciding with pilot avatar . The pilot avatar is capable of receiving information from another object located inside the aura . That is to say the pilot avatar is capable of visually recognizing a drawn avatar and an application object AO which are located inside the aura . To put it concretely the pictures of the drawn avatar and the object are displayed on the CRT monitor of the client PC of the pilot avatar . However the pilot avatar is capable of visually recognizing neither a drawn avatar nor an application object AO which are located outside the aura . To put it concretely the pictures of the drawn avatar and the object are not displayed on the CRT monitor of the client PC of the pilot avatar .

By the same token an aura is also set for each of the other objects namely the drawn avatar and the object the drawn avatar and the object . In this system the size of each aura is uniform for all client PCs. It should be noted however that the aura of an AO can be set with a size different from the aura of the avatar if necessary. Furthermore the use of a spherical aura is merely for convenience and an irregularly shaped aura may be used if so desired. With the aura prescribed as described above it becomes necessary for the pilot avatar to acquire information from the drawn avatar and the object but not from the drawn avatar and the object which are located outside the aura . The amount of information to be received can thus be reduced.

Consider an example shown in . When the avatar moves information on its new position is transmitted to the shared server . Upon receiving the information on the new position of the avatar the shared server identifies what objects including avatars are located inside the aura centered at the new position of the avatar and transmits information on the objects to the client PC of the avatar . In the example shown in since an object is identified as an object located inside the aura centered at the new position of the avatar after its movement the shared server transmits information on the object to the client PC of the avatar . Upon receiving the information on the object the client PC of the avatar displays the picture of the object allowing the user of the avatar to visually recognize the object . If a large number of objects exist in the world the virtual space there may also be many objects located inside the aura increasing the amount of information to be received. In order to prevent the amount of information to be received from exceeding what is really required a maximum number of objects in an aura that can be visually recognized by the avatar of the aura is set in advance to be controlled by the shared server . As a result only information on a number of objects not exceeding the selected maximum is transmitted.

For example assume that the maximum number of objects in the aura that can be visually recognized by the avatar is set at two and there are three or more objects located inside the aura . In this case only two objects that are included first or at earliest times are taken into account. That is to say information on the third and subsequent objects entered the aura after the second one are not reported to the avatar . The maximum number of objects in the aura that can be visually recognized by the avatar is set in advance at a value predetermined by among other limiting factors a restriction on resources in the client PC for the avatar and a limit on a transmission bandwidth of a network between the client PC and the shared server . It should be noted however that the maximum number of objects in the aura that can be visually recognized by the avatar may exclude AOs application objects moving autonomously in the world. Thus the avatar is always capable of visually recognizing such an AO even if the number of objects included in the aura has already reached the maximum.

By the way if a maximum limit value is imposed on the number of objects in an aura that can be visually recognized by the avatar of the aura as described above it will be quite within the bounds of possibility that imposition of such a limit results in a state of mismatching that is a state in which the avatar of the aura is not capable of visually recognizing another avatar in spite of the fact that the other avatar is capable of visually recognizing the avatar of the aura. The state of mismatching cited above is exemplified by the following case. Assume that an avatar enters an aura of an avatar after avatars and have already been included in the aura as shown in . In this case the avatar visually recognizes the avatar due to the fact that the avatar is the only avatar in an aura of the avatar . On the other hand the avatar is not capable of visually recognizing the avatar due to the fact that when the avatar enters the aura the maximum number of avatars that can be recognized by the avatar in the aura has been reached by the existence of the two other avatars and in the aura . Thus when the third avatar newly enters the aura the avatar count exceeds the maximum number 2 making the avatar incapable of visually recognizing the third avatar . As a result the avatar is not capable of visually recognizing the other avatar in spite of the fact that the other avatar is capable of visually recognizing the avatar . Thus for example the avatar is capable of requesting the avatar to have a chat with the avatar but the avatar is not capable of accepting the request for the chat made by the avatar .

In order to avoid such a state of mismatching the system is designed so that if the avatar is capable of visually recognizing the avatar the avatar is also made capable of visually recognizing the newly entering avatar even in a state in which the presence of the avatar causes the avatar count in the aura to exceed the maximum value thereof. It is thus possible to avoid a state of mismatching in which a specific avatar in an aura is not capable of visually recognizing another avatar in the aura in spite of the fact that the other avatar is capable of visually recognizing the specific avatar. So far a reception aura of an avatar has been mainly explained. Next a transmission aura of an AO provided by the present invention is described by referring to . In this system while only a reception aura is set for an avatar reception and transmission auras are set for an AO. As shown in a reception aura and a transmission aura having a radius larger than that of the reception aura are set for an AO . The transmission aura is capable of informing an avatar existing at a farther location of information on the AO . Note that transmission may also occur within the reception aura . A reception aura of an avatar has a radius equal to the reception aura . If desired the reception aura may have a radius different from that of the reception aura . Without setting the transmission aura that is with only the reception aura set for the AO the avatar will not be capable of sensing the AO which is a clock tower in this example since the AO is located outside the reception aura of the avatar . By setting also the transmission aura having a radius greater than that of the reception aura however it is more positively within the bounds of possibility that the avatar is located inside the transmission aura even if the avatar is far away from the AO so that the avatar is capable of sensing the AO .

The flow of the processing then goes on to a step S in which the shared server carries out inclusion detection processing. In the processing the shared server forms a judgment as to whether or not another object gets newly included in the reception aura of the avatar due to the movement of the avatar . In the processing the shared server also forms a judgment as to whether or not the avatar enters the auras of other objects such as the AO due to the movement of the avatar . The formation of the judgment at the step S is explained by referring to flowcharts shown in as follows. As shown in the flowchart begins with a step S in which the shared server selects an object from those in the set B of the avatar as an object X. The flow of the processing then goes on to a step S in which the shared server forms a judgment as to whether or not all objects in the set B of the avatar have completed the subsequent processing following step S If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that all objects in the set B of the avatar have not yet completed the subsequent processing the flow of the processing goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server forms a judgment as to whether the transmission aura area of the object X is valid or invalid. If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the transmission aura area of the object X is invalid the flow of the processing goes on to a step S. At the step S the shared server forms a judgment as to whether or not the object X is still included in the reception aura area of the avatar after the movement of the avatar . If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the object X is no longer included in the reception aura area of the avatar the flow of the processing goes on to a step S. At the step S the shared server deletes the object X from the set B of the avatar and deletes the avatar from the set A of the object X since the object X is no longer in the reception aura area of the avatar . That is to say the shared sever updates the shared object management tables see of the avatar and the object X. After the shared object management tables have been updated at the step S the flow of the processing goes back to the step S to repeat the processing described so far. It should be noted that if the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the object X is still included in the reception aura area of the avatar on the other hand it is not necessary to delete the object X from the set B of the avatar nor the avatar from the set A of the object X. In this case the flow of the processing goes back to the step S skipping the processing of the step S.

If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the transmission aura area of the object X is valid on the other hand the flow of the processing goes on to a step S. At the step S the shared server forms a judgment as to whether or not the avatar is still included in the transmission aura area of the object X after the movement of the avatar . If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the avatar is no longer included in the transmission aura area of the object X the flow of the processing goes on to the step S in which the shared sever updates the shared object management tables as described above. After the shared object management tables have been updated at the step S the flow of the processing goes back to the step S to repeat the processing described so far. It should be noted that if the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the avatar is still included in the transmission aura area of the object X on the other hand it is not necessary to update the shared object management tables. In this case the flow of the processing goes back to the step S skipping the processing of the step S.

Thereafter the pieces of processing of the steps S to S are carried out repeatedly as long as the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that all the objects in the set B of the avatar have not yet been selected. When all objects in the set B of the avatar have been selected the flow of the processing goes on to a step S. At the step S the shared server selects an object from those in the set A of the avatar as an object X. The flow of the processing then goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server forms a judgment as to whether or not all objects in the set A of the avatar have completed the processing steps following step S. If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that all objects in the set A of the avatar have not yet completed the subsequent processing the flow of the processing goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server forms a judgment as to whether the transmission aura area of the avatar is valid or invalid. If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the transmission aura area of the object X is invalid the flow of the processing goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server forms a judgment as to whether or not the avatar is still included in the reception aura area of the object X after the movement of the avatar . If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the avatar is no longer included in the reception aura area of the object X the flow of the processing goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server deletes the avatar from the set B of the object X and deletes the object X from the set A of the avatar since the avatar is no longer in the reception aura area of the object X. That is to say the shared sever updates the shared object management tables see for the object X and the avatar . After the shared object management tables have been updated at the step S the flow of the processing goes back to the step S to repeat the processing described so far.

It should be noted that if the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the avatar is still included in the reception aura area of the object X on the other hand it is not necessary to delete the avatar from the set B of the object X and delete the object X from the set A of the avatar . In this case the flow of the processing goes back to the step S skipping the processing of the step S.

If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the transmission aura area of the avatar is valid on the other hand the flow of the processing goes on to a step S. At the step S the shared server forms a judgment as to whether or not the object X is still included in the transmission aura area of the avatar after the movement of the avatar . If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the object X is not included in the transmission aura area of the avatar anymore the flow of the processing goes on to the step S in which the shared sever updates the shared object management tables as described above. After the shared object management tables have been updated at the step S the flow of the processing goes back to the step S to repeat the processing described so far. It should be noted that if the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the object X is still included in the transmission aura area of the avatar on the other hand it is not necessary to update the shared object management tables. In this case the flow of the processing goes back to the step S skipping the processing of the step S.

Thereafter the pieces of processing of the steps S to S are carried out repeatedly as long as the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that objects in the set A of the avatar have not yet all completed the subsequent processing. When all objects in the set A of the avatar have completed the subsequent processing the flow of departure detection processing is terminated and the flow of processing goes back to the step S of the flowchart shown in .

As shown in the flowchart begins with a step S in which the shared server selects an object from those in the shared object management table as an object X. The flow of the processing then goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server forms a judgment as to whether or not all objects in the shared object management table have completed the subsequent processing. If all objects in the shared object management table have not yet completed the subsequent processing the flow of the processing then goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server forms a judgment as to whether or not the object X is the avatar itself. If the object X is the avatar itself the flow of the processing goes back to the step S. If the object X is not the avatar itself on the other hand the flow of the processing goes on to a step S. At the step S the shared server forms a judgment as to whether the transmission aura area of the object X is valid or invalid. If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the transmission aura area of the object X is invalid the flow of the processing goes on to a step S. At the step S the shared server finds out if information in the shared object management table indicates that the avatar is not aware of the object X and forms a judgment as to whether or not the object X is actually located in the reception aura area of the avatar after the movement of the avatar . If the information in the shared object management table shows that the avatar is not aware of the object X but the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the object X was included in the reception aura area of the avatar after the movement of the avatar the flow of the processing goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server adds the object X to the set B of the avatar and adds the avatar to the set A of the object X in the shared object management tables since the object X is now included in the reception aura area of the avatar due to the movement of the avatar . The flow of the processing then goes on to a step S.

If the information in the shared object management table shows that the avatar is aware of the object X or the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the object X is not included in the reception aura area of the avatar after the movement of the avatar on the other hand the flow of the processing goes on to the step S skipping the processing of the step S since updating is not required. The flow of the processing from the step S to the step S skipping the step S may represent a case in which the object X has been excluded from the reception aura area of the avatar due to the movement of the avatar .

If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the transmission aura area of the object X is valid on the other hand the flow of the processing goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server finds out if information in the shared object management table indicates that the avatar is not aware of the object X and forms a judgment as to whether or not the avatar has entered the transmission aura area of the object X after the movement of the avatar . If the information in the shared object management table shows that the avatar is not aware of the object X but the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the avatar has entered the transmission aura area of the object X after the movement of the avatar the flow of the processing goes on to the step S to update the shared object management table as described above. If the information in the shared object management table shows that the avatar is aware of the object X or the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the avatar is not in the transmission aura area of the object X after the movement of the avatar on the other hand the flow of the processing goes on to the step S skipping the processing of the step S since updating is not required. The flow of the processing from the step S to the step S skipping the step S may represent a case in which the avatar has departed from the transmission aura area of the object X due to the movement of the avatar .

At the step S the shared server forms a judgment as to whether the transmission aura area of the avatar is valid or invalid. If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the transmission aura area of the avatar is invalid the flow of the processing goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server finds out if information in the shared object management table indicates that the object X is not aware of the avatar and forms a judgment as to whether or not the avatar has actually entered the reception aura area of the object X after the movement of the object X. If the information in the shared object management table shows that the object X is not aware of the avatar but the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the avatar has entered the reception aura area of the object X after the movement of the object X the flow of the processing goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server adds the avatar to the set B of the object X and adds the object X to the set A of the avatar in the shared object management tables since the avatar is now included in the reception aura area of the object X due to the movement of the avatar . The flow of the processing then goes back to the step S.

If the information in the shared object management table shows that the object X is aware of the avatar or the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the avatar is not included in the reception aura area of the object X after the movement of the avatar on the other hand the flow of the processing goes back to the step S skipping the processing of the step S since updating is not required. The flow of the processing from the step S back to the step S skipping the step S may represent a case in which the avatar has departed from the reception aura area of the object X due to the movement of the avatar .

If the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the transmission aura area of the avatar is valid on the other hand the flow of the processing goes on to a step S.

At the step S the shared server finds out if information in the shared object management table indicates that the object X is not aware of the avatar and forms a judgment as to whether or not the object X is actually located in the transmission aura area of the avatar after the movement of the avatar . If the information in the shared object management table shows that the object X is not aware of the avatar but the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the object X has entered the transmission aura area of the avatar after the movement of the avatar the flow of the processing goes on to the step S to update the shared object management table as described above. If the information in the shared object management table shows that the object X is aware of the avatar or the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that the object X is not in the transmission aura area of the avatar after the movement of the avatar on the other hand the flow of the processing goes back to the step S skipping the processing of the step S since updating is not required. The flow of the processing from the step S back to the step S skipping the step S may represent a case in which the object X has been excluded from the transmission aura area of the avatar due to the movement of the avatar .

The pieces of processing in the steps S to S are carried out repeatedly as long as the outcome of the judgment formed at the step S indicates that all the objects in the shared object management table have not yet completed the subsequent processing. When all objects in the shared object management table have completed the subsequent processing the flow of the processing is terminated and goes back to the calling program.

It should be noted that a computer program to be executed for carrying out the various kinds of processing described above may be presented to the user in computer readable form through presentation media which can be network presentation media such as a network or information recording media such as a CD R a CD ROM or a floppy disc. As an alternative the program can be stored in an embedded RAM or a hard disc if necessary.

It should be understood that various changes and modifications to the presently preferred embodiments described herein will be apparent to those skilled in the art. Such changes and modifications can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention and without diminishing its intended advantages. It is therefore intended that such changes and modifications be covered by the appended claims.

