---

title: Dispatch communication forwarding
abstract: Systems and methods for forwarding dispatch communications are provided. A dispatch communication forwarding request is sent to a dispatch processor or a dispatch communication forwarding server. A record associated with the dispatch station initiating the dispatch communication forwarding request is updated in a home location register to indicate that dispatch communications intended for the dispatch station should be forwarded to another dispatch station. The communication forwarding can be absolute such that all communications intended for one dispatch station are forwarded to another dispatch station. Alternatively, the communication forwarding can be conditional such that all dispatch communications meeting certain criteria intended for one dispatch station are forwarded to another dispatch station.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07991389&OS=07991389&RS=07991389
owner: Nextel Communications Inc.
number: 07991389
owner_city: Reston
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051222
---
This application claims priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 to U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 638 194 filed Dec. 23 2004 the entire disclosure of which is herein expressly incorporated by reference.

Wireless communications systems such as cellular communication systems typically provide interconnect and or dispatch voice communication services. Interconnect voice communication services are those typically provided by most wireless carriers as circuit switched communications. Dispatch communication services are commonly known as a push to talk PTT or walkie talkie type of communication such as Sprint Nextel Corporation s service identified by the trade name Direct Connect.

While wireless interconnect voice communication networks have typically been implemented with services similar to those provided by wireline voice communication networks wireless dispatch communication networks typically have not provided many services provided by wireline voice communication networks. For example while voice mail has been available in wireless interconnect and wireline voice networks voice mail has not been made available in dispatch communication networks. Implementing services typically provided in wireless interconnect and wireline voice networks require changes to network elements and procedures of dispatch communication networks.

Systems and methods for forwarding dispatch communications are provided. A dispatch communication forwarding request is sent to a dispatch processor or a dispatch communication forwarding server. A record associated with the dispatch station initiating the dispatch communication forwarding request is updated in a home location register to indicate that dispatch communications intended for the dispatch station should be forwarded to another dispatch station.

The dispatch communication forwarding can be absolute such that all communications intended for one dispatch station are forwarded to another dispatch station. Alternatively the communication forwarding can be conditional such that all dispatch communications meeting certain criteria intended for one dispatch station are forwarded to another dispatch station. The dispatch communication forwarding allows a person with multiple stations such as personal and work dispatch stations to forward dispatch communications between the multiple stations in accordance with certain variable criteria such as forwarding dispatch communication from the personal dispatch station to the work dispatch station during the week and then carry the personal dispatch station on the weekends without receiving work communications.

Other objects advantages and novel features of the present invention will become apparent from the following detailed description of the invention when considered in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

Dispatch communications have typically been provided in both private and public networks. Private dispatch networks typically cover very limited geographic areas e.g. a city or a portion of a city support a limited number of dispatch stations and have a relatively simple network infrastructure. In contrast public networks that provide dispatch communications typically cover large geographic areas e.g. portions of one or more states support a far larger number of dispatch stations and involve a more complex network infrastructure. The more complex infrastructure of public networks compared to private networks is due in part to the mobility e.g. the ability to move between wireless sites in different geographic areas provided by public networks. This mobility is provided using home location registers and visitor location registers. In addition compared to private networks that typically only support dispatch communications public networks can support both dispatch and interconnect communications.

One type of public network which provides interconnect and dispatch communications is the iDEN network such as that owned and operated by Sprint Nextel Communications Corp. of Reston Va. Accordingly in an iDEN network the dispatch processor would be a dispatch application processor DAP and the HLR would be an iDEN HLR iHLR . Implementing dispatch communication forwarding in the iDEN network requires the DAP and VLR to recognize a new call type i.e. the dispatch communication forwarding call type.

Assume that a user of dispatch station wants to have dispatch communications forwarded to dispatch station . The user of dispatch station accesses a graphical user interface GUI on the dispatch station to provide an identifier of dispatch station . In the iDEN network dispatch identifiers are known as Universal Fleet Mobile Identifiers UFMIs . The identifier of dispatch station is provided in a dispatch communication forwarding request to dispatch processor . The dispatch communication forwarding request can be provided over a random access channel RACH traffic channel TCH or any other uplink wireless channel. Alternatively or additionally the identifier of dispatch station can be provided via an interactive voice response service to an operator using a computer e.g. by accessing a web page and or the like.

Dispatch processor sends the request for dispatch communication forwarding to HLR using for example mobile application part MAP protocol. HLR updates its records for the subscriber to indicate that dispatch communications destined for mobile station should be forwarded to dispatch station . The dispatch communication forwarding information may also be stored in dispatch processor because dispatch communications between dispatch stations supported by the same dispatch processor may not result in a query to the HLR.

Assume that dispatch station initiates a dispatch communication to dispatch station . Dispatch processor receives the dispatch communication request and access records for dispatch station which are either stored in the dispatch processor or are obtained from HLR . Using the records for dispatch station the dispatch processor determines an identifier for dispatch station and forwards the dispatch communication request to dispatch station .

After the HLR has updated its own records HLR can distribute the dispatch communication forwarding information to the dispatch processor . Alternatively or additionally the information can be forwarded to dispatch processor when the dispatch processor receives a dispatch communication intended for dispatch station and requests information associated with dispatch station from HLR . The dispatch communication forwarding server can also forward the information related to the dispatch communication forwarding request directly to the dispatch processor .

The dispatch communication forwarding can be absolute or conditional. An absolute dispatch communication forwarding forwards all dispatch communications to the forwarded dispatch station. A conditional dispatch communication forwarding forwards dispatch communications which match predefined criteria to the forwarded dispatch station. These criteria can include calling dispatch station identifier time of day day of the week communication type e.g. call alerts private calls group calls and selective dynamic group calls and or the like.

Although the dispatch communication forwarding has been described in connection with forwarding only communications for a single dispatch station to another dispatch station the present invention can also forward dispatch communications for a number of dispatch stations to the same dispatch station. This may be useful for example when a group is traveling together and each member does not want to carry a separate dispatch station. This would allow one member of the group to carry a dispatch station and communications to the other dispatch stations will be forwarded to the dispatch station carried by the one member of the group.

Although the present invention has been described in connection with an iDEN network the present invention is equally applicable to any type of network which supports dispatch communications.

The foregoing disclosure has been set forth merely to illustrate the invention and is not intended to be limiting. Since modifications of the disclosed embodiments incorporating the spirit and substance of the invention may occur to persons skilled in the art the invention should be construed to include everything within the scope of the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

