---

title: Induced sludge bed anaerobic reactor
abstract: An induced sludge bed anaerobic reactor includes a vessel in which a septum or other partition is positioned to maintain solids in wastewater being treated toward a lower zone in the reactor. A gas trap, which may also comprise an overpressure protection device, may be arranged at an outlet of the vessel. A distribution plate may be located at an inlet. A central aperture is formed in the septum into which a plug control mechanism, such as an auger, may be positioned to force solids to the lower zone of the reactor or, alternatively, pull solids up above the septum so that they can be removed from the vessel, if desired. A mixer may be utilized in connection with the bioreactor to mix the contents and prevent a crust from forming at the top of the bioreactor. Still further, a wall may be positioned to extend above the septum around its perimeter to assist in separating solids from the wastewater. The various types of bacteria used in the anaerobic process may also be separated, according to the present invention, in either a single vessel or multiple vessels so that the conditions of each respective vessel can be altered as desired.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07452467&OS=07452467&RS=07452467
owner: Utah State University
number: 07452467
owner_city: North Logan
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051110
---
This is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 155 283 filed 17 Jun. 2005 now abandoned which is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 325 634 filed Dec. 18 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 911 149 which claims priority under 35 U.S.C 119 e from U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 343 017 filed on 19 Dec. 2001 entitled Induced Sludge Bed Anaerobic Reactor. 

This invention was supported in part by the United States Government under Grant 68 3A75 3 153 USDA NRCS . The U.S. Government may have an interest in this application.

The invention disclosed herein was made under a joint development agreement between Andigen a Utah limited Liability Company and Utah State University an institution of higher education.

This invention relates to anaerobic digestion of wastewater. More particularly this invention relates to processes and devices to induce and control a sludge bed within an anaerobic reactor to enhance and improve the anaerobic digestion process.

Wastewater treatment has always been important particularly in agricultural production and food processing which produces wastewater containing high concentrations of organic matter.

Anaerobic digestion is one traditional method of treating wastewater containing high concentrations of organic matter. Through anaerobic digestion large quantities of organic matter are removed from the wastewater by converting the organic matter into biogas. Anaerobic digestion is particularly suitable for wastewater containing high concentrations of organics such as wastewater generated through agricultural production and processing.

Inducing a sludge blanket or sludge bed the terms bed and blanket are used interchangeably throughout this disclosure has long been recognized as a way to promote anaerobic digestion. A sludge blanket is used to retain anaerobic bacteria in a designated space. One prior method of establishing such a sludge bed is to utilize a so called upflow anaerobic sludge blanket UASB which causes a sludge blanket to form over time inside a bioreactor. There are many problems however with respect to prior UASBs. For example it may take an extended period of time before the sludge blanket forms in a UASB. Traditional UASB bioreactors further do not have a method for controlling the formation of a sludge blanket within the reactor such that the sludge blanket may become too thick or otherwise less effective to carry out anaerobic digestion. Perhaps the biggest problem with traditional UASB bioreactors relates to plugging which can be particularly problematic when treating wastewater containing significant amounts of solids such as animal wastewater.

Still others have developed bioreactors wherein relatively high concentrations of bacteria are maintained by adding fixed media such as plastic rings or rocks which provide locations to which the bacteria can attach. Unfortunately these prior types of bioreactors also plug often when treating substrates like animal manure and various kinds of food processing wastes.

There is a need therefore to provide a bioreactor that quickly forms a sludge blanket within the bioreactor. There is also a need to provide a bioreactor that can control the density of the sludge blanket to keep the bioreactor from plugging.

Still another need exists to provide a bioreactor that has the ability to separate the various types of bacteria needed for the anaerobic breakdown of organics by forming gradients in a single sludge blanket reactor by providing separate tanks for the various stages of anaerobic digestion. Yet another need exists to provide a bioreactor that includes a device to assist in separating settling solids from the liquid or wastewater in which the settling solids are suspended. Another need exists recirculate any solids that do not break down and to prevent effluent exiting the bioreactor from plugging. Another need exists to protect against overpressure of produced biogas.

The present invention relates to methods and apparatus for inducing and controlling a sludge blanket within an anaerobic reactor. In one embodiment a rigid or semi rigid partition or septum is positioned inside an enclosed bioreactor vessel. The septum tends to hold solids down or at least contain solid particles in the bottom zone of the bioreactor. The partition or septum may slope upwardly from the sides of the vessel toward a central aperture or hole so that biogas produced below the partition can move along the bottom of the septum and escape into the top of the tank where it can be removed. In addition a plug control mechanism may be incorporated into the invention to force solids down below or pull solids above the partition or septum to control the amounts of solids retained in the bioreactor vessel. In one embodiment the plug control mechanism comprises an auger with sloping fins to move solids from just above the hole in the septum downward to some distance beyond the bottom of the hole toward a lower zone in the bioreactor. Alternatively the auger can pull sludge up through the hole and above the septum where the sludge can be removed from the vessel. Still further a mixer may be attached to the shaft of the auger to mix the bioreactor contents and prevent a crust from forming at the top of the bioreactor. Also a separator in the form of a weir wall may be incorporated into the vessel so that it extends above the septum and assists in separating solids from the wastewater being treated.

Yet another aspect of the invention involves using a single bioreactor or a plurality of bioreactors in connection with the present invention to further enhance separation. More specifically a plurality of gradients in the sludge blanket may be formed in a single tank according to the various types of bacteria required for the stages of hydrolysis acidogenesis and methanogenesis in the anaerobic digestion process. Alternatively multiple tanks may be utilized so that conditions in each tank can be adjusted according to the particular step being performed.

According to one aspect of the invention an induced sludge blanket anaerobic reactor is provided and comprises a vessel an inlet coupled to the vessel the inlet introducing wastewater into the vessel a first outlet coupled to the vessel the first outlet directing wastewater to the outside of the vessel a gas port coupled to the vessel the gas port collecting gasses produced in the vessel a septum having a periphery the septum positioned within the vessel to maintain solid particles below the septum and an aperture formed in the septum. The septum may taper from an apex to side walls of the vessel. The first outlet may be coupled to the side wall of the vessel at an elevation between the apex and the periphery of the septum at the side wall. The reactor may further comprise a second outlet coupled to the vessel adjacent to the first outlet. The second outlet may be coupled to the side wall of the vessel at a second elevation. The second elevation may be arranged between the first outlet and the periphery of the septum at the side wall. According to some aspects the first and second outlets are fluidly connected in series to a recirculation pump capable of moving solids from above the septum back into the vessel below the septum. The first outlet may comprise a gas trap and overpressure device. The gas trap and overpressure device may comprise P trap or an inverted P trap. If an inverted P trap is used a center of a top of the inverted P trap may be located at an elevation approximately equal to the apex. The inverted P trap may have a cleanout as well. The gas trap and overpressure device may release gas through the first outlet at a predetermined pressure. The first outlet may comprise a passive gas trap and overpressure device wherein the passive gas trap and overpressure device releases gas through the first outlet when gas pressure in the vessel above the septum reaches approximately ten to twenty inches of water. The passive gas trap and overpressure device may release gas through the first outlet when gas pressure in the vessel above the septum reaches approximately twelve inches of water. According to some embodiments the reactor further comprises a distribution plate disposed in the vessel at the inlet. The inlet may comprise a pipe extended into the vessel to a tee the tee emptying into the vessel in two directions and the distribution plate may be disposed in the vessel at one exit of the tee. The distribution plate may be attached to a pedestal disposed in the vessel the pedestal being attached to a floor of the vessel wherein the pedestal is adjacent to but spaced from the inlet.

Another aspect of the invention provides an apparatus comprising an induced sludge blanket anaerobic reactor. The reactor comprises a vessel an inlet coupled to the vessel the inlet introducing wastewater into the vessel. The reactor also comprises a first outlet coupled to the vessel the first outlet directing wastewater to the outside of the vessel. The first outlet comprises a gas trap. The reactor also comprises a gas port coupled to the vessel the gas port collecting gasses produced in the vessel. The reactor includes a septum having a periphery the septum positioned within the vessel to maintain solid particles below the septum and an aperture formed in the septum inside the periphery. The reactor may comprise a second outlet in fluid communication with the first outlet the second outlet disposed at a lower elevation on the vessel than the first outlet and located above the septum wherein the gas trap comprises an inverted P trap. The second outlet may lead to a recirculation pump in fluid communication with the vessel below the septum.

Another aspect of the invention includes an induced sludge blanket anaerobic reactor the reactor comprising a vessel and an inlet coupled to the vessel. The inlet introduces wastewater into the vessel. The reactor includes a septum having a periphery the septum positioned within the vessel to maintain solid particles below the septum. The reactor also comprises an aperture formed in the septum inside the periphery and a first outlet coupled to the vessel. The first outlet is arranged above the septum for directing wastewater to the outside of the vessel. The first outlet comprises a gas trap and overpressure device. A second outlet is coupled to the vessel at an elevation lower than the first outlet and above the septum. A gas port is coupled to the vessel and collects gas produced in the vessel. The reactor also includes a distribution plate inside the vessel at the inlet.

Another aspect if the invention provides a method of processing wastewater through anaerobic digestion. The method comprises sending a flow of wastewater into a vessel to hold wastewater anaerobically digesting the wastewater with bacteria retaining solids from the wastewater in a lower zone of the vessel with a septum releasing gases generated in the lower zone of the vessel through an aperture in the septum controlling plugging of the aperture trapping gas at an effluent outlet to the vessel collecting the gases generated in the lower zone of the vessel and protecting against overpressure of the collected gases. The method may further comprise recirculating solids that pass through the aperture back to the lower zone.

Another aspect of the invention provides an induced sludge blanket anaerobic reactor. The reactor comprises a vessel and an inlet coupled to the vessel. The inlet introduces wastewater into the vessel. The reactor also includes a first outlet coupled to the vessel the first outlet directing wastewater to the outside of the vessel. A gas port is coupled to the vessel the gas port collecting gasses produced in the vessel. A septum is arranged substantially flat within the vessel the septum maintaining solid particles therebelow. The septum is positioned within the vessel to maintain solid particles below the septum and there is an aperture formed in the septum. The first outlet may comprise a downward sloping segment and an inverted P trap extending from the downward sloping segment. A center of a top of the inverted P trap is located at an elevation higher than the septum. A cleanout port may be disposed in the inverted P trap according to some embodiments. The first outlet may also include a valved bypass downstream of the downward sloping segment and in fluid communication with the inverted P trap.

Another aspect of the invention provides another induced sludge blanket anaerobic reactor. The reactor comprises a vessel an inlet coupled to the vessel a first outlet coupled to the vessel a gas port coupled to the vessel and a septum arranged within the vessel. The septum comprises an upward slope from a lowest portion to a side wall of the vessel and includes an aperture. The reactor may further comprise a plate disposed below and contacting the septum. The plate may comprise a generally flat plate including an aperture aligned with the aperture of the septum. The generally flat plate cooperates with the septum to enclose an area between the generally flat plate and a sloping surface of the septum.

The foregoing and other features utilities and advantages of the invention will be apparent from the following detailed description of the invention with reference to the accompanying drawings.

The present invention relates to an anaerobic reactor comprising an enclosure or vessel in which wastewater containing high concentrations of organic matter is introduced for treatment. An anaerobic reactor according to the present invention is particularly applicable to wastewater generated through agricultural production and food processing.

In the anaerobic digestion process bacteria convert carbon containing waste products such as byproducts of farming ranching or food processing into primarily biogas that is similar to natural gas. Suspended growth anaerobic digesters such as lagoons or enclosed vessels that are mixed and heated do not retain bacteria. Therefore the rate of treatment depends on how fast the bacteria can grow.

An induced blanket bioreactor IBR quickly forms a sludge blanket or bed within the bioreactor. It is to be understood that the terms sludge blanket are synonymous and interchangeable with the terms sludge bed. A sludge blanket refers to a zone or designated space within the bioreactor that is thick with solids. The sludge blanket initially consists of various types of solid particles naturally found in waste such as undigested feed or pieces of bedding. A sludge blanket of this type is a haven for bacteria. The bacteria will attach to the particles of waste in the wastewater.

If the sludge blanket is controlled properly the particles will grow without being flushed out of the bioreactor. Also if the sludge blanket is managed properly it will evolve to comprise mostly living bacteria being made up of floating solids that trap bacteria. Where the solids which consist mostly of living bacteria are trapped in a zone they multiply and consume the solid non living material that initially makes the blanket or that flows into the blanket. Without some type of sludge bed control mechanism however the wastewater passing through a continuously fed bioreactor would transport bacteria out of the bioreactor with the effluent. This is not desirable because a high concentration of bacteria is necessary to effectively destroy organic matter in the wastewater.

Prior bioreactors have been developed to provide a high concentration of bacteria to enhance the anaerobic digestion process. These prior bioreactors have added a fixed media such as plastic rings or rocks so that the bacteria have something to which they can attach. A drawback of these prior bioreactors however is that they soon plug when treating substrates such as animal manure and many kinds of food processing wastes. They also employ no mechanism to control formation of the sludge blanket.

Referring to the bioreactor comprises a vessel or tank which essentially comprises a cylindrical upstanding tank. The vessel may be made of any suitable material including but not limited to steel plastic or concrete. The vessel provides an enclosure in which wastewater is held. The vessel is preferably round in cross section and two to five times taller than the diameter. The wastewater to be treated in vessel may comprise any type of waste products such as byproducts of farming ranching food processing or any other type of wastewater that contains high concentrations of organic matter. The wastewater is introduced into the central bottom of vessel through an inlet . In one embodiment the wastewater is introduced into the vessel at a rate of approximately 10 gallons minute.

As shown in a partition or septum is positioned within or otherwise secured to the inside of the vessel approximately two thirds of the way up in vessel . The septum may be rigid or semi rigid and may comprise any suitable material such as plastic metal or the like. Those skilled in the art will understand suitable materials for constructing the septum or partition . It is also to be understood that the septum may comprise a plurality of panels or may comprise a single unitary piece of material. In one embodiment the septum is mounted inside of vessel by a frame which extends radially inwardly from the walls of vessel toward the center of the vessel. Alternatively the septum may itself be structurally sufficient to be secured to the inside of vessel without a frame . The septum may slope upwardly from the vessel side walls toward an apex and may include an aperture such as a central aperture . In one embodiment the volume above the septum will be approximately one third or less than the total volume of the bioreactor. The central aperture or hole in the septum will be approximately six inches or approximately 1 10 to 1 20 of the diameter of the septum . The septum will further have approximately a one foot rise from the outer diameter of vessel to the central aperture . The upwardly sloping bottom surface of septum allows biogas to rise to the top of the vessel where it can be removed.

A plug control device is operatively coupled to the enclosure and positioned within central aperture in the septum . In one embodiment the plug control mechanism is an auger which will include sloping fins one continuously spiraling fin is shown . When rotated clockwise the auger tends to force solids down toward a lower zone in vessel or at least contain solid particles in the bottom zone of the bioreactor to promote the anaerobic digestion process. If the central aperture becomes clogged or the wastewater becomes too thick the auger can be rotated counterclockwise to move particles up above the septum to clean out the central aperture . The auger moves relatively thicker portions of the sludge blanket to the top of the partition or septum where they can be taken out of the induced blanket reactor.

The plug control mechanism is provided to prevent the aperture from plugging but it may help form and maintain the sludge blanket or sludge bed below the septum to hold anaerobic bacteria within the bioreactor. By retaining the anaerobic bacteria within the sludge blanket area there remain more bacteria for breakdown of the organics in a waste stream. By utilizing the plug control mechanism wastewater can be treated much faster and much more efficiently in the apparatus described in connection with the present invention as compared to other prior bioreactors. This reduces capital costs management required and makes it easier to build and scale up. In one experimental use involving pig waste treatment of the sludge blanket occurred approximately three to eight times faster than commonly used methods. The present invention also makes it much easier for an inexperienced operator to manage the anaerobic digester without having to know how the anaerobic digester actually works.

The auger comprises a shaft which is rotated by a motor or other type of drive mechanism not shown held inside a housing . Housing may also provide access to the interior of the bioreactor to remove sludge if desired from the top of septum see .

With reference to several different ports may be provided in the bioreactor . When sludge builds up toward the bottom of the bioreactor a port is provided for cleaning out unwanted settled out sludge. A top access port which may be of any suitable size may be provided at the top of vessel for added accessibility to the top of the enclosure. A vent or gas port formed at the top of vessel may be utilized to remove biogas generated within the bioreactor . A lower access port closed during normal operation which can be of any suitable size may be provided toward the lower end of the vessel for access to the lower portion of vessel . A recirculation port may be provided to redirect sludge or other wastewater above septum to the lower portion or lower zone of the vessel either through inlet or through another return line not shown . In the embodiments where a weir wall explained below is utilized the recirculation port will extend through the weir wall so that it can access the area above septum and inside weir wall and . Test ports may be provided to test the wastewater or sludge bed at any number of locations relative to the vertical orientation of the tank. An effluent port may be provided to remove water that has passed through the continuously fed bioreactor. Preferably water passing through effluent port will be treated wastewater that contains little or no bacteria. Those skilled in the art will understand that any number of other ports may be utilized in connection with the present invention without departing from the scope or spirit thereof.

As shown in a mixer may be incorporated into the bioreactor according to the present invention. In one embodiment the mixer comprises a pair of horizontally disposed bars or other members coupled to the auger shaft . A plurality of metal chains may be coupled to the horizontal bars . The chains hang down into the top of the sludge bed. When the auger shaft is rotated chains mix the bioreactor contents and prevent a crust from forming at the top of the bioreactor. It is to be understood that the chains may be made of any suitable material and may be of any desirable length. In addition although the embodiment of shows the horizontal bars and the chains positioned above septum it is to be understood that this or another type of mixer could be positioned below the septum if desired.

Still another embodiment of the present invention relates to a weir wall and that is coupled to and extends upwardly from the septum . The weir wall is a solid vertical partition or wall that could be six inches high and extend entirely around the perimeter of the tank. The weir wall may but does not have to be placed close to the outside wall. As shown in the weir wall may be secured directly to the vessel wall by a perpendicularly extending wall i.e. similar to a rain gutter or alternatively by an extension section shown in dashed lines that attaches directly to the septum .

The purpose of the weir wall is to provide a final mechanism to capture solids that would otherwise escape through effluent port . The septum and gravity will in most cases retain most of the solids within the bioreactor. Thus in an ideal configuration only treated water without suspended solids will pass over the weir wall and into effluent pipe . The top of the wall comprises a weir of some type such as a jagged edge weir which is the type often used in settling tanks to separate solids from the liquid in which they are suspended. Such a jagged edge of weir wall may include upwardly extending teeth portions and lower trough portions . It is to be understood that any tooth configuration may be used on the top of weir wall .

The weir wall captures solids that somehow make it past the sludge blanket control mechanism through the central area of septum . This may occur because biogas attaches temporarily to some particles making them extremely buoyant. These solids contain a high concentration of bacteria and also contain undigested organic matter. They may be returned to the sludge bed via central aperture in the septum or alternatively removed by means of a separate pipe e.g. return duct and an appropriate recycle pump. Water that passes over the weir wall may be removed from the vessel through effluent pipe for further processing or disposal. It is to be understood that a weir wall may or may not be used in connection with the present invention depending on the circumstances and the wastewater being treated.

Operation of the induced sludge bed anaerobic reactor will be with a programmable logic controller PLC or microprocessor. The computer language will be one unique to PLC and will be understood by those skilled in the relevant art.

Still another aspect of the present invention relates to separation of the various types of bacteria needed for the anaerobic breakdown of organics by forming gradients in the sludge bed. The anaerobic digestion process is complex involving various types of bacteria that work symbiotically each playing a role in the breakdown of organics. The stages of anaerobic digestion can be broken down into hydrolysis acidogenesis and methanogenesis. Specific types of bacteria are required for each stage of the process and are well known to those skilled in the art. In a properly operating anaerobic digester hydrolyzing bacteria break down large molecules that are then further broken down by acidogens into volatile organic acids VOA . VOA is consumed by the methanogens which produce methane as a byproduct. Acidogens are faster growing than those types of anaerobic bacteria in most situations. This means that most anaerobic digesters must be relatively lightly loaded to prevent the acidogens from outgrowing the methanogens and thus producing more VOA than the methanogens can consume. If they do not the pH will drop into the acid range which inhibits methanogens and builds up acid in a downward spiral until no acids are removed and the digester fails. This means that a limited amount of substrate i.e. organic matter in wastewater can be added to most anaerobic digesters in any given time period so that processes of hydrolysis and acid production do not outstrip the ability of methanogens to utilize the VOA and thus the pH will be maintained near the neutral range and the system is kept in balance.

A single tank or multiple tanks may be utilized in connection with the induced sludge bed anaerobic reactor system according to the present invention. A multiple tank arrangement e.g. tanks and in provides advantages for better separation of bacteria types. The multiple tank arrangement also facilitates easy upscaling quick startup if the system needs servicing and easier diagnosis and refurbishment if operating below parity. For example hydraulic retention time HRT is longer and pH is higher in the methane forming tank. Extensive control mechanisms may be used to maintain different conditions. In a multiple bioreactor tank arrangement acidogens and methanogens may be captured in a settling basin weir wall arrangement at the top of each separate bioreactor tank. Captured bacteria are returned to their respective sludge beds.

In the single tank system the hydrolyzing and acid forming bacteria are captured toward the bottom of the induced blanket. Methanogens are also retained where they grow best which is above the acidogens in the upper part of the sludge bed in a single tank. Anaerobic treatment may also be important for the production of usable energy such as electricity by utilizing the biogas produced in the anaerobic digestion process as fuel in an engine generator.

Another embodiment of the present invention is shown in . The embodiment of is similar or identical to the embodiment of and may include additional or modified piping at a first outlet. The first outlet may comprise an effluent port coupled to the vessel . As with the effluent port of the first effluent port directs processed wastewater to the outside of the vessel . The first effluent port is coupled to the vessel at an elevation between the apex of the septum and the periphery of the septum where the septum meets the side walls of the vessel .

In addition a second outlet may be coupled to the vessel as well. As shown in the second outlet comprises a second effluent port and is coupled to the vessel at a second elevation. The second elevation may be between the first effluent port and the periphery of the septum where the septum meets the side walls of the vessel . Thus the second effluent port may be arranged just above the periphery of the septum. Any solids that may pass through the aperture of the septum will tend to sink along the septum toward the second effluent port .

The first and second effluent ports may be arranged in series as shown in and may be fluidly connected to a pump such as a recirculation pump . The recirculation pump may be turned on at will or at intervals and may be used to move any solids that pass through the aperture back into a lower zone of the vessel below the septum for further processing. According to some embodiments the recirculation pump is piped back into the lower zone of the vessel just under the septum . For example the piping downstream of the recirculation pump may be lead into the vessel zero to thirty six inches under the septum .

The first outlet may include a gas trap or a combination gas trap and overpressure device. The gas trap or gas trap and overpressure device may comprise a P trap for example an inverted P trap . The inverted P trap may reduce the risk of plugging as compared to a conventional P trap. A centerline of the top of the inverted P trap may coincide with the top of the apex . Therefore liquids that have passed through the aperture and sit on the top of the septum tend to flow into the first and second effluent ports and out of the vessel through the inverted P trap . Solids will tend to fall out of the liquids toward the recirculation pump mostly via the second effluent port rather than potentially plugging the inverted P trap . The centerline of the top of the P trap may be arranged approximately ten to twenty inches above a centerline of the first effluent port . For example the centerline of the top of the P trap may arranged approximately twelve inches above a centerline of the first effluent port . However according to some embodiments the centerline of the top of the P trap may arranged approximately one to three inches above a centerline of the first effluent port .

The submerged first and second effluent ports and the inverted P trap prevent produced biogas from venting or leaving the vessel through the effluent piping under normal circumstances. Instead biogas is directed through the gas port . In addition the inverted P trap protects against biogas overpressure. If biogas pressure within the vessel increases to a predetermined measurement the pressure will cause the fluid level on the septum to decrease and expose the first effluent port to the biogas. The excess pressure is then vented to atmosphere maintaining the integrity of the vessel . According to some embodiments the predetermined pressure that will expose the first effluent port is approximately one to twenty inches of water corresponding to the distance between the centerlines of the P trap and the effluent port minus the radius of the first effluent port . According to some embodiments the predetermined pressure is approximately ten to twenty inches of water or approximately twelve inches of water.

According to some embodiments the P trap is equipped with a cleanout to allow an operator access to the interior of the P trap in the unlikely event of a plug or for other reasons. Moreover according to some embodiments there is no recirculation pump or associated piping and there may be a cleanout at a bottom of a tee of the second effluent port to facilitate removal of any accumulated solids. Further according to some embodiments both the recirculation pump and the second effluent port are omitted and a cleanout may be located at the bottom of a tee or other fall out collector of the first effluent port .

According to some embodiments the septum may be significantly raised from the side walls of the vessel to the apex . For example the elevation between the periphery of the septum and the apex may be approximately ten to twenty inches or twelve to eighteen inches. However according to other embodiments the elevation between the periphery of the septum at the walls of the vessel and the apex may be quite shallow. For example according to some embodiments the elevation between the periphery of the septum and the apex may be approximately one to three inches. A more flat or shallow septum may facilitate higher bacteria concentrations in the vessel by holding more of the bacteria in the lower zone of the vessel .

Referring next to FIGS. and A C according to some embodiments a distribution plate may be disposed in the vessel at the inlet . The inlet of the embodiment of includes a tee that tends to cause the wastewater to empty into the vessel in two directions. Wastewater that tends to drop to the bottom the vessel is distributed by the floor of the vessel. Wastewater that tends to exit the tee through the top is distributed by the distribution plate . Accordingly the distribution plate may be located in close proximity to the top outlet of the tee .

The distribution plate may be metal plastic or other material and may comprise any shape including the circular shape shown. The distribution plate may be supported by a pedestal that may comprise for example three legs. The pedestal may be attached to the distribution plate in any manner and the pedestal may be integral with the distribution plate as well. The pedestal may be welded or otherwise attached to the floor of the vessel to maintain the position of the distribution plate relative to the tee .

Another embodiment of the present invention is shown in . The embodiment of is similar to the embodiment of and may include other septum arrangements and modified piping at a first outlet . According to the embodiment of rather than having a downward slope from an apex to the vessel side wall the septum is arranged substantially flat within the vessel . The generally flat arrangement may maintain more solids and more bacteria in the lower zone of the vessel .

The generally flat arrangement of the septum according to may be accompanied by the modified piping at the first outlet . The first outlet includes the effluent port and may include a downward sloping segment leading to the inverted P trap . The inverted P trap continues to have at least one cleanout and may include a second cleanout . In addition the first outlet may comprise a bypass with a valve disposed therein. The bypass allows effluent to bypass the inverted P trap if the valve is open. However the valve is normally closed during operation and any solids that pass the septum tend to fall out in the downward sloping segment toward the valve as the liquids pass through the inverted P trap . The clean outs may be used to remove any accumulated solids.

According to the embodiment of the effluent port is substantially located just above the septum. Further the centerline of the top of the inverted P trap is arranged at an elevation higher than the generally flat septum . Therefore liquids that have passed through the aperture and collect on the top of the septum tend to build up until the fluid level is sufficient to pass through the inverted P trap . Again any solids trapped in the exiting fluids will tend to fall out of the liquids toward the valve of the bypass rather than potentially plugging the inverted P trap . The centerline of the top of the P trap may be arranged approximately ten to twenty inches above the septum . For example the centerline of the top of the P trap may arranged approximately twelve inches above the septum . However according to some embodiments the centerline of the top of the P trap may be arranged approximately one to three inches above the septum .

As in some of the previous embodiments the inverted P trap shown in prevents produced biogas from venting or leaving the vessel through the effluent piping under normal circumstances. Instead biogas is directed through the gas port . In addition the inverted P trap protects against biogas overpressure. If biogas pressure within the vessel increases to a predetermined measurement the pressure will cause the fluid level on the septum to decrease and expose the first effluent port to the biogas. The excess pressure is then vented to atmosphere maintaining the integrity of the vessel . According to some embodiments the predetermined pressure that will expose the first effluent port is approximately one to twenty inches of water minus the diameter of the first effluent port . According to some embodiments the predetermined pressure is approximately ten to twenty inches of water or approximately twelve inches of water.

Yet another embodiment of the present invention is shown in . The embodiment of is similar to the embodiment of and may include another septum arrangement and the modified outlet piping shown in . According to the embodiment of the septum has an upward or cupping slope from a lowest portion to the side wall of the vessel . The septum shown in may be accompanied by a support. For example the septum may be accompanied by a generally flat plate . The generally flat plate includes an aperture substantially aligned with the aperture of the septum . The generally flat plate may also comprise a downward slope opposite of the upward slope of the septum of . The generally flat plate contacts and is attached to the septum and encloses an area disposed between the septum and the generally flat plate .

The cupping arrangement of the septum according to may include the same or similar modified piping described above with reference to . Therefore the first outlet includes the effluent port and the downward sloping segment leading to the inverted P trap . The other aspects of the first outlet are also included as described with reference to .

According to the effluent port is again located just above the septum at the side wall of the vessel . Further the centerline of the top of the inverted P trap is arranged at an elevation higher than the highest point of the septum which is at the side walls of the vessel . Therefore liquids that have passed through the aperture and sit on the top of the septum tend to build up until the fluid level is sufficient to pass through the inverted P trap . Any solids trapped in the exiting fluids will tend to fall out of the liquids back toward the apertures or if they exit the effluent port toward the valve of the bypass . The centerline of the top of the P trap may be arranged approximately ten to twenty inches above the highest points of the septum . For example the centerline of the top of the P trap may arranged approximately twelve inches above the septum . However according to some embodiments the centerline of the top of the P trap may arranged approximately one to three inches above the septum .

While this invention has been described with reference to certain specific embodiments and examples those skilled in the art will recognize that many variations are possible without departing from the scope and spirit of this invention. The invention as defined by the claims is intended to cover all changes and modifications of the invention which do not depart from the spirit of the invention. The words including and having as used in the specification including the claims shall have the same meaning as the word comprising. 

