---

title: Personalized content feed suggestions page
abstract: A user may be presented with suggestions of content feeds to which she may subscribe. The suggestions are based on documents, such as web pages, accessed by the user. The content feeds suggested to the user are content feeds associated with at least some of the documents accessed by the user. The user may accept or reject any or all of the suggestions. A suggestion of a content feed may be suppressed based on a rejection of a past suggestion for the same content feed.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08190997&OS=08190997&RS=08190997
owner: Google Inc.
number: 08190997
owner_city: Mountain View
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051007
---
This application is related to the following U.S. Patent Applications which are incorporated by reference herein in their entirety 

U.S. patent application No. 11 246 596 titled Content Feed User Interface with Gallery Display of Same Type Items filed Oct. 7 2005 

U.S. patent application No. 11 246 656 titled Indirect Subscriptions to Top N Lists of Content Feeds filed Oct. 7 2005 and

U.S. patent application No. 11 246 597 titled Indirect Subscriptions to a User s Selected Content Feed Items filed Oct. 7 2005.

The disclosed embodiments relate generally to content syndication and more particularly to providing suggestions of content feed subscriptions based on accessed web pages.

Content syndication is growing in popularity as a way to distribute frequently updated information such as news and blog postings on the Internet. Using content syndication formats such as Really Simple Syndication RSS and Atom content providers can include content and or links to such in a content feed. Users may subscribe to these content feeds using an application known as a reader or aggregator. When the content feed is updated with new content items the new content items are reflected in the user s reader.

Many web pages such as news web sites and blogs provide content feeds. However the content feed links provided by web pages may go unnoticed by the users who browse those pages. Even if the user is interested in subscribing to content feeds provided by the web pages she may not be able to do so because she may be unaware that they are available.

In accordance with some embodiments a method of providing content includes identifying a document determining if the document has an associated content feed and if the document is determined to have an associated content feed providing a suggestion to a user to subscribe to the content feed.

In accordance with some embodiments a method of providing content includes identifying a plurality of documents identifying a subset of the plurality of documents that have associated content feeds and providing suggestions to a user to subscribe to at least a subset of the content feeds.

In accordance with some embodiments a method of subscribing to content includes receiving and presenting to a user a set of content subscription suggestions including a plurality of content subscription suggestions associated with web pages visited by the user and subscribing to content feeds corresponding to one or more selections by the user from the set of content subscription suggestions.

A user during a web browsing session may browse web pages that are associated with content feeds. However the user may not notice those content feeds as she is browsing the web pages and thus lose an opportunity to subscribe to those content feeds. Suggestions to subscribe to content feeds associated with web pages or other documents accessed by the user may be provided to the user so that she may be informed of those feeds and be given an opportunity to affirmatively subscribe to any or all of those feeds or decline to subscribe to those feeds.

The server system accesses content feeds from the feed sources . The server system includes a server and a database . Server serves as a front end for the server system . Server retrieves the content feeds from the feed sources and also provides an interface between the server system and the client systems . In some embodiments the functions of server may be divided or allocated among two or more servers.

The server system stores content items in the content feeds in the database . In some embodiments the database stores both metadata e.g. title description URL date time and possibly other metadata and the content of each content item. However in some other embodiments the database stores the metadata but not the content for each content item. The database also stores user feed information for a plurality of users. The user feed information for a particular user identifies content feed subscriptions as well as sources filters and read states for that particular user. That is user feed information associated with a user identifies the content feeds to which the user has subscribed any filters the user has defined for the feeds any labels the user has associated with individual feed items and an indication of whether each feed item has been marked as read by the user.

It should be appreciated that the server system including the server and the database may be implemented as a distributed system of multiple computers. However for convenience of explanation the server system is described below as being implemented on a single computer which can be considered a single logical system.

A content feed or channel is a resource or service that provides a list of content items that are present recently added or recently updated at a feed source . A content item in a content feed may include the content associated with the item itself the actual content that the content item specifies a title and or a description of the content a locator e.g. URL of the content or any combination thereof. For example if the content item identifies a text article the content item may include the article itself inline along with the title and locator. Alternatively a content item may include the title description and locator but not the article content. Thus some content items may include the content associated with those items while others contain links to the associated content but not the full content of the items. A content item may also include additional metadata that provides additional information about the content. The full version of the content may be any machine readable data including but not limited to web pages images digital audio digital video Portable Document Format PDF documents and so forth.

In some embodiments a content feed is specified using a content syndication format such as RSS. RSS is an acronym that stands for rich site summary RDF site summary or Really Simple Syndication. RSS may refer to any of a family of formats based on the Extensible Markup Language XML for specifying a content feed and content items included in the feed. In some other embodiments other content syndication formats such as the Atom syndication format the VCALENDAR calendar format or any of a number of other syndication formats may be used to specify content feeds.

Further information regarding the RSS syndication format known as Really Simple Syndication is disclosed in the RSS 2.0 Specification by D. Winer which is hereby incorporated by reference herein in its entirety. M. Nottingham et al. disclose further information regarding the Atom syndication format in The Atom Syndication Format which is hereby incorporated by reference herein in its entirety.

A user interfaces with the server system and views content items at a client system or device hereinafter called the client system for ease of reference . The client system includes a computer or computer controlled device such as a person digital assistant cellular telephone or the like hereinafter called the client system for ease of reference . The computer typically includes one or more processors not shown memory which may include volatile memory not shown and non volatile memory such as a hard disk drive and a display . The computer may also have input devices such as a keyboard and a mouse not shown .

In some embodiments a user may interact with the server system via a feed reader user interface that may be presented on the display . The user may create a list of feed subscriptions via the feed reader user interface . In some embodiments using the feed reader user interface the user may also create filters or labels to be applied to content feeds and or content items and modify the read states of content feeds and or content items. The feed reader user interface transmits a list of content feed subscriptions or modifications to a list of content feed subscriptions to the server system for storage at the database . The feed reader user interface presents content items stored at the database to the user based on the user s list of content feed subscriptions. That is feed reader user interface presents to the user content items specified in the content feeds to which the user has subscribed. A user may view the full version of the content of a content item in the feed reader user interface by selecting it e.g. by clicking on it with a mouse pointer . In some embodiments a copy of the user s list of content feed subscriptions and copies of the presented content items may be cached locally at the client system .

In some embodiments the feed reader user interface may be a web based user interface. That is the feed reader user interface displays one or more web pages in one or more browser e.g. web browser windows. The web pages may be written in the Hypertext Markup Language HTML Extensible Markup Language XML or any other suitable language for preparing web pages and may include one or more scripts for interfacing with the server system . The user may subscribe to content feeds view content items and otherwise interact with the server system by interacting with the web pages of the feed reader user interface . In other words the server system and the web pages transmitted by the server system to the feed reader user interface provides a web based content aggregation service. The server system aggregates and stores content items in accordance with the user s content feed subscriptions. In some embodiments the server system can also apply filters or labels or change the read states of content items in accordance with user actions or instructions. When the user accesses the feed reader user interface content items to which the user has subscribed are presented to the user via the feed reader user interface .

In some other embodiments the feed reader user interface may be a part of a standalone application that is run on the client system . The standalone application may interface with the servers system via an application programming interface API .

Attention is now directed to which is a flow diagram illustrating a process for providing content feed subscription suggestions in accordance with some embodiments. The content feed aggregation system may identify documents that have associated content feeds and provide to a user a suggestion to subscribe to that content feed. While the process flow described below includes a number of steps or operations that appear to occur in a specific order it should be apparent that these processes can include more or fewer steps or operations. Some of the operations that are described here as being executed serially may be performed in parallel e.g. using parallel processors or a multi threading environment . Furthermore in some embodiments some of the operations e.g. operations may be performed multiple times before a following operation e.g. operation is performed.

A document is identified . In some embodiments the document is a web page visited by the user e.g. viewed in a web browser on a client system and the web page is identified at the time of the visit. The web page may be written in the Hypertext Markup Language HTML Extensible Markup Language XML or any other suitable language for preparing web pages and may include one or more scripts for interfacing with the server system . The web page may be a weblog also known as a blog a news web page an image collection web page or any other type of web page. In some other embodiments the identified document is any document accessed by the user.

Whether or not the identified document has an associated content feed is determined . In some embodiments the determination is made by searching for the locator of a content feed in some embodiments the Uniform Resource Locator URL that is known to be referenced by the identified document in the server system database . In some other embodiments the determination is made by parsing the identified document to locate HTML tags that have attributes associated with a content feed. For example web pages that include RSS content feeds may include the HTML tag with attributes rel alternate and type application rss xml in its HTML source. The tag also includes an absolute or a relative locator in some embodiments the Uniform Resource Locator URL of the content feed. By searching the document for one or more tags having attributes associated with a content feed a determination on whether the document has an associated content feed may be made. More generally the identified document may be parsed for any information that indicates the existence of a content feed associated with the document. Examples of such information may include a particular HTML tag with particular attributes anchor text with particular keywords etc.

In some embodiments a record of the document identification may be stored or updated in the server system database if the document is determined to have an associated content feed. Similarly a record of the document identification associated with the user may be made if the identified document is determined to have an associated content feed. The identified document and the content feed are recorded as well as the date and time of the access. The record may also include other data. Further details regarding the record are described below in relation to .

If the identified document is determined to not have an associated content feed then there is no effect . If the identified document is determined to have an associated content feed then the content feed may be a candidate for a subscription suggestion to the user. However in some embodiments a subscription suggestion may be suppressed i.e. not presented to the user for a variety of reasons. One reason for suppressing the suggestion may be that the user already has an active subscription to the content feed a suggestion to subscribe to the content feed when the user is already subscribed to the feed would be redundant. Another possible reason for suppression may be that the user has previously rejected a suggestion to subscribe to the same content feed. That is the user did not subscribe to the content feed when the content feed was suggested to the user in the past implying that the user is not interested in subscribing to that content feed. Other reasons for suppressing a suggestion may also apply including the application or rules or filters established by the user or by another person or entity. If the subscription suggestion for the content feed is to be suppressed Yes then the suggestion is suppressed and not presented to the user . If the suggestion is not to be suppressed No then the suggestion is presented to the user . In some embodiments the suggestion may be presented to the user as a prompt e.g. in a pop up window to subscribe to the content feed. The suggestion is an opt in operation where the user is not subscribed to the content feed unless the user accepts the suggestion by affirmatively subscribing to the content feed rather than an opt out operation.

The user may accept the suggestion or the user may reject the suggestion. If the user rejects the suggestion i.e. the user does not opt in to a subscription to the content feed No then the user is not subscribed to the suggested content feed. By not accepting the suggestion to subscribe to the suggested content feed the user may be considered to have rejected the suggestion and future suggestions of the content feed may be suppressed based on that rejection . If the user accepts the suggestion Yes then the user is subscribed to the suggested content feed .

As described above a suggestion to subscribe to a content feed may be suppressed on the basis of a past rejection of a suggestion to subscribe to the same content feed. In some embodiments a single rejection of the suggestion to subscribe to the content feed may be the basis for suppressing future suggestions to subscribe to the same content feed. In some other embodiments however multiple rejections of suggestions to subscribe to the content feed are required in order to suppress future suggestions to subscribe to that content feed. For example further suggestions to subscribe to a content feed would not be suppressed until the user has rejected suggestions to subscribe to that same content feed two times three times or more. depending on the implementation .

As described above a suggestion to subscribe to a content feed may be suppressed on the basis of an active subscription to the same content feed. In some embodiments a determination of whether a subscription to the content feed is active may be made by searching for the content feed in the user s list of content feed subscriptions. In some other embodiments the determination may be made by searching a feed subscription information table such as the one described below in relation to for the suggested content feed and identifying whether the user is indicated as having subscribed to the content feed e.g. by checking the subscription flag associated with the user .

In some embodiments suppression of a content feed subscription suggestion based on one or more rejections of past suggestions may last for at least a predefined duration. The duration of the suppression may be defined by time e.g. a predefined time elapsed since the start of the suppression or by the number of times a document with the same content feed was accessed and identified e.g. a predefined number of times the document has been accessed and identified since the start of the suppression . After the expiration of the duration the suppression may be rescinded and suggestions for the content feed may be presented to the user with the possibility that it may be suppressed again in the future. On the other hand suppression of a content feed subscription suggestion based on an active subscription may last for as long as the subscription remains active.

Attention is now directed to which is a flow diagram illustrating a process for providing content feed subscription suggestions in batches in accordance with some embodiments. Multiple suggestions may be presented at once as a batch rather than one at time so that the user is less frequently interrupted by prompts to act on a suggestion. A plurality of documents is identified . In some embodiments the documents are web pages visited by the user. A subset of the documents that have associated content feeds is identified . In some embodiments the documents in the subset are the web pages visited by the user that also have associated content feeds. Whether a web page has an associated content feed or not may be determined by parsing the web page or by any other suitable procedure as described above in relation to . Suggestions to subscribe to at least a subset of the associated content feeds are provided to the user . The suggestions may be provided in a suggestions page where suggestions to subscribe to one or more content feeds may be presented all together and the user may select any all or none of the content feeds for subscription. Suggestions for subscriptions to some of the associated content feeds may be suppressed from being presented in the suggestions page based on a current subscription prior rejections and or the application of one or more rules or filters as described above.

In some embodiments the suggestion operation is triggered by the user logging on to the content aggregation service. That is the user is presented with the suggestion when log on is successful. The suggestions presented are for content feeds associated with documents identified since the last log on when suggestions were last presented to the user . After the presentation of the suggestions the system accumulates suggestions for presentation to the user at the next log on.

Attention is now directed to which is a flow diagram illustrating a process for presenting to a user content feed subscription suggestions in accordance with some embodiments. A set of content subscription suggestions are received at the client system . The set includes a number of content subscription suggestions that are associated with web pages visited by the user. The suggestions are presented to the user . As described above the suggestions may be presented in a prompt e.g. a pop up window or a selection page where the user can select content feeds for subscription and confirm the subscriptions. The user is subscribed to content feeds corresponding to the user s selections from the subscription suggestions . Stated another way the user is subscribed to the suggested content feeds that she selects for subscription. Content subscription suggestions not selected by the user may be suppressed in the future as described above.

In some embodiments the document feed identification module is independent of the feed reader module . That is the document feed identification module is separate from the feed reader module and may be active even when the feed reader module is not active. That said the document feed identification module may communicate with the feed reader module . In some embodiments the document feed identification module may be a module in a client application an add on or plug in to a client application or a module in an add on or plug in such as a web browser toolbar to a client application.

In some embodiments the feed reader module may be a script based module embedded in a web page served from the server system . The web page may be rendered by a client application such as a web browser at the client computer . When the web page is rendered the feed reader module is run and rendered as a web based interface to the server system . The script based feed reader module may be written in JavaScript ECMAScript or any other suitable scripting language.

In some other embodiments the feed reader module may be a standalone application stored in memory of the client computer . The standalone application may include but is not limited to a feed aggregator application. In further other embodiments the feed reader module may be an add on or a plug in to another application. For example the feed reader module may be a plug in to a web browser application or an email application.

In some embodiments received content items may be cached locally in memory . Similarly a user s list of content feed subscriptions may also be cached locally in memory .

Each of the above identified elements may be stored in one or more of the previously mentioned memory devices and corresponds to a set of instructions for performing a function described above. The above identified modules or programs i.e. sets of instructions need not be implemented as separate software programs procedures or modules and thus various subsets of these modules may be combined or otherwise re arranged in various embodiments. In some embodiments memory may store a subset of the modules and data structures identified above. Furthermore

The user data stores data for users of the service such as login information and user preferences. The user data includes subscription lists which include lists of users feed subscriptions. Each user has a corresponding list of content feed subscriptions. Each user may also have a list of suggested subscriptions declined by the user. The user data may further include document feed information for recording documents accessed by the user such as visited web pages and any content feeds associated with them.

The subscription suggestion module generates content subscription suggestions for a user of the service by inspecting the user data of the user to identify feed subscriptions that are associated with web pages or documents visited by the user removing any identified feed subscriptions that are to be suppressed as discussed above and sending the user one or more feed suggestions. The one or more feed suggestions may be sent to the user in form of a web page for presentation to the user using a web browser or in any other form suitable for use by a client application. The subscription suggestion module may update the user data to identify the user s newly selected subscriptions and may also update the user data to identify feed subscription suggestions that have been declined by the user.

The feed content provisioning module identifies and sends content items to a user in accordance with the user s feed subscriptions. The feed content provisioning module may update the user data to identify content items viewed by the user so as to avoid sending those same items to the user again. Optionally for instance in accordance with service features selected by the user the feed content provisioning module may also update the user data to record other information such as information identifying content items bookmarked by the user or otherwise marked or selected by the user as being of special interest to the user.

In some embodiments the server computer may further store feed subscription information and feed content items in one or more tables both not shown . The feed subscription information table stores information associated with content feeds such as the locations of the feeds e.g. the feeds URLs and per user subscription information with respect to individual content feeds. The feed content items table stores the content items associated information and per user information with respect to individual content items. Further details regarding the feed subscription information and feed content item tables are described below in relation to .

Each of the above identified elements may be stored in one or more of the previously mentioned memory devices. Each of the above identified modules corresponds to a set of instructions for performing a function described above. The above identified modules or programs i.e. sets of instructions need not be implemented as separate software programs procedures or modules and thus various subsets of these modules may be combined or otherwise re arranged in various embodiments. In some embodiments memory may store a subset of the modules and data structures identified above. Furthermore memory may store additional modules and data structures not described above.

Although shows a server computer is intended more as functional description of the various features which may be present in a set of servers than as a structural schematic of the embodiments described herein. In practice and as recognized by those of ordinary skill in the art items shown separately could be combined and some items could be separated. For example some items shown separately in could be implemented on single servers and single items could be implemented by one or more servers.

The user may view the content items in a universal view. The universal view includes a list of content items from all of the user s subscribed feeds that have new content items not yet viewed by the user. The list may be generated for example by the feed content provisioning module of the server computer . In some embodiments various criteria may be used by the feed content provisioning module to limit the items included in the list such as publication date and time and number of items not yet viewed by the user that were published by the same source. For instance items published more than X e.g. 7 days ago may be excluded. In another example when there are more than Y e.g. 10 unviewed items from the same source only the Y most recent unviewed items from the source may be included in the list .

The content items shown in the list are interleaved without regard to source. In some embodiments the list is sorted by publication date and time for example in reverse chronological order. Also in some embodiments the list may show only content items that the user has not viewed. The list presents identifying information for the content items so that the user can identify a content item she wishes to view and select it. Because the UI may have a finite size and the list may include more items than can fit into the UI the UI may display a subset of the content items at a given time and the user may scroll through the list to find other content items. The list may also include an indicator of how many content items are in the list in total. Alternatively the indicator may indicate the number of content items yet to be viewed.

From the list the user may select a content item. When the user selects an item from the list in the universal view the UI may display the full version of the content in a viewer region . For example if the selected content item indicated by a box with a thick border includes a link to an article at a news web site or a link to a blog posting the article or the blog posting respectively may be displayed in the viewer region .

From the UI the user may request suggestions of content feeds to which she may subscribe. In some embodiments the user may make the request by selecting a suggestions button . When the user selects the suggestions button a suggestions page as shown in may be presented to the user. The suggestions page which is a part of the UI includes a list of web pages visited by the user that have associated content feeds. The list includes the subscription suggestions for the user. Each listed web page is a suggestion to the user to subscribe to the content feed associated with that web page. The suggestions page may provide a link labeled View site in to each of the listed web pages or some other manner of opening the listed web pages for viewing. The user may use the View site links to remind herself of the subject matter of the listed web pages. Each of the listed web pages may have an associated checkbox which the user may check or clear so as to identify the content feeds to which she wishes to subscribe checked and the content feeds to which she declines to subscribe unchecked or cleared . Because the suggestions are opt in operations initially the checkboxes are not checked. The suggestions page may also include optional Check All and Clear All buttons and respectively for quick checking or clearing of all checkboxes presented to the user in the suggestions page . The exemplary suggestions page also includes a Subscribe Checked button . When the user selects the Subscribe Checked button the UI subscribes the user to the content feeds associated with the web pages with checked checkboxes and does not subscribe the user to the content feeds associated with the web pages with cleared checkboxes. This is accomplished by sending information i.e. information identifying the checked and unchecked check boxes from the suggestions page to a server that manages the user s feed content subscriptions. The suggestions page may optionally include a Cancel button which when selected by the user cancels out of the suggestions page and declines all of the listed suggestions even if one or more the suggestions has a checkbox that is checked.

It should be appreciated however that the suggestions page is merely exemplary and only one of many possible ways of presenting content feed subscription suggestions to the user. The suggestions presentation mechanism may have more or less elements than shown and may take on alternative forms. Furthermore the suggestions mechanism may be configured to present content feed subscription suggestions individually one at a time e.g. upon visiting a web site having an associated content feed instead of in batches.

Attention is now directed to which is a diagram illustrating a data structure for maintaining records of identified documents that have associated content feeds in accordance with some embodiments. In some embodiments records of identified documents that have associated content feeds are maintained. By maintaining the records not only can the content feed aggregation system present suggestions to a user more than one suggestion at a time the system can also track which suggestions were rejected by the user and therefore suppress those suggestions in the future.

The document feed information which in some embodiments is stored at the client computer includes a plurality of document records . The records are maintained on a per user basis. That is each user has a respective set of records. The document location provides the locator or address of the document and may be used as the identifier of the document. In some embodiments the document location is the URL of the document. The feed location provides the locator or address of the content feed associated with the document. In some embodiments the feed location is the URL of the content feed. The date time of visit records the date time of the most recent access to the document. In the case of documents that are web pages the date time of visit records the date time of the most recent visit to the web page.

The record also may include suppression data . In some embodiments the suppression data includes a flag and a counter . The flag is an indicator of whether suggestions for the corresponding content feed should be suppressed due to prior rejections of suggestions to subscribe to the same content feed. Suggestions to subscribe to the content feed are suppressed if the flag is set and are not suppressed if the flag is cleared.

In embodiments where a suggestion suppression based on past rejections may expire the suppression data may include a counter for measuring the duration of the suppression. The counter may measure the duration since the flag was set in terms of some unit of time e.g. number of days or number of times the document has been accessed by the user and identified by the system . The counter is incremented for each unit of time e.g. a day elapsed or for each access of the document. When the counter reaches a predefined expiration threshold the flag may be cleared and the suggestion will be presented to the user. The counter is reset and does not increment until the flag is set again. Alternately the counter may be replaced by an expiration date and time after which the suppression flag is cleared or ignored.

In some other embodiments the document feed information may be stored at the server. In these embodiments the document feed information from a plurality of users may be stored in one or more data structures. The document feed information may include an additional field such as a UserID field to identify the user associated with each record

A feed content table stores both content items from the feed sources known to the system and user data for those content items. The feed content table includes a row for each content item from each feed source. Each row includes one or more fields that identify the content item such as a content ID and a feed ID which identifies the feed source of the content item . In some embodiments the content ID may include information that uniquely identifies the feed source in which case the feed ID may be omitted. Each row may further include content of the content item. The content may include the metadata of the content item e.g. title description URL date time and possibly other metadata and may further include the actual content of the content item. In some embodiments the content may include metadata and the actual content for multiple versions of the content item. In addition each row includes a column or field for each registered user of the system. The user data in this column may include a viewed flag which indicates whether the user corresponding to this column has viewed the content item associated with the row containing the user data and may optionally include additional user information such as one or more user specified labels or flags . A user may label content items that the user may want to view again in the future and a record of the label that the user associated with a content item may be stored in the user data . In some embodiments the system may allow users to label individual content items with predefined labels e.g. star red blue etc. and some embodiments further allow users to label individual content items with user defined labels.

The feed subscription information table and feed content table or portions of these tables may be stored using sparse table storage mechanisms since large portions of the user data in these tables may be empty or set to default values.

The foregoing description for purpose of explanation has been described with reference to specific embodiments. However the illustrative discussions above are not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise forms disclosed. Many modifications and variations are possible in view of the above teachings. The embodiments were chosen and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention and its practical applications to thereby enable others skilled in the art to best utilize the invention and various embodiments with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.

