---

title: Flexible licensing architecture for licensing digital application
abstract: An application includes a plurality of features. A transaction is engaged with a retailer to obtain a product license corresponding to the application. The product license defines at least one feature of the application that may be employed. A base copy of the application is obtained from a distributor and is actuated. A use license corresponding to the product license is acquired from a licensor by way of the actuated application sending the product license to the licensor along with an identification of at least one of a user, the computing device, and a trusted component operating on the computing device, where the use license includes feature policy granting rights to employ each feature defined in the product license.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07890428&OS=07890428&RS=07890428
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07890428
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050204
---
The present invention relates to a computing device and method for providing a license to operate a digital application on the computing device. More particularly the invention relates to such a computing device and method where only one version of the digital application need be released with multiple available features and where a particular license issued to a particular user specifies which available features may be employed by the user. Thus the publisher of the application need not release multiple versions of the same application and the user in obtaining the license can select which of the multiple available features are to be licensed.

Rights management and enforcement is highly desirable in connection with digital content such as a digital application or the like where such digital application is to be distributed to one or more users. Typical modes of distribution include tangible devices such as a magnetic floppy disk a magnetic tape an optical compact disk CD etc. and intangible media such as an electronic bulletin board an electronic network the Internet etc. Upon being received by the user on a computing device thereof such user can activate the application with the aid of an appropriate operating system on the computing device.

Typically an author and or publisher of the application wishes to distribute such application to each of many users or recipients in exchange for a license fee or some other consideration. In such scenario then the application may be a word processing application a spreadsheet application a browser application a gaming application a media player application a combination thereof and the like. Such author publisher or other similar entity hereinafter publisher given the choice would likely wish to restrict what each user can do with such published application. For example the publisher would like to restrict the user from copying and re distributing such application to a second user at least in a manner that denies the publisher a license fee from such second user.

However after publication has occurred such publisher has very little if any real control over the application. This is especially problematic in view of the fact that practically every personal computer includes the software and hardware necessary to make an exact digital copy of such application and to download such exact digital copy to a write able magnetic or optical disk or to send such exact digital copy over a network such as the Internet to any destination.

Of course as part of a transaction wherein the application is distributed the publisher may require the user recipient of the application to promise not to re distribute such application in an unwelcome manner. However such a promise is easily made and easily broken. A publisher may attempt to prevent such re distribution through any of several known security devices usually involving encryption and decryption. However there is likely very little that prevents a mildly determined user from decrypting an encrypted application saving such application in an un encrypted form and then re distributing same.

In addition the publisher may wish to provide the user with the flexibility to purchase different types or editions of the application. For example the publisher may wish to provide a full featured edition at a higher price and a rudimentary edition at a lower price. Likewise the publisher may wish to offer a business edition and a home edition a student edition and a teacher edition or the like. Note though that in the prior art each such edition of the application would require that the publisher distribute a separate set of operating code. Thus and as should be appreciated offering multiple editions of the same application requires that a publisher maintain package and sell each such edition separately with considerable expense. Moreover each such edition likely is supported separately updated separately and debugged separately with even more considerable expense. Also when errors or bugs in the application are found each such edition likely must be separately reviewed and corrected if in fact the error exists in all such editions once again with considerable expense.

To provide the user with the flexibility to purchase different editions of an application a publisher may offer different types of use licenses at different license fees while at the same time holding the user to the terms of whatever type of license is in fact purchased. For example and in the case where the application includes multiple available features the publisher may wish to offer a user menus of such available features editions to be licensed or even allow a user to select particular ones of the available features to be licensed. Thus the user in purchasing such a license would be able to employ the available features of the application that are enabled by the license and would be restricted from employing the available features of the application that are not enabled by the license. Presumably fees for licenses would vary based on the available features enabled thereby.

Significantly by offering multiple types of licenses for the application or by offering customized licenses for the application the publisher can avoid having to distribute multiple distinct editions of the application each tailored to a particular set of available features. Instead the publisher need only distribute a single base copy of the application with all available features and then provide a license that enables only a certain subset of all such available features. As may be appreciated if the single base copy of the application is distributed in a form such that the application is inoperable without a valid license such application may be freely distributed and re distributed yet may only be operated by a user if such user obtains a license from the publisher or an agent thereof.

Rights Management RM and enforcement architectures and methods have previously been provided to allow the controlled operation of arbitrary forms of digital applications where such control is flexible and definable by the publisher of such application. Typically a digital license is provided to operate the application where the application cannot be actuated in a meaningful manner without such license. For example it may be the case that at least a portion of the application is encrypted and the license includes a decryption key for decrypting such encrypted portion. In addition it may be the case that the license is tied to a user or a computing device thereof and such computing device includes a security feature that ensures that the terms of the license are honored.

However such RM architectures have not heretofore been employed to effectuate a licensing architecture where only one copy of a digital application need be released with multiple available features or editions such that a particular license issued to a particular user specifies which available features edition may be employed by the user. Accordingly a need exists for such a licensing architecture whereby a publisher of an application need not release multiple editions of the same application and a user in obtaining a license can select which of the multiple available features editions are to be licensed.

The aforementioned needs are satisfied at least in part by the present invention in which a computing device and associated method are provided to obtain a use license for using an application on a computing device where the application includes a plurality of features. In the method a transaction is engaged with a retailer to obtain a product license corresponding to the application from such retailer where the product license defines at least one feature of the application that may be employed based on such product license. In addition a base copy of the application is obtained from a distributor and is actuated. The use license corresponds to the product license and is acquired from a licensor by way of the actuated application sending the product license to the licensor along with an identification of at least one of a user the computing device and a trusted component operating on the computing device where the use license includes feature policy granting rights to employ each feature defined in the product license.

Although not required the invention can be implemented via an application programming interface API for use by a developer and or included within the network browsing software which will be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by one or more computers such as client workstations servers or other devices. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures and the like that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Typically the functionality of the program modules may be combined or distributed as desired in various embodiments. Moreover those skilled in the art will appreciate that the invention may be practiced with other computer system configurations. Other well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers PCs automated teller machines server computers hand held or laptop devices multi processor systems microprocessor based systems programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network or other data transmission medium. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing the invention includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus .

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CDROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies. A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard and pointing device commonly referred to as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB .

A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . A graphics interface such as Northbridge may also be connected to the system bus . Northbridge is a chipset that communicates with the CPU or host processing unit and assumes responsibility for accelerated graphics port AGP communications. One or more graphics processing units GPUs may communicate with graphics interface . In this regard GPUs generally include on chip memory storage such as register storage and GPUs communicate with a video memory . GPUs however are but one example of a coprocessor and thus a variety of co processing devices may be included in computer . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface which may in turn communicate with video memory . In addition to monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer although only a memory storage device has been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on memory device . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

One of ordinary skill in the art can appreciate that a computer or other client device can be deployed as part of a computer network. In this regard the present invention pertains to any computer system having any number of memory or storage units and any number of applications and processes occurring across any number of storage units or volumes. The present invention may apply to an environment with server computers and client computers deployed in a network environment having remote or local storage. The present invention may also apply to a standalone computing device having programming language functionality interpretation and execution capabilities.

Distributed computing facilitates sharing of computer resources and services by direct exchange between computing devices and systems. These resources and services include the exchange of information cache storage and disk storage for files. Distributed computing takes advantage of network connectivity allowing clients to leverage their collective power to benefit the entire enterprise. In this regard a variety of devices may have applications objects or resources that may interact to implicate authentication techniques of the present invention for trusted graphics pipeline s .

It can also be appreciated that an object such as may be hosted on another computing device or . Thus although the physical environment depicted may show the connected devices as computers such illustration is merely exemplary and the physical environment may alternatively be depicted or described comprising various digital devices such as PDAs televisions MP3 players etc. software objects such as interfaces COM objects and the like.

There are a variety of systems components and network configurations that support distributed computing environments. For example computing systems may be connected together by wireline or wireless systems by local networks or widely distributed networks. Currently many of the networks are coupled to the Internet which provides the infrastructure for widely distributed computing and encompasses many different networks.

In home networking environments there are at least four disparate network transport media that may each support a unique protocol such as Power line data both wireless and wired voice e.g. telephone and entertainment media. Most home control devices such as light switches and appliances may use power line for connectivity. Data Services may enter the home as broadband e.g. either DSL or Cable modem and are accessible within the home using either wireless e.g. HomeRF or 802.11b or wired e.g. Home PNA Cat 5 even power line connectivity. Voice traffic may enter the home either as wired e.g. Cat 3 or wireless e.g. cell phones and may be distributed within the home using Cat 3 wiring. Entertainment media may enter the home either through satellite or cable and is typically distributed in the home using coaxial cable. IEEE 1394 and DVI are also emerging as digital interconnects for clusters of media devices. All of these network environments and others that may emerge as protocol standards may be interconnected to form an intranet that may be connected to the outside world by way of the Internet. In short a variety of disparate sources exist for the storage and transmission of data and consequently moving forward computing devices will require ways of protecting content at all portions of the data processing pipeline.

The Internet commonly refers to the collection of networks and gateways that utilize the TCP IP suite of protocols which are well known in the art of computer networking. TCP IP is an acronym for Transport Control Protocol Interface Program. The Internet can be described as a system of geographically distributed remote computer networks interconnected by computers executing networking protocols that allow users to interact and share information over the networks. Because of such wide spread information sharing remote networks such as the Internet have thus far generally evolved into an open system for which developers can design software applications for performing specialized operations or services essentially without restriction.

Thus the network infrastructure enables a host of network topologies such as client server peer to peer or hybrid architectures. The client is a member of a class or group that uses the services of another class or group to which it is not related. Thus in computing a client is a process i.e. roughly a set of instructions or tasks that requests a service provided by another program. The client process utilizes the requested service without having to know any working details about the other program or the service itself. In a client server architecture particularly a networked system a client is usually a computer that accesses shared network resources provided by another computer e.g. a server. In the example of computers etc. can be thought of as clients and computer etc. can be thought of as the server where server etc. maintains the data that is then replicated in the client computers etc.

A server is typically a remote computer system accessible over a remote network such as the Internet. The client process may be active in a first computer system and the server process may be active in a second computer system communicating with one another over a communications medium thus providing distributed functionality and allowing multiple clients to take advantage of the information gathering capabilities of the server.

Client and server communicate with one another utilizing the functionality provided by a protocol layer. For example Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP is a common protocol that is used in conjunction with the World Wide Web WWW . Typically a computer network address such as a Universal Resource Locator URL or an Internet Protocol IP address is used to identify the server or client computers to each other. The network address can be referred to as a Universal Resource Locator address. For example communication can be provided over a communications medium. In particular the client and server may be coupled to one another via TCP IP connections for high capacity communication.

Thus illustrates an exemplary networked or distributed environment with a server in communication with client computers via a network bus in which the present invention may be employed. In more detail a number of servers etc. are interconnected via a communications network bus which may be a LAN WAN intranet the Internet etc. with a number of client or remote computing devices etc. such as a portable computer handheld computer thin client networked appliance or other device such as a VCR TV oven light heater and the like in accordance with the present invention. It is thus contemplated that the present invention may apply to any computing device in connection with which it is desirable to process store or render secure content from a trusted source.

In a network environment in which the communications network bus is the Internet for example the servers can be Web servers with which the clients etc. communicate via any of a number of known protocols such as HTTP. Servers may also serve as clients as may be characteristic of a distributed computing environment. Communications may be wired or wireless where appropriate. Client devices may or may not communicate via communications network bus and may have independent communications associated therewith. For example in the case of a TV or VCR there may or may not be a networked aspect to the control thereof. Each client computer and server computer may be equipped with various application program modules or objects and with connections or access to various types of storage elements or objects across which files may be stored or to which portion s of files may be downloaded or migrated. Thus the present invention can be utilized in a computer network environment having client computers etc. that can access and interact with a computer network bus and server computers etc. that may interact with client computers etc. and other devices and databases .

As is known and referring now to rights management RM and enforcement is highly desirable in connection with a digital application that is to be distributed to users. Upon being received by the user such user instantiates the application with the aid of an appropriate computing device or the like.

Typically an application author or publisher hereinafter publisher distributing such digital application wishes to restrict what the user can do with such distributed application . For example the publisher may wish to restrict the user from copying and re distributing such application to a second user or may wish to allow distributed application to be actuated only a limited number of times only for a certain total time only on a certain type of machine only on a certain type of rendering platform only by a certain type of user etc.

However after distribution has occurred such publisher has very little if any control over the application . An RM system then allows the controlled actuating of an application where such control is flexible and definable by the publisher of such application . Typically the application is distributed to the user in the form of a package by way of any appropriate distribution channel. The package as distributed may include the application or a portion thereof encrypted with a symmetric encryption decryption key KD i.e. KD AP as well as other information identifying the application how to acquire a license for such application etc.

The trust based RM system allows the publisher of the application to specify license rules that must be satisfied before such application is allowed to be actuated on a user s computing device . Such license rules can include the aforementioned temporal requirement and may be embodied within a digital license or use document hereinafter license that the user user s computing device such terms being interchangeable unless circumstances require otherwise must obtain from the publisher or an agent thereof. Such license also includes the decryption key KD for decrypting the encrypted portion of the application perhaps encrypted according to a key decryptable by the user s computing device . As seen in such encrypting key may be a public key of the user s computing device PU BB and the user s computing device presumably has the corresponding private key PR BB by which PU BB KD may be decrypted.

The publisher for the application must trust that the user s computing device will abide by the rules and requirements specified by such publisher in the license i.e. that the application will not be actuated unless the rules and requirements within the license are satisfied. Preferably then the user s computing device is provided with a trusted component or mechanism that will not actuate the application except according to the license rules embodied in the license associated with the application and obtained by the user.

The trusted component typically has a license evaluator that determines whether the license is valid reviews the license rules and requirements in such valid license and determines based on the reviewed license rules and requirements whether the requesting user has the right to actuate the corresponding application in the manner sought among other things. As should be understood the license evaluator is trusted in the RM system to carry out the wishes of the publisher of the application according to the rules and requirements in the license and the user should not be able to easily alter such trusted element for any purpose nefarious or otherwise.

As should be understood the rules and requirements in the license can specify whether the user has rights to actuate the application based on any of several factors including who the user is where the user is located what type of computing device the user is using what operating system is calling the RM system the date the time etc. In addition the rules and requirements of the license may limit the license to a pre determined number of actuations or pre determined operating time for example. Thus the trusted component may need to refer to a clock on the computing device .

The rules and requirements may be specified in the license according to any appropriate language and syntax. For example the language may simply specify attributes and values that must be satisfied DATE must be later than X e.g. or may require the performance of functions according to a specified script IF DATE greater than X THEN DO . . . e.g. .

Upon the license evaluator determining that the license is valid and that the user satisfies the rules and requirements therein the application can then be actuated. In particular to actuate the application the decryption key KD is obtained from the license and is applied to KD AP from the package to result in the actual application and the actual application is then in fact actuated in the manner set forth in the license .

As set forth above the license with PU BB KD in effect authorizes an entity in possession of PR BB to access KD and thereby access the application encrypted according to such KD presuming of course that the entity abides by all conditions as set forth in the license . As should be appreciated though other types of licenses may exists within the RM system .

For example it may be appreciated that in one scenario the publisher of the application may authorize one or more particular licensors to issue a license for the application by providing the licensor with a publishing license . As may be appreciated such publishing license is similar to the license in that such publishing license likely includes the decryption key KD for decrypting the application here encrypted according to a public key of the licensor PU BB . Likewise the publishing license likely includes the rules and requirements for rendering the content . Here however such rules and requirements are to be inserted into the license as issued by the licensor and are not especially applicable to such licensor .

Note though that the publishing license may indeed include other rules and requirements that are indeed applicable to the licensor . Accordingly the licensor should include a trusted component with a license evaluator in a manner akin to the user s computing device . Significantly each type of license etc. hereinafter license as proffered typically includes a digital signature for authentication verification purposes and each digital signature is validated by the trusted component before the license is honored. Of course if any validation fails the process ends and the license is not honored.

As was set forth above a publisher may wish to provide a user with the flexibility to purchase different types or editions of an application . For example and again the publisher may wish to provide a full featured edition a rudimentary edition a business edition a home edition etc. However according to the prior art each such edition of the application would be separately issued as a code set i.e. computer file or series of such files or the like . As should be evident supporting maintaining marketing and distributing each such separately issued code set could be greatly complicated especially as compared to performing such chores with regard to a single commonly issued code set.

Thus in one embodiment of the present invention a publisher in fact issues a common code set for the application but differentiates between editions of the application by issuing differing corresponding RM licenses . Significantly the application as set forth within the common code set is defined to have a plurality of features or the like and each license is defined to enable certain ones of the defined features and or disable certain ones of the defined features. Constructing and employing such a license for the application within the RM architecture is known or should be apparent to the relevant public and therefore need not be set forth herein in any detail. Accordingly any such method of constructing and employing such a license may be used without departing from the spirit of the present invention described herein.

For example it may be the case that the application has an instantiation portion that instantiates same on the computing device and that such instantiation portion is encrypted and decryptable according to the key KD from the license . Thus upon an appropriate command from the user or the like the trusted component retrieves such key KD from the license if such license so allows and then employs the retrieved KD to decrypt the instantiation portion and the decrypted instantiation portion is then employed to instantiate the application .

Similarly it may be the case that the application is defined to have several feature portions each corresponding to a feature and that each feature portion requires as a condition precedent to the use thereof that the trusted component confirm that the license so allows. Thus and as should now be appreciated if an application has features A B and C a first license corresponding to a first edition of the application may allow use of feature A only a second license corresponding to a second edition of the application may allow use of features B and C only a third license corresponding to a third edition of the application may allow use of all of features A B and C and the like. Note here that editions may be defined by the publisher by offering only certain types of corresponding licenses or may be customized by a user in the course of obtaining a particular license presuming that the publisher in fact offers such a customized license . In obtaining a particular type of license a user is able to employ the available features of the application that are enabled by the license and is restricted from employing the available features of the application that are not enabled by the license . Presumably in the case where a license is obtained as a purchase based on a fee such fee would vary based on the available features in the application enabled thereby.

Significantly although the application may be offered in at least the three editions as set forth above if not more all three editions may be based on a single base copy of the application with all available features included therein. As should be appreciated each feature is available to a particular user with a particular license if the license enables such feature or does not disable such feature. Moreover the single base copy may be widely distributed and re distributed without fear of inappropriate use inasmuch as use of the application can occur only with a properly obtained license .

Notably to effectuate issuing such license for an application and in one embodiment of the present invention a licensing architecture such as that shown in is provided. As seen in such the licensing architecture includes the publisher and the licensor of and may also include a retailer that retails the application to a user. Of course the publisher may also be the retailer without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention.

Presumably such retailer is a retail location that performs a retail transaction with a user to obtain the application and or to obtain a license corresponding thereto. In doing so the retailer would direct the user to a distributor or the like operating a distribution site or the like to obtain the application itself and or would direct the user to the licensor for the license itself. Presumably although not necessarily the retailer the licensor and the distributor are all networked together by way of a network such as the Internet and the user visits the retailer and obtains the application from the distributor and the license from the licensor hereinafter the use license by way of such network.

In one embodiment of the present invention and as seen in the application as provided by the publisher includes executable code by which the application is instantiated and employed. Significantly such application as provided by the publisher also includes a number of special licenses including a definition license an initial license and a non network license where such special licenses are distinct from the use license heretofore referenced.

The definition license again is not itself a use license that may be obtained from a licensor to employ the application but instead is a special license that defines all of the features available in the application by way of an appropriate use license . Such definition license sets forth all of the features of the application as available rights then but does not actually grant any of such rights. Instead an obtained use license in enabling a particular feature grants a corresponding right.

Thus to continue the example from above if an application included three defined features A B and C the definition license would set forth each such features A B and C together with pertinent information relating thereto. Such pertinent features may for example include a reference to the feature in the application a description and perhaps edition information regarding which edition of the application includes such feature. Thus a use license that enables such feature may for example employ such information to allow a user to employ same. Likewise if a use license does not enable such feature such information may nevertheless be employed to inform a user of the availability of such feature and perhaps even direct the user to a licensor to obtain another use license that would enable such feature.

Unlike a definition license an initial license is itself akin to a use license that may be used to employ the application . However such use license is a special license in that such use license can only be employed in an initial manner such as for example to allow a user to try out the application for a defined amount or length of time for example. Note here that the use license is not tied to the user or the computing device thereof.

Such initial license may or may not grant rights to all features of the application as set forth within the definition license depending upon how the publisher has constructed such initial license . Generally the initial license may be offered to allow a prospective user a period of time to try out the application without purchasing a use license to allow the user to have free access to a rudimentary edition of the application without the need to obtain a use license or the like. In the former case the initial license may grant rights to all features but for a relatively short period of time while in the latter case the initial license may grant rights to some features but for a relatively long period of time. Thus a user may employ the initial license in a temporary manner until such user either decides to obtain a use license or to not further employ the application or may employ the initial license to use a rudimentary form of the application as the case may be.

Like an initial license a non network license is itself akin to a use license that may be used to employ the application . However such non network license is a special license in the event that a user does not have network access to the licensor but still wishes to use the application . Typically in such a case the non network license cannot be employed unless the user obtains a confirmation code such as for example by telephone or mail where such confirmation code may be obtained in exchange for a fee. Thus with such confirmation code the non network license enables the application to be employed as if the user had obtained some sort of use license from the licensor . Here too the non network license is not tied to the user or the computing device thereof at least not directly although obtaining the confirmation code does at least indirectly tie the non networked license to the user presuming the user identified itself in the course of obtaining such confirmation code.

As with the initial license the non networked license may or may not grant rights to all features of the application as set forth within the definition license depending upon how the publisher has constructed such non networked license . Note that while the non networked license may grant rights to all features of the application doing so may be inadvisable inasmuch as the obtained special code could be transferred by the user to others who would then be able to access all such features of the application .

Typically the retailer can provide the application with the aforementioned special licenses to the user either directly or by way of the aforementioned distributor . Note though that the user may also obtain such application from the publisher or from any other source without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. In fact and as set forth in more detail below it may be that the user obtains the application from an acquaintance or a third party and then obtains a use license by way of the retailer .

In any case and in one embodiment of the present invention the application as distributed to the user may additionally be packaged with referral information including an identification of a particular retailer . Thus in the situation where the user obtains the application from a source other than the retailer such referral information refers such user to such retailer to effectuate a transaction to obtain a use license for a particular edition of such application . In addition even after the user obtains the use license such referral information may be employed should the user desire to go back to the retailer to return such use license or to obtain a different use license for another edition of such application .

As was set forth above a user in possession of the single base copy of the application requires a use license of some sort to employ a particular corresponding edition of the application unless of course the user employs the aforementioned initial license or non network license . However and as should be appreciated such a use license contains the decryption key KD for accessing the encrypted portion of the application and is tied to the user or the computing device thereof and thus does not normally travel with the application .

In one embodiment of the present invention then and remembering that the application includes the definition license as was set forth above the user in the course of obtaining such a use license first obtains from the retailer or the like a product license that specifies at least some of the features as set forth in the definition license . In such embodiment the product license is not itself a use license that can be used to employ the application . Instead the product license as provided by the retailer or the like defines which edition of the application that the user has obtained or else the features as set forth in the definition license that the user has requested and thus is a token or authorization that the user presents to the licensor during the course of a use license request transaction to signify to such licensor that such user is entitled to a corresponding use license for a particular edition of the application .

Put more simply the user interacts with the retailer to obtain the right to a use license but does not in fact receive the use license from such retailer . Instead the user receives the product license as a token that is presented to the licensor and the licensor in response in fact issues a corresponding use license to the user that the user may in fact use to employ a corresponding edition of the application . The use license as issued corresponds to the product license in that the rights conferred in the use license correspond to the edition or features set forth in the product license .

As may be appreciated while the product license could be dispensed with by having the user obtain the use license in the course of a direct transaction with the licensor the licensor may prefer not to handle the retail aspects of such a direct transaction. Moreover by employing the product license in the manner set forth herein multiple retailers may be employed to effectuate retail transactions with users while still only having one or a few licensors each licensor being able to issue a use license in connection with a transaction with any retailer . Finally by separating the issuance of the use license by the licensor from the retail transaction with the retailer the publisher may exert greater control over such issuance and also may achieve greater security.

Presumably the product license as provided by the retailer to the user includes appropriate information regarding where the user may find the licensor to issue the use license corresponding to such product license . In addition and in one embodiment of the present invention the product license as provided by the retailer to the user may be packaged with referral information including an identification of the distributor from which the application may be obtained. Thus in the situation where the user obtains the product license prior to the application such referral information refers such user to such distributor to obtain the base copy of such application . In addition even after the user obtains the application such referral information may be employed should the user desire to go back to the distributor for another copy of such base copy of such application or even for a new or updated version of such base copy of such application .

To summarize then a user may obtain the application before or after a product license therefor. If before the referral information packaged with the application is employed to locate a particular retailer from which the user can obtain the product license . If after the referral information packaged with the product license is employed to locate a particular distributor from which the user can obtain the base copy of the application .

In one typical scenario and turning now to a user purchasing or otherwise obtaining the application and a corresponding use license would visit a retailer therefor and engage therewith in a transaction by which the user would select particular features desired in the application or a particular edition of the application step . As part of such transaction the user may provide a fee to the retailer . Typically although not necessarily the retailer controls the transaction and determines the presentation of information and options relating to the application and acceptable forms of payment and upon approval from the user executes the transaction.

Also as part of the transaction the retailer collects information from the user necessary to construct or obtain an appropriate product license corresponding to the user selection and in fact constructs or obtains such product license step . As noted above such product license may be packaged with referral information including a particular distributor from which the base copy of the application may be obtained. At any rate such product license is conveyed from the retailer to the user step . In addition the retailer may send a transaction confirmation message to the user confirming the transaction. If so the message may include a location at which the product license may be obtained if such product license is not automatically sent to the user.

Upon receiving the product license from the retailer the user may install same step or may save the product license for later retrieval and installation. Generally and as will be set forth below in more detail installation includes validating the publishing license including a signature thereof and storing same on the computing device of the user. Although a use license corresponding to the product license may be obtained at this point it may instead be advisable to first ensure that the corresponding application has been installed. Note that if the product license is saved for later retrieval such product license should be saved in an encrypted form especially if the product license can be taken by another user and employed thereby.

Once the product license has been received the user s computing device determines whether the corresponding application has been installed step . Such check may for example be achieved by checking a registry on the computing device for an appropriate value. If already installed the application may then be actuated to complete the process of acquiring the use license step . If not installed the application is acquired from the distributor set forth in the referral information included with the product license or is obtained from a storage medium available to the computing device and the acquired application is installed on such computing device step and the installed application is then actuated as at step .

Note that at this point there may already be another obtained use license on the computing device in which case the use license to be obtained is an additional use license . At any rate upon the installed application being actuated and based on the presence of the product license the computing device acquires a use license corresponding thereto step . In particular the product license and perhaps the definition license from the application are sent to the licensor as identified within the product license along with an identification of the user and or the computing device thereof and or the trusted component thereof or the like step .

The licensor validates all licenses and identifications and assuming such validations succeed the licensor constructs an appropriate use license based thereon step and returns same to the requesting user step . Notably in constructing the use license the licensor obtains a cryptographic key from at least one of the identifications such as a public key PU of the user encrypts the aforementioned decryption key KD for the application with such PU to result in PU KD and includes such PU KD in the constructed and returned use license . Also notably the identifications may include a hardware ID HWID corresponding to the user s computing device and such HWID may also be included in the constructed and returned use license . Further notably the licensor may note in an appropriate database that the product license has been submitted and that a corresponding use license has been issued and also may notify the retailer regarding same.

The user s computing device may store the returned use license in an appropriate location such as a license store and such stored use license may then be employed to use certain features of the application. In particular and turning now to upon a request to use a particular feature of the application step such feature of the application may in effect request that the trusted component determine whether a use license on the computing device permits such use of such feature step . In response the trusted component may locate an obtained use license in a license store step validate same step and determine whether such validated use license permits the use of the feature step .

Presuming that the validated use license does in fact permit the use of the feature such trusted component then retrieves PU KD from such use license and applies a corresponding private key PR to same to reveal the decryption key KD step and such decryption key KD may then be applied in an appropriate manner to decrypt an appropriate portion of the application step . Thereafter the requested feature may be used step .

As may be appreciated at some point the user after having obtained the use license may decide to return same for any of a variety of reasons. Critically if the user is allowed to return such use license such user should not be allow to retain a copy of such use license . Accordingly in one embodiment of the present invention and turning now to such return is effectuated by way of a request to the retailer that includes the corresponding product license as provided thereby step . In response the retailer returns an executable or command to the user s computing device step where the executable command in effect deletes the use license from the user s computing device in a trusted manner. In particular the trusted component on such computing device executes the executable command to delete the use license at issue step and then sends a message to the retailer that the deletion was successful step . Thereafter the retailer informs the licensor that the corresponding product license is invalid step and the licensor notes same in a database thereof such that any future request for a use license based on such product license is not honored.

As may also be appreciated and remembering that the use license is tied to a particular computing device by way of including a HWID of such computing device in such use license it is to be recognized that the user may wish to transfer the use license to another computing device thereof with a different HWID again for any of a variety of reasons. Similar to before if the user is allowed to transfer such use license from a first device to a second device such user should not be allow to retain a copy of such use license as tied to the first device . Accordingly in one embodiment of the present invention and turning again to such transfer is effectuated in a manner similar to a return. In particular such transfer is effectuated by way of a request to the licensor that includes the corresponding product license as provided by the retailer step . In response the licensor returns an executable or command to the user s computing device step where the executable command in effect deletes the use license from the user s computing device in a trusted manner. Again the trusted component on such computing device executes the executable command to delete the use license at issue step and then sends a message to the licensor that the deletion was successful step .

Significantly in the context of a transfer the licensor should be able to issue another use license corresponding to the product license in this case to a different computing device of the user. Accordingly in the context of a transfer the licensor notes that the corresponding product license can again be employed step and any future request for a use license based on such product license is in fact honored.

In one embodiment of the present invention a publisher may define a license by way of a license file or the like and then may give the license file to a retailer for sale. In addition the publisher may create the base copy of the application and provide same to the distributor . The retailer may then sell the license to a user and deliver same by way of a licensor operating a web page or the like. The license may be packaged with information that points the user to the distributor if the user needs to obtain the application therefrom. The application may be packaged with information that points the user to the licensor if the user needs to obtain the license therefrom. Thus a user in possession of the application can find the licensor to obtain a license and a user in possession of the license can find the distributor to obtain the application .

The programming necessary to effectuate the processes performed in connection with the present invention is relatively straight forward and should be apparent to the relevant programming public. Accordingly such programming is not attached hereto. Any particular programming then may be employed to effectuate the present invention without departing from the spirit and scope thereof.

In the present invention an RM architecture is employed to effectuate a licensing architecture where only one copy of a digital application need be released with multiple available features or editions such that a particular use license issued to a particular user specifies which available features edition may be employed by the user. Thus a publisher of the application need not release multiple editions of the same application and a user in obtaining a use license can select which of the multiple available features editions are to be licensed.

It should be appreciated that changes could be made to the embodiments described above without departing from the inventive concepts thereof. It should be understood therefore that this invention is not limited to the particular embodiments disclosed but it is intended to cover modifications within the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims.

