---

title: Reactive material enhanced projectiles and related methods
abstract: A projectile having a reactive material disposed therein is provided. The projectile includes a housing which defines a cavity, the cavity being open at one end of thereof. A reactive material is disposed within the cavity. A tip is coupled with the housing and substantially encloses the opening of the cavity. The housing, the reactive material and the tip are cooperatively positioned and configured so as to define a void space between a surface of the tip and a surface of the reactive material. Upon impact with a target, the tip of the projectile is designed to become displaced within the cavity until it contacts the reactive material and transfers kinetic energy thereto, thereby causing ignition of the reactive material. The void space may be defined to provide a desired amount of time between initial impact of the projectile with a target and the subsequent ignition of the reactive material.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07603951&OS=07603951&RS=07603951
owner: Alliant Techsystems Inc.
number: 07603951
owner_city: Minneapolis
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050314
---
The present application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 553 430 entitled REACTIVE MATERIAL ENHANCED PROJECTILES AND RELATED METHODS filed on Mar. 15 2004 the disclosure of which is incorporated by reference herein in its entirety.

The United States Government has certain rights in the present invention pursuant to Contract No. N00178 01 D 1015 between the United States Navy and ATK Thiokol a subsidiary of Alliant Techsystems Inc. and Contract No. DAAe30 01 9 0800 between the United States Army and ATK Thiokol a subsidiary of Alliant Techsystems Inc.

The present invention is related to reactive material enhanced projectiles and more particularly to projectiles including incendiary or explosive compositions the projectiles having improved stabilization characteristics and control over the ignition of the composition.

There are numerous designs of projectiles containing incendiary or explosive compositions. Such projectiles are conventionally configured such that the incendiary or explosive composition becomes ignited upon or shortly after the projectile s contact with a target. Ignition of the incendiary or explosive composition is intended to inflict additional damage on the intended target. Aside from the additional damage that might result from the pressure of the explosion the burning of the composition or both often ignition of the incendiary or explosive composition is accompanied by fragmentation of the projectile casing thereby providing additional shrapnel like components which spread out to create a larger area of impact and destruction.

Some exemplary projectiles containing an incendiary or explosive composition are described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 419 936 to Coates et al. the disclosure of which is incorporated by reference herein in its entirety. The Coates patent generally discloses a ballistic projectile having one or more chambers containing a material which is explosive hypergolic incendiary or otherwise reactive or inert. The material may be a liquid a semi liquid a slurry or of solid consistency. Initially the material is hermetically sealed within a casing of the projectile but is released when the projectile impacts with a target and the projectile casing is concomitantly fragmented.

In many cases projectiles containing an incendiary or explosive composition are designed to provide increased penetration of the projectile into a given target such as for example an armored vehicle. One such projectile is the MK211 armor piercing incendiary API a projectile which is configured for penetration of armor plating. However the MK211 and similar projectiles have proven to be relatively ineffective against what may be termed thin skinned targets. Thin skinned targets may include for example liquid filled fuel tanks or other similar structures having a wall thickness of for example about 6 millimeters mm about 0.25 inch or less.

Use of conventional APIs or other projectiles configured for penetration of armored structures often fail to inflict any damage on thin skinned targets other than the initial penetration opening. This is often because the projectiles are configured as penetrating structures with much of the projectile being dedicated to penetrating rods or other similar structures. As such these types of projectiles contain a relatively small amount of incendiary or explosive composition therein because the volume needed for larger amounts of such material is consumed by the penetrating structure. Thus containing relatively small amounts of incendiary or explosive materials the resultant explosions or reactions are similarly relatively small. Additionally because the incendiary or explosive composition is configured to ignite substantially simultaneously with the impact of the projectile and a target the explosion or other reaction is often complete before it can inflict substantial additional damage to the target such as ignition of leaking fuel from a fuel tank .

An exemplary projectile designed for discrimination between an armored type target and a thin skinned target includes that which is described in U.S. Patent Application Publication Number 20030140811. The projectile disclosed by this publication includes one or more sensors such as a piezoelectric crystal which are configured to determine the rate of deceleration of the projectile upon impact with a target. The rate of deceleration of the projectile will differ depending on whether an armored type target or a thin skinned target is being struck. For example the rate of deceleration of the projectile will be relatively greater i.e. it will decelerate more quickly if the projectile strikes an armored target than if it strikes a thin skinned target. Upon determining the rate of deceleration a fuse will ignite an incendiary or explosive composition at an optimized time in order to effectively increase the damage to the specific target depending on what type of target is being impacted.

While the projectile disclosed in the US 20030140811 publication reference provides an incendiary or explosive projectile which may provide some effectiveness against thin skinned targets the projectile disclosed thereby is a complex structure requiring numerous components and would likely be expensive and difficult to fabricate.

An additional problem with conventional incendiary or explosive projectiles is the ability to control the projectile s stability and accuracy. For example considering the projectile disclosed by the above described Coates patent wherein the incendiary explosive material is in the form of a liquid the liquid and surrounding casing will likely exhibit differing angular velocities at any given time particularly when the casing is rapidly changing its angular velocity such as upon initial firing or upon initial impact of a target. The independent angular velocities of the liquid material and casing can affect the overall stability of the projectile during flight and ultimately affect the projectile s accuracy particularly over long ranges. Of course such discrepancy in angular velocities can occur when other incendiary or explosive compositions including solid compositions are housed within the projectile s casing.

In view of the shortcomings in the art it would be advantageous to provide a projectile comprising a reactive material in the form of an incendiary explosive or pyrotechnic composition wherein the projectile may be tailored for proper ignition of the reactive material contained therein depending on the nature of an intended target while maintaining a simple robust and yet relatively inexpensive structural design. Additionally it would be an advantage to provide an explosive or incendiary projectile which exhibits increased stability and accuracy.

In accordance with one aspect of the invention a projectile is provided. The projectile includes a housing having a cavity defined therein the cavity being open at one end of the housing. A reactive material is disposed within the cavity. A tip is coupled with the housing and substantially closes the opening of the cavity. The housing the reactive material and the tip are cooperatively positioned and configured to define a void space between a surface of the tip and a surface of the reactive material.

The projectile may further include one or more recesses formed within a surface of the housing adjacent the cavity. The recesses or other surface features which may be used provide added securement between the reactive composition and the housing in order to prevent slippage therebetween and differential angular momentum between the reactive composition and the tip and housing assembly upon firing of the projectile.

In accordance with another embodiment of the present invention a method of timing the ignition of a reactive material disposed within a projectile is provided. The projectile includes a housing in which the reactive material is disposed and a tip coupled with the housing. The method includes providing a defined distance or standoff between a directionally trailing surface of the tip and a directionally leading surface of the reactive material. When the projectile is impacted upon a target the tip of the projectile is displaced rearwardly with respect to the housing such that the directionally trailing surface of the tip contacts the directionally leading surface of the reactive material. Kinetic energy from target impact is transferred to the reactive material through the displaced tip causing the ignition thereof. The defined distance or standoff may be tailored depending for example on the type of intended target e.g. armored vs. thin skinned and the desired reaction initiation time delay for ignition of the reactive material after target impact.

In accordance with yet another aspect of the present invention a method of fabricating a projectile is provided. The method includes providing a housing and defining a cavity within the housing including an opening at one end of the housing. A mass of reactive material is disposed within the cavity. A tip is coupled to the housing to close the opening and the tip the housing and the reactive material are cooperatively positioned and configured so as to define a void space between a surface of the tip and a surface of the reactive material.

In accordance with a further aspect of the present invention a method of timing the ignition of a reactive material disposed within a projectile is provided wherein the projectile includes a housing and a tip coupled with the housing. The method includes forming a rear housing portion for the projectile with a cavity therein and an open forward facing mouth and a selected volume of reactive material is disposed within the cavity. A projectile tip is placed into the mouth of the cavity and secured to the rear housing portion with a rearward facing surface of the projectile tip located a defined distance the defined distance being selected to at least in part determine a time delay between impact of the projectile tip and a target and initiation of the reactive material by contact of the rearward facing surface of the projectile tip therewith.

Referring to an assembled cartridge having a projectile in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention is shown. The cartridge includes a cartridge casing containing for example gun powder or another appropriate propellant composition . An initiating or detonation device commonly termed a primer is in communication with and configured to ignite the propellant composition . The projectile is coupled with the cartridge casing such as for example by mechanically press fitting the projectile into an end of the cartridge casing .

Upon actuation of the detonation device such as by a firing pin of a gun or other artillery weapon none shown the detonation device ignites the propellant composition causing the projectile to be expelled from the cartridge casing and from the barrel of a gun or other weapon in which the cartridge is housed at a very high rate of speed. For example in one embodiment the cartridge may be designed as a .50 caliber round meaning that the cartridge is designed to be fired from a weapon having a bore diameter of approximately .50 inch or approximately 13 mm wherein the projectile may exhibit a muzzle velocity the velocity of the projectile as it leaves the muzzle or barrel of a weapon of approximately 760 to 915 meters per second approximately 2 500 to 3 000 feet per second .

Referring now to an enlarged cross sectional view of the projectile is shown. The projectile includes a rear housing portion defining a cavity therein the cavity being open at a forward end of the rear housing portion . An appropriate incendiary explosive pyrotechnic or other reactive material hereinafter referred to as a reactive material for purposes of convenience is disposed within the cavity . A tip includes a shaped forward portion A and an aft portion B which is sized and configured for coupling with the rear housing portion of the projectile to close the open end or mouth of the cavity . For example the aft portion B of the tip may be sized to be press fit into the cavity of the rear housing portion . Additionally referring to in conjunction with the tip may include a shoulder which is configured to axially abut a surface of the rear housing providing a positive stop between the tip and rear housing when the projectile is initially assembled.

Still referring to a void space also referred to as an ullage may be defined between the aft portion B of the tip and the reactive material . The void space may be configured such that a specified distance Dis defined between the directionally trailing surface of the aft portion B of the tip and the directionally leading surface of the reactive material . As will be discussed in further detail hereinbelow the void space may be used to strategically define the amount of time delay between impact of the projectile with a target and initiation of the reactive material .

In some embodiments the cavity formed in the rear housing portion may include one or more grooves or flutes along a lateral periphery thereof. For example in the embodiment shown in a plurality of substantially longitudinally extending grooves are formed in the interior surface of the rear housing portion adjacent the cavity . The grooves may be incorporated into the wall of the rear housing portion surrounding the recess to provide improved securement of the reactive material within the cavity and to reduce or even prevent slippage of the reactive material relative to the rear housing portion of the projectile during travel thereof. In other embodiments other surface discontinuities may be used including for example discrete recesses or indentations protrusions roughened surface finishes or a combination thereof.

In many cases the projectile is fired from a barrel or muzzle which has rifling grooves formed therein. As will be appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art rifling grooves impart a rotational motion to the projectile during travel through the barrel which generally improves the accuracy of the projectile after leaving the barrel. Thus during flight of the projectile there exists a possibility of slippage occurring between the interfacing surfaces of the rear housing portion and the reactive material contained within the cavity . If slippage does occur the rear housing portion will rotate at a first angular velocity and the reactive material may rotate at a second angular velocity different from the first. Such a situation reduces the stability and accuracy of the projectile .

Additionally the recesses or flutes may be sized positioned and configured to assist in the fragmentation of the projectile more particularly the rear housing portion thereof upon impact of the projectile with a target and the ignition of the reactive material . For example it may be desirable to enhance the fracturing of the rear housing portion such that an explosion resulting from ignition of the reactive material occurs at a desired time and in a desired manner when the projectile strikes a thin skinned target such as a fuel tank. Thus the number of grooves or other surface features as well as their size and location within the cavity may be tailored according to the desired destructive effect to be provided by the projectile taking into account the type of target the projectile is intended to strike.

Moreover the size shape and configuration of flutes or other surface discontinuities may be specifically tailored to control the timing of the fragmentation of the projectile . For example by providing a greater number of the recesses or flutes within the rear housing portion or by providing the recesses or flutes with a relatively greater radial depth allows for easier breach of the rear housing portion by an ignited reactive material . Thus with a relatively weaker delivery vehicle i.e. the rear housing portion due to a tailored number size and shape of the recesses or flutes there will be less resistance to the reaction provided by an ignited reactive material and therefore a faster breach of the structure. On the other hand a relatively fewer number of recesses or flutes a recess or flute with a lesser radial depth in the rear housing portion or both will provide a stronger delivery vehicle with more resistance to breach thereof by an ignited reactive material and therefore a longer period of time to achieve such a breach. Thus the tailoring of the recesses or flutes or other surface discontinuities may be employed for purposes of controlling fragmental ion for controlling the time of structural breach of the projectile by an ignited reactive material for stabilization and spin control of the projectile during flight or for a combination of such purposes.

Still referring to in one exemplary embodiment the rear housing portion and the tip may be formed of a material such as brass. While it is contemplated that other materials may also be used brass may be used for example when the projectile is intended for thin skinned targets because it takes less energy to deform the tip of the projectile upon impact of a target as compared to for example carbon steel. One particular embodiment may include the projectile being formed as a 0.50 caliber round as defined hereinabove . Such an embodiment may include for example four flutes located approximately 90 from one another which exhibit a radial depth of approximately 0.015 inch approximately 0.38 mm and a circumferential width of approximately 0.020 inch approximately 0.51 mm . The void space may be configured using a selected value of reactive material in conjunction with a selected length of the aft portion B of the tip such that the distance Dis approximately 0.23 inch approximately 5.8 mm . Of course it is to be understood that the projectile may be formed of different materials and may be sized larger or smaller than a .50 caliber round include a larger or smaller void space and include different surface features within the rear housing portion to prevent slippage between the reactive material and the rear housing portion to control fragmentation to control timing of an ignited reactive material breaching the structure or to effect some combination thereof.

Various types of reactive material may be used with the projectile . In one embodiment the reactive material includes reactive material components from at least two of the following three component categories at least one fuel at least one oxidizer and at least one class 1.1 explosive. The reactive material is formulated for use in a reactive material projectile such as a bullet and to provide at least one of an overpressure of greater than approximately 9 pounds per square inch approximatley 62 kilopascals at a radial measurement of approximately 12 inches approximately 305 mm from a point of impact on a target a hole greater than approximately 2 square inches approximately 12.9 square centimeters at an optimum penetration level in a target and pressure damage and a flame when the reactive material projectile impacts a target.

The at least one fuel may be selected from the group consisting of a metal a fusible metal alloy an organic fuel and mixtures thereof. A suitable metal for the fuel may be selected from the group consisting of hafnium tantalum nickel zinc tin silicon palladium bismuth iron copper phosphorous aluminum tungsten zirconium magnesium boron titanium sulfur magnalium and mixtures thereof. A suitable organic for the fuel may be selected from the group consisting of phenolphthalein and hexa ammine cobalt III nitrate. A suitable fusible metal alloy for the fuel may include at least one metal selected from the group consisting of bismuth lead tin cadmium indium mercury antimony copper gold silver and zinc. In one embodiment the fusible metal alloy may have a composition of about 57 bismuth about 26 indium and about 17 tin.

The at least one oxidizer may be selected from the group consisting of an inorganic oxidizer sulfur a fluoropolymer and mixtures thereof. The at least one oxidizer may be an alkali or alkaline metal nitrate an alkali or alkaline metal perchlorate or an alkaline metal peroxide. For instance the at least one oxidizer may be ammonium perchlorate potassium perchlorate potassium nitrate strontium nitrate basic copper nitrate ammonium nitrate cupric oxide tungsten oxides silicon dioxide manganese dioxide molybdenum trioxide bismuth oxides iron oxide molybdenum trioxide or mixtures thereof. The at least one oxidizer may also be selected from the group consisting of polytetrafluoroethylene a thermoplastic terpolymer of tetrafluoroethylene hexafluoropropylene and vinylidene fluoride and a copolymer of vinylidenefluoride hexafluoropropylene.

The at least one class 1.1 explosive may be selected from the group consisting of trinitrotoluene cyclo 1 3 5 trimethylene 2 4 6 trinitramine cyclotetramethylene tetranitramine hexanitrohexaazaisowurtzitane 4 10 dinitro 2 6 8 12 tetraoxa 4 10 diazatetracyclo 5.5.0.0.0 dodecane 1 3 3 trinitroazetine ammonium dinitramide 2 4 6 trinitro 1 3 5 benzenetriamine dinitrotoluene and mixtures thereof. The reactive material may also include at least one binder selected from the group consisting of polyurethanes epoxies polyesters nylons cellulose acetate butyrate ethyl cellulose silicone graphite and bis 2 2 dinitropropyl acetal bis 2 2 dinitropropyl formal .

A more specific exemplary composition includes a mixture of approximately 90 hafnium by weight and approximately 10 THV fluoropolymer a terpolymer of tetrafluoroethylene hexafluoropropylene and vinylidene fluoride by weight. Of course other reactive compositions may be used in conjunction with the present invention. Other exemplary reactive compositions which may be used with the present invention as set forth in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 801 948 entitled REACTIVE MATERIAL ENHANCED MUNITION COMPOSITIONS AND PROJECTILES CONTAINING SAME assigned to the assignee hereof the disclosure of which is incorporated by reference herein in its entirety.

Referring now to the projectile is shown upon impact with a target . As the projectile strikes the target a number of things occur. The tip of the projectile may experience an amount of deformation upon impact with the target . Similarly the wall of the target experiences some deformation as the projectile penetrates the target . Additionally upon impact with the target the tip of the projectile is displaced rearwardly into the cavity . In other words the tip becomes displaced relative to the rear housing portion as indicated by directional arrow .

It is noted that in order for the tip to become displaced into the cavity of the rear housing portion some deformation of the rear housing portion the tip such as along the shoulder shown in or both will occur. Thus it is desirable to design the interface of the tip and rear housing portion including the shoulder or other structure to yield and allow such relative displacement upon application of a determined dynamic force to the tip . In designing such an interface one may take into account the types of materials being used the wall thickness of rear housing portion the size and number of flutes or other surface discontinuities on the interior of the rear housing portion the shape of the tip the type of intended target e.g. thin skinned vs. armored the mass of the projectile and the anticipated speed or range or possible speeds of the projectile upon impact with an intended target.

The displacement of the tip relative to the rear housing causes the tip to impact reactive material . The reactive material is ignited either through the transfer of kinetic energy to the reactive material upon impact of the tip therewith through an adiabatic compression potential of the gas trapped in the void space which causes an increase of temperature on the surface of reactive material or through a combination of both events. Ignition of the reactive material causes the rear housing portion to burst and may produce a plume of fire with an associated pressure shock. The ignition of the reactive material causes additional damage to the intended target. For example if the intended target is a fuel tank the initial penetration of the projectile may cause fuel to escape from the fuel tank and vaporize while ignition of the reactive material may then cause ignition of the vaporized fuel and explosion of the fuel tank.

With reference to both it is noted that the void space shown in is eliminated upon displacement of the tip relative to the rear housing portion as shown in . The void space may be advantageously tailored such that the distance D and the attendant volume of the void space helps to determine the amount of time delay between initial impact of the projectile with a target and the ignition of the reactive material . For example the inventors presently believe that the volume of the void space helps to determine the amount of adiabatic compression potential of the gas trapped in the void space . The adiabatic compression may result in a temperature increase thereby affecting the time delay in the initiating ignition of the reactive material . In addition to tailoring the void space to produce a desired reaction time other features suitable for adjusting the time delay may be designed in conjunction with the void space such as the interfacing structure formed between the shoulder of the tip and its engagement with the rear housing portion such as been described hereinabove.

Referring now to another projectile is shown in accordance with another embodiment of the present invention. The projectile includes a rear housing portion defining a cavity therein. An appropriate incendiary explosive pyrotechnic or other reactive material is disposed within the cavity . A tip includes a shaped tapered forward portion A and an aft portion B which is sized and configured for coupling with the rear housing portion of the projectile . For example the aft portion B may be sized to be press fit into the cavity of the rear housing portion . Additionally the tip may include a shoulder or other physical structure configured to axially abut a surface of the rear housing portion providing a positive stop between the tip and rear housing portion when the projectile is initially assembled.

A void space or ullage may be defined between the aft portion B of the tip and the reactive material . The void space may be configured such that a specified distance Dis defined between the rear surface of the aft portion B of the tip and the forward surface of the reactive material . The void space may be used to strategically define the amount of time delay between impact of the projectile with a target and ignition of the reactive material upon displacement of the tip into the cavity and the associated transfer of kinetic energy from the tip to the reactive material upon adiabatic compression of gas within the void space or through a combination of such events.

In some embodiments while not specifically shown the cavity formed in the rear housing portion may include one or more grooves or other surface features such as described in conjunction with the embodiment shown and described with respect to . The projectile shown in also includes a first jacket disposed about the rear housing portion or a portion thereof and a second jacket disposed about the tip or a portion thereof .

In one embodiment the rear housing portion and tip are formed of a first material exhibiting a first hardness while the first and second jackets and respectively are formed of a second material exhibiting a second hardness which is less than that of the first material. For example in one particular embodiment the rear housing portion and the tip may be formed of steel while the first and second jackets and maybe formed of brass. Such an embodiment enables the projectile to penetrate a robust target such as an armored target more effectively than a projectile entirely or largely formed of for example brass. The first jacket may be used to interface with the inside surface of the muzzle or barrel of a firing weapon and more particularly with rifling grooves formed therein to avoid damage thereto while enhancing the interaction between the rifling grooves and the projectile. The second jacket provides a softer more yielding and deformable material at the interface between the tip and the rear housing portion . Such a structure enables more efficient and rapid displacement of the tip within the cavity upon impact of the projectile with a target.

It is noted that with the projectile being designed to provide increased penetration capability such as may be needed for an armored target the void space may be appropriately tailored in a manner described hereinabove to produce an increased time delay for initiation of reactive material so that it does not initiate prematurely. Similarly the projectile may be configured to control the amount of time before an ignited reactive material will breach the structure of the projectile as also discussed hereinabove. Thus in one example assuming the projectile is configured as a .50 caliber round as defined hereinabove the distance Dmay be approximately 0.575 inch approximately 14.6 mm .

Referring now to another projectile is shown in accordance with yet another embodiment of the present invention. The projectile is configured generally similar to the projectile shown and described with respect to . For example the projectile includes a rear housing portion which defines a cavity therein the cavity being filled with a reactive material . A tip is coupled with the rear housing portion . The tip also defines a cavity therein and the cavity is filled with a reactive material which may include an incendiary explosive or pyrotechnic composition. Thus the projectile is configured such that an initial explosion may occur by kinetically igniting the reactive material in the tip and a subsequent explosion may occur by kinetically or otherwise igniting the reactive material in the cavity of the rear housing portion . In some cases the reactive material in the tip may be the same or similar to the reactive material in the rear housing . In other cases the two reactive materials and may be considerably different from one another.

Thus in some embodiments one reactive material may be used for enhanced ignition of the other reactive material . In other embodiments the reactive material in the tip may be used for enhanced penetration of the projectile into an armored type target while the reactive material in the rear casing may be for inflicting explosive or incendiary damage to the target as described hereinabove.

While the invention may be susceptible to various modifications and alternative forms specific embodiments have been shown by way of example in the drawings and have been described in detail herein. However it should be understood that the invention is not intended to be limited to the particular forms disclosed. Rather the invention includes all modifications equivalents and alternatives falling within the spirit and scope of the invention as defined by the following appended claims.

