---

title: Entangled photon spectroscopy for stand-off detection and characterization
abstract: A system for and method of detecting and characterizing materials using entangled photons is presented. The material may be at a great distances from the detector and may be biological material, complex organic compounds, or inorganic chemicals. The disclosed system and method provide advantages over traditional techniques in that they are largely impervious to atmospheric reduction of probing radiation and in that less probing radiation is required. The reduced probe energy requirement allows for detecting and characterizing sensitive material with significantly reduced material bleaching compared with traditional techniques.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07408637&OS=07408637&RS=07408637
owner: General Dynamics Advanced Information Systems, Inc.
number: 07408637
owner_city: Arlington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050324
---
The present application claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 555 675 to Freeling et at entitled Entangled Photon Spectroscopy for Stand Off Detection and Characterization filed on Mar. 24 2004 the disclosure of which is expressly incorporated by reference herein in its entirety. The present application further incorporates by reference in its entirety U.S. Utility Patent Application Ser. No. 10 850 394 to Kastella et at entitled System and Method of Detecting Entangled Photons filed on May 21 2004.

To the extent that this invention was made with government support under contract number F33615 99 D 1501 delivery order 0009 awarded by the U.S. Air Force the government has certain rights in this invention.

The invention relates to ascertaining properties of a material using entangled photons. In particular the invention relates to directing entangled photons to a material possibly located at a distance from the source of entangled photons in order to ascertain properties of the material by detecting evidence of entangled photon absorption by the material.

Photons are quanta of electromagnetic energy. Multiple photons may be entangled or not entangled. Photons that are not entangled together i.e. random photons exist as independent entities. In contrast entangled photons have a connection between their respective properties.

Two photons entangled together are referred to as an entangled photon pair also biphotons . Traditionally photons comprising an entangled photon pair are called signal and idler photons. Measuring properties of one photon of an entangled photon pair determines results of measurements of corresponding properties of the other photon even if the two entangled photons are separated by a distance. As understood by those of ordinary skill in the art and by way of non limiting example the quantum mechanical state of an entangled photon pair cannot be factored into a product of two individual quantum states.

In general more than two photons may be entangled together. More than two photons entangled together are referred to as multiply entangled photons. Measuring properties of one or more photons in a set of multiply entangled photons restricts properties of the rest of the photons in the set by constraining measurement outcomes. As understood by those of ordinary skill in the art and by way of non limiting example the quantum mechanical state of a set of n 2 multiply entangled photons cannot be factored into a product of n separate states. The term entangled photons refers to both biphotons and multiply entangled photons.

General techniques for ascertaining spectroscopic properties of materials are known. Such techniques typically rely on directing non entangled random photons at a material which absorbs the photons and emits fluorescence. In general these techniques rely on varying the frequency of the non entangled photons. By comparing incident photon energy with the energy of resulting fluorophotons the absorbing material may be crudely characterized.

According to an embodiment of the present invention a system for and method of determining spectroscopic properties of a material are presented. The method comprises producing entangled photons having at least one known entangled photon parameter and directing the entangled photons to a material. Fluorescence resulting from entangled photon absorption by the material is observed and spectroscopic properties of the material are deduced from the at least one known entangled photon parameter and the fluorescence observations. The spectroscopic properties of the material are deduced from a relationship between absorption characteristics determined by the fluorescence observations and the known entangled photon parameters.

Various optional and preferable features and advantages of embodiments of the present invention include the following. Materials that may be detected and characterized include organic materials biological materials and inorganic materials. The probing radiation may be selected to be easily transmitted by the atmosphere. A material may be detected and characterized at a great distance from the invention embodiment. Low energy probing radiation may be used which results in reduced material bleaching when compared to traditional techniques.

Other exemplary embodiments and advantages of the present invention may be ascertained by reviewing the present disclosure and the accompanying drawings.

The particulars shown herein are by way of example and for purposes of illustrative discussion of the embodiments of the present invention only and are presented in the cause of providing what is believed to be the most useful and readily understood description of the principles and conceptual aspects of the present invention. In this regard the description taken with the drawings provides a fundamental understanding of the present invention making apparent to those skilled in the art how the several forms of the present invention may be embodied in practice.

Stand off detection and characterization embodiment is used to analyze spectroscopic properties of sample material . More particularly by manipulating parameters associated with entangled photons and monitoring whether sample material fluoresces in response to being bombarded by these photons stand off detection and characterization embodiment ascertains certain spectroscopic properties of sample material . As discussed below in reference to entangled photon parameters that may be usefully manipulated in embodiments of the present invention include entanglement time and interbeam delay. Standard electronic hardware or software e.g. is used to gather relevant entangled photon parameter information and fluorescence observations and thereby compute derived spectroscopic information. Specifics of this derivation and the types of spectroscopic information that may be determined are presented in detail below in reference to .

Adjustable nonlinear crystal is used to produce entangled photons with a known entanglement time. Entanglement time is an entangled photon parameter that depends on the thickness of the nonlinear crystal that produces the entangled photons. Typically denoted T entanglement time may be computed as by way of non limiting example T DL 2 where D is the difference in inverse group velocities of ordinary and extraordinary rays leaving the nonlinear crystal and L is the length of the nonlinear crystal. By way of non limiting example for BBO the parameter D may be approximated as D 0.2 psec mm where psec denotes picoseconds. Because the effective width of adjustable nonlinear crystal is manipulable adjustable nonlinear crystal selects the entanglement time of produced entangled photons. Thus setting various translation positions of adjustable nonlinear crystal halves allows for production of entangled photons with various corresponding entanglement times. The configuration for selecting entanglement time illustrated in is not meant to be limiting other techniques and configurations are also contemplated.

Adjustable delay is used to select an interbeam delay parameter of entangled photons. More particularly when used in an embodiment of the present invention adjustable delay interposes a temporal delay between constituent photons of an entangled photon pair. This delay generally denoted by is referred to as the interbeam delay associated with the entangled photons. That is the interbeam delay of an entangled photon pair is the delay induced by lengthening the optical path of one of the signal or idler photon relative to the optical path length of the other of the signal or idler photon.

Embodiments of the present invention generally seek to manipulate entanglement time and interbeam delay so as to maximize entangled photon absorption by the sample material. illustrates that in the case of hydrogen there are many possible combinations of entanglement time and interbeam delay that maximize entangled photon absorption e.g. . The entanglement time and interbeam delay of a set of entangled photons are typically manipulated as disclosed above in reference to respectively. Maximizing entangled photon absorption generally maximizes detectible fluorescence which is in turn used to derive spectroscopic properties of the sample material as described in detail below in reference to . Note however that either or both of entanglement time and interbeam delay may be manipulated according to embodiments of the present invention. Note also that entangled photon absorption need not be maximized for embodiments of the present invention to successfully operate. That is a less than maximal amount of entangled photon absorption suffices in some embodiments of the present invention.

Immediately after absorbing the entangled photons the material s electronic state makes virtual transitions through energy levels which are higher than the total energy of the entangled photons. Such energy levels are denoted by and referred to as virtual states. An embodiment of the present invention is capable of discerning properties of the material including the material s identity from spectroscopic information related to such virtual states. One such distinguishing property discussed further below is an energy difference between such virtual states and the ground state of the material.

Toward explaining how an embodiment of the present invention derives spectroscopic information an ETPA cross section theory is disclosed presently. An ETPA cross section tells how likely a material is to absorb entangled photon pairs. The larger the ETPA cross section the more strongly a material absorbs entangled photon pairs. The ETPA cross section of material as a function of entanglement time and interbeam delay may be represented as by way of non limiting example 

Thus an embodiment of the present invention such as that depicted above in reference to determines spectroscopic information of a sample material by exploiting properties of equations 1 4 . First the embodiment directs entangled photons having known entangled photon parameter values at the sample material. The parameters may be any or a combination of entanglement time interbeam delay and polarization. The values of these parameters may be scanned in a discrete or continuous fashion. If the embodiment is directed to detecting a particular material the parameter values may have a limited domain. Second the embodiment gathers data relating to observed fluorescence and the parameters of the associated incident entangled photons. The embodiment then constructs a data structure representation of observed fluorescence as a function of entangled photon parameters. This function corresponds with equation 2 above. This and the other functions subsequently described are preferably stored as conventional data structures.

Third if appropriate values of entanglement time are averaged out leaving a function of a single variable e.g. interbeam delay . The resulting function corresponds with equation 3 above. Fourth this function is Fourier transformed to yield a function whose domain is energy equivalently frequency . This function corresponds with equation 4 above and represents a spectral analysis. This function may be stored and used to identify and characterize the material. Alternately or in addition by inspecting a plot of this function for peaks embodiments of the present invention ascertain energy difference values . These values comprise spectroscopic information that is valuable in its own right. In particular embodiments of the present invention may use these values to identify and characterize the sample material. Fifth embodiments of the present invention may further process or analyze the spectral analysis function or the functions built from observed data and corresponding to equations 2 and 3 to derive yet more spectroscopic information. Such information includes the material s energy level difference . Because the energy difference is a function of cop which is known as well as embodiments of the present invention may determine this latter quantity once is known. Sixth the spectroscopic information obtained by observation is compared with pre stored spectroscopic information in order to identify and characterize the material. Any of the spectroscopic information discussed herein may be used for such a comparison.

Embodiments of the present invention are capable of identifying materials by comparing observed properties with properties stored in a pre formed database. The database information may be gathered by performing laboratory analysis of materials of interest. Such a database acts as a storehouse of material fingerprints which may be used to identify an unknown sample based on its observed spectroscopic properties. A match between stored properties and observed properties yields a material identification. Such a database preferably includes spectral analysis functions energy differences and energy level differences for a variety of materials. These data may further include shape information of fluorescence response curves. More particularly the database preferably includes representations of and other spectroscopic properties as functions of entanglement time interbeam delay and other entangled photon parameters. Such representations are preferably stored as conventional data structures. These representations may be compared with material responses to multiple entangled photon bombardments. Such comparisons allow for matching shapes of various response curves instead of matching single point responses.

Another quantity that embodiments of the present invention may ascertain is the magnitude of transition matrix element D. This can be seen by computing the second derivative of equation 3 with respect to prior to Fourier transforming. The second derivative of equation 3 may be represented as by way of non limiting example 

Note that embodiments of the present invention are capable of ascertaining sample material spectroscopic information using only a single pump laser frequency. This is in contrast with conventional spectroscopy in which the frequency of probing radiation varies and intermediate state properties correlate only with probe radiation frequency. Embodiments of the present invention may ascertain a plethora of spectroscopic material information by using a single pump frequency and varying one or more entangled photon parameter s . Such parameters may include entanglement time and interbeam delay as discussed above and also preferably include others such as constituent photon polarization and relative energy distribution between signal and idler photons or between multiple photons for multiply entangled photon embodiments . Nevertheless in some embodiments of the present invention pump laser frequency may also be varied.

In contrast embodiments of the present invention overcome these obstacles. By using two entangled photons instead of a single photon to excite biological materials standoff detection and characterization range is greatly improved. In particular instead of UV photons embodiments of the present invention use entangled photon pairs produced from single UV photons for biological or other material detection and characterization. Such entangled photon pairs may be produced from UV photons such that their individual wavelengths are both in the visible light range. This is a consequence of conservation of energy which states that the sum of the constituent entangled photon s energies must equal the energy of the photon from which they were derived. By way of non limiting example a 255 nm UV photon may be used to produce an entangled photon pair consisting of a 550 nm photon and 475 nm photon both of which are readily transmitted by the atmosphere.

Moreover the atmosphere is much more transparent to visible photons than it is to UV photons. Such entangled photon pairs produced from UV photons are in general readily absorbed by biological materials. Thus compared with random UV photons entangled photon pairs derived from UV photons travel farther in the atmosphere while retaining the ability to excite biological materials to fluorescence. In this manner entangled photons having favorable characteristics for atmospheric transmission may be produced and used to characterize materials. Embodiments of the present invention may be used to identify and characterize materials at ranges of less than one kilometer several kilometers several tens of kilometers or several hundreds of kilometers. The ability to identify and characterize materials at such ranges is particularly useful when the material under analysis may be hazardous.

Other advantages of using entangled photon pairs also exist. For example entangled photons produced from a high energy e.g. UV photon are safer than a single high energy photon. UV light is dangerous to the human eye while entangled photons may be produced from a UV photon such that both constituent photons are harmless to the human eye. Additionally lower energy photons are less detectable which allows for covert material detection and characterization where required.

An embodiment of the present invention may select entangled photons with constituent photons frequencies particularly suited for travel through the atmosphere with little loss. By way of non limiting example depicts several transmittance peaks e.g. . Such an embodiment may generate entangled photons whose constituent photons frequencies lie in the domain of one or more of such peaks. Entangled photons consisting of such constituent photons are thus specially suited for atmospheric transmittance. Atmospheric transmittance may be measured for each situation and the entangled photons selected accordingly to allow for remote material identification and characterization using photons particularly suited for transmittance according to local atmospheric characteristics.

Thus entangled photon pairs may be used to excite materials at distances far greater than those available from conventional techniques. Spectroscopic information may accordingly be gained using embodiments of the present invention at distances that were previously intractable. Note that the techniques disclosed herein are not limited to use on biological materials any material whether organic or inorganic may be analyzed.

Entangled photon production power requirements are analyzed presently. The number of received photons generally depends on at least incident flux dwell time T the time spent bombarding the material at and detecting fluorophotons from a particular location the number of target molecules N the fluorescence efficiency E typically a few percent and the collection efficiency E. Incorporating these factors the number of collected photons Nmay be represented as by way of non limiting example . 7 In equation 7 Rrepresents a two photon absorption rate which may be either random or entangled. Assume for purposes of illustration and by way of non limiting example that the material to be detected and characterized is in the form of a cloud. Given the depth l of the cloud the area Aof the beam at the cloud and the density of the cloud we have N lA . Assuming for the purpose of illustration perfect detection modules actual efficiencies are about 0.5 for a collection aperture of area D the collection efficiency at range R may be estimated as by way of non limiting example E 3D 4 R D R. 8 The beam spot area for biphotons of wavelength at range R may be estimated at by way of non limiting example A R D . 9 Combining equations 7 8 and 9 yields 

The path of each photon is individually analyzed as follows. Signal photon originates at coordinate right arrow over r from the face of nonlinear crystal and is transformed according to by way of non limiting example right arrow over right arrow over right arrow over right arrow over right arrow over . 15 In equation 15 I represents the signal photon beam intensity at the exit face of nonlinear crystal right arrow over r represents the coordinate in image plane of signal photon and h represents the system transfer function for lens . An equation analogous to equation 15 obtains for incoherent transformation of idler photon . The coherent wave function of the entangled photon pair is transformed as by way of non limiting example right arrow over right arrow over right arrow over right arrow over right arrow over right arrow over right arrow over right arrow over right arrow over right arrow over . 16 In equation 16 the parameters are the same as those of equation 15 with the following additions represents the biphoton coherent wave function right arrow over r represents the coordinate of idler photon at image plane and right arrow over r represents the coordinate of signal photon at image plane . The entanglement area for the photons depicted in may be computed as by way of non limiting example A r where ris the solution to r r r 1 e.

In one embodiment the present invention requires less probing radiation energy compared with conventional techniques using similar levels of eye safe radiation. This has the benefit of offering material identification and characterization with reduced material bleaching. In contrast with traditional photon sources which provide Poisson distributed photons that arrive randomly and independently an entangled photon source according to an embodiment of the present invention provides photons entangled in space and time. Such photons may be configured to arrive simultaneously at a material rather than randomly and independently thus necessitating lower intensity radiation while achieving a similar degree of absorption. Another advantage of using entangled photons is seen by examining absorption as a function of photon flux. In general random two photon absorption by a material for non entangled photons is proportional to the square of the incident radiation flux. In contrast entangled photon absorption by a material is generally linearly proportional to the incident radiation flux. Thus under low flux conditions under the critical flux i.e. the flux at which random two photon absorption and ETPA rates are equal less flux is required of entangled photons when compared with non entangled photons to achieve the same level of absorption. As a result less energy is required to probe a material. Material samples that would be bleached by radiation required for conventional techniques may be safely identified and characterized without such bleaching according to an embodiment of the present invention.

Many different materials may be identified and characterized in embodiments of the present invention. Examples of biological materials that may be detected and characterized at long ranges include by way of non limiting example nerve gas such as sarin spores such as anthrax bacteria viruses and organic chemicals. Inorganic materials that may be detected and characterized include by way of non limiting example potentially radioactive materials such as cobalt cesium radium plutonium or uranium chlorine gas and other materials with tactical significance. Materials may be solid liquid gas aerosolized or colloids. An embodiment of the present invention may be configured to detect chemical biological or potentially nuclear material dispersion e.g. a so called dirty bomb over large ranges such as in the upper atmosphere or on the grounds of a government compound.

Embodiments of the present invention may have various configurations of entangled photon sources and fluorescence detectors. By way of non limiting example the entangled photon source may be at the same physical location as the fluorescence detector or may be at a different physical location. Either or both of the entangled photon source and florescence detector may be fixed or mobile on the ground in the air or orbiting the Earth. Either or both of the entangled photon source and florescence detector may be located on a vehicle such as a terrestrial motor vehicle or aircraft. Either or both of the entangled photon source and florescence detector may be located in close proximity to the material to be identified such as in the same room. For laboratory settings an embodiment of the present invention may be a single desktop unit. In some embodiments entangled photon pairs are sent over optical fiber and subsequent fluorophoton emissions are detected and analyzed as described herein.

Biphotons of any frequency may be used in embodiments of the present invention. That is entangled photons may be produced from light of any frequency. In particular the present invention is not limited to using entangled photons produced from UV light to ascertain spectroscopic properties. Entangled photons may be produced from photons of any frequency consistent with the present invention.

The various calculations comparisons and judgments required during operation in order to ascertain spectroscopic properties and identify and characterize materials according to embodiments of the present invention may be accomplished by conventional computer hardware or software. These calculations are preferably performed automatically during the normal course of operation of embodiments of the present invention. By way of non limiting example the computations and comparisons associated with equations 1 6 used to identify and characterize materials may be performed by appropriately programmed or configured standard computer hardware or software.

Note that the terms signal and idler may be used interchangeably. More particularly as used herein no distinction is drawn between signal photons and idler photons.

By way of elaborating on earlier definitions entanglement time is a quantity associated with the spread in phase differences between signal photons and associated idler photons. That is entanglement time relates to the collection of differences in phase between signal photons and associated idler photons produced by an entangled photon source e.g. a non linear crystal . Entanglement time may be by way of non limiting example considered as the average time difference between when ordinary and extraordinary rays leave a nonlinear crystal. Ordinary rays leaving a nonlinear crystal are typically associated with signal photons and extraordinary rays leaving a nonlinear crystal are typically associated with idler photons. By way of non limiting example entanglement time is a function of the length l of a non linear crystal used to produce the entangled photons and may be described as T l n n 2c where n nare indices of refraction associated with ordinary and extraordinary crystal directions respectively. By way of non limiting example entanglement times on the order of T 5 10seconds are possible with a crystal length of 5 mm. These parameters yield an entanglement distance the distance that light can travel during the entanglement time of 0.15 mm.

Alternate embodiments of the present invention may calculate entanglement area Aaccording to the following which describes a non limiting exemplary technique for such computation. It is typically possible to calculate fourth order correlation height and width coefficients. In the direction defined by the x axis and for a given signal photon at location x the idler photon in location xwill generally arrive within x of x i.e. x x x . Similarly in the z axis direction and for a given signal photon at location z the idler photon in location zwill arrive within z of z i.e. z z z . The quantities x and z may generally be computed using fourth order correlation theory. The entanglement area Amay be derived as the product of x and z i.e. A x z .

Entangled photons with selected entanglement times may be produced according to a variety of techniques. Instead of adjustable nonlinear crystal of embodiments of the present invention may use two right parallelepiped nonlinear crystals that are closely spaced apart to produce entangled photons with selected entanglement times. In such embodiments adjusting the distance between the two nonlinear crystals controls the entanglement time of entangled photon pairs produced by the crystals. In alternate embodiments of the present invention a single wedge shaped nonlinear crystal may be used to produce entangled photons with selected entanglement times. By moving such a crystal relative to the pump laser such that the width through which the pump laser beam passes varies entangled photons with different entanglement times may be produced. In other alternate embodiments of the present invention entanglement times of entangled photon pairs may be selected by spectral filtering. In such embodiments constituent photons of entangled photon pairs are selected by choosing the appropriate angle as described above in reference to or by optical filtering. Each photon s angle at exiting the crystal depends on the photon s propagation speed through the nonlinear crystal. Because as discussed above entanglement time may be considered as the average time difference between when ordinary and extraordinary rays leave the nonlinear crystal by selecting the angle at which photons appear embodiments of the present invention effectively select the entanglement time as well.

Other types of entangled photons and techniques for producing them within the scope of the present invention include the following. Those of ordinary skill in the art are capable of producing entangled photon pairs triples etc. By way of non limiting example entangled photons may be produced according to types I or II parametric down conversion. That is biphotons whose constituent signal and idler photons are orthogonally polarized may be used as well as biphotons whose constituent signal and idler photons are polarized in parallel. For type I downconversion signal photons may be separated from idler photons and recombined with idler photons using dichroic glass. For both types of downconversion signal photons and idler photos may be selected as they exit the biphoton source by providing apertures at the appropriate angles. Any non central symmetric nonlinear crystal not limited to BBO may be used. Other ways to produce entangled photons include excited gasses materials without inversion symmetry and generally any properly phase matched medium. Furthermore the entangled photons are not limited to any particular wavelength or frequency.

In embodiments of the present invention evidence of entangled photon absorption may be of a variety of forms. By way of non limiting example entangled photon absorption may result in fluorescence phosphorescence direct electron transfer or ionization of the absorbing material. Detecting fluorescence phosphorescence direct electron transfer or ionization may be used to detect entangled photon absorption. Also by way of non limiting example avalanche photodiodes photo multiplier tubes or other devices may be used to detect the fluorophotons ionization direct electron transfer or other absorption indicia.

The equations contained in this disclosure are illustrative and representative and are not meant to be limiting. Alternate equations may be used to represent the same phenomena described by any given equation disclosed herein. In particular the equations disclosed herein may be modified by adding error correction terms higher order terms or otherwise accounting for inaccuracies using different names for constants or variables using different expressions or accounting for propagation of light through different media. Other modifications substitutions replacements or alterations of the equations may be performed.

The particular optical manipulation devices depicted herein are illustrative and representative and are not meant to be limiting. By way of non limiting example apertures filters lenses and particular lasers disclosed herein may be replaced with devices known to those of ordinary skill in the art.

Alternate embodiments of the present invention may delay one photon in various ways. By way of non limiting example a length of optical fiber may be inserted into the path of one or both photons. Alternately sets of mirrors may be used to increase the path length of one or both photons. Other techniques for delaying one or more photons may also be used.

Note that this disclosure follows standard physics notational conventions. By way of non limiting example in some places Planck s constant h and h and the speed of light c may both considered to be one 1 for the purpose of calculations. This convention allows inter alia for common units for frequency and energy as well as common units for time and distance e.g. temporal delays may be considered as spatial lengths and vice versa . This notational convention is accounted for after calculations have been performed in order to deduce correct units for application purposes. This disclosure also uses Dirac bracket notation e.g. known to those of ordinary skill in the art to denote quantum states.

It is noted that the foregoing examples have been provided merely for the purpose of explanation and are in no way to be construed as limiting of the present invention. While the present invention has been described with reference to certain embodiments it is understood that the words which have been used herein are words of description and illustration rather than words of limitation. Changes may be made within the purview of associated claims without departing from the scope and spirit of the present invention in its aspects. Although the present invention has been described herein with reference to particular means materials and embodiments the present invention is not intended to be limited to the particulars disclosed herein rather the present invention extends to all functionally equivalent structures methods and uses.

