---

title: Self contained fuel system for solid oxide fuel cell
abstract: A power source for an unmanned undersea vehicle with increased energy density is described that employs a self-contained fuel system to address carbon dioxide evolution. A solid oxide fuel cell serves as the power source in the self-contained fuel system. In combination with the solid oxide fuel cell, the system comprises a chemical composite that is combined with water to create both a hydrocarbon fuel for the solid oxide fuel cell and a water-soluble byproduct. The byproduct is then combined with the carbon dioxide gas generated by the fuel cell to create a storable solid precipitate.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07635531&OS=07635531&RS=07635531
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07635531
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050818
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore.

The present invention relates to fuel cells and more specifically to a novel fuel system designed for use with a solid oxide fuel cell for powering unmanned underwater vehicles.

The most logical choice of an energy source for an unmanned underwater vehicle would appear to be a battery since it can be operated in the absence of air. However most batteries lack sufficient energy density to carry out the long missions associated with unmanned undersea vehicles and the few batteries that might find application for example lithium thionyl chloride are prohibitively expensive. There continues to be a need for energy sources with a high energy density that can power unmanned undersea vehicles. These energy sources need to have long endurance quiet operation be relatively inexpensive environmentally friendly safe to operate reusable capable of a long shelf life and not prone to spontaneous chemical or electrochemical discharge.

In an effort to develop power sources for unmanned undersea vehicles with increased energy density research has been directed towards semi fuel cells and fuel cells as one of several high energy density power sources being considered. For larger scale unmanned underwater vehicles and longer duration missions proton exchange membrane fuel cells and solid oxide fuel cells are being used because they can be completely re fueled from both a fuel and oxidizer standpoint.

A key requirement for an unmanned underwater vehicle powered by a solid oxide fuel cell and maneuvering in shallow water in a surveillance mode is that its presence goes undetected. Stealthy operation of the unmanned underwater vehicle will depend in part on the reduction or elimination of any signature caused by the evolution of the product gas carbon dioxide CO. Carbon dioxide produced from the use of hydrocarbons in a solid oxide fuel cell must be contained and stored onboard the unmanned underwater vehicle. Since proton exchange fuel cells require pure hydrogen H for their operation and release only water HO as a product carbon dioxide is not an issue. However proton exchange membrane fuel cells cannot run on hydrocarbon fuels because their platinum metal catalysts will not tolerate any carbon monoxide CO that forms inside the fuel cell. For this reason what is needed is a solid oxide fuel cell fuel system that offers an innovative solution to address carbon dioxide evolution.

It is a general purpose and object of the present invention to provide a power source for an unmanned undersea vehicle with increased energy density that employs a self contained fuel system to address carbon dioxide evolution.

It is a further object to have a solid oxide fuel cell as the power source in the self contained fuel system.

This object is accomplished by employing a chemical composite that when combined with water creates a fuel for the solid oxide fuel cell and a water soluble byproduct that can then be combined with the carbon dioxide gas generated by the fuel cell to create a storable solid precipitate.

Referring now to there is illustrated a unique fuel system that is intended for use with a high temperature fuel cell such as a solid oxide fuel cell . A solid chemical composite consisting of calcium carbide CaC and calcium oxide CaO is reacted with water HO in a reaction chamber connected to the solid oxide fuel cell to generate acetylene gas CH and the byproduct calcium hydroxide Ca OH . The chemical reactions are illustrated in equation 1 CaC CaO 3HO CH 2Ca OH 1 

The byproduct calcium hydroxide Ca OH is directed to a precipitation chamber connected to the reaction chamber and solid oxide fuel cell . The acetylene gas CH is then either reformed to synthesis gases CO and H in a reformer or is fed directly into the solid oxide fuel cell where it can undergo electrochemical oxidization at the anode to produce water HO and carbon dioxide CO according to equation 2 CH 5O 2CO HO 10 2 

The COeffluent is then directed via a hose or some other device to the precipitation chamber where it is reacted with Ca OH to precipitate calcium carbonate CaCO which can then be stored in solid form. The chemical reactions are illustrated in equation 3 Ca OH CO CaCO HO 3 

The liquid oxidant hydrogen peroxide HO can be used as the oxygen O source in equation 2 for the solid oxide fuel cell. The hydrogen peroxide HO is decomposed over the appropriate catalyst in a decomposition chamber connected to the reaction chamber and the solid oxide fuel cell to produce water and oxygen according to the reaction illustrated in equation 4 2HO 2HO O 4 

The water HO formed by this reaction can be used in equation 1 to convert the composite consisting of calcium carbide CaC and calcium oxide CaO to acetylene CH and calcium hydroxide Ca OH hence eliminating the need for carrying an additional source of water HO.

The advantage of the present invention over the prior art is that it is a self contained zero effluent fuel system with two distinct features 1 it generates its own hydrocarbon fuel acetylene CH and 2 it produces calcium hydroxide Ca OH which reacts with carbon dioxide gas CO to form a storable solid calcium carbonate CaCO. Since there is zero effluent i.e. no carbon dioxide gas CO evolution to the underwater environment buoyancy of the unmanned undersea vehicle is not affected. In addition the fuel composite of calcium carbide CaC and calcium oxide CaO is stored in solid form until it is converted to fuel upon demand.

In light of the above it is therefore understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described.

