---

title: Method for correcting a received electronic mail having an erroneous header
abstract: A computer implemented method, system, and computer usable program code for correcting a received electronic mail having an erroneous header. Responsive to a recipient receiving an e-mail indicating the erroneous header, the recipient corrects the erroneous header to form a corrected header. Responsive to the recipient correcting the erroneous header to form the corrected header, a received e-mail is updated for other recipients and a sender of the received e-mail with the corrected header.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08166111&OS=08166111&RS=08166111
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 08166111
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051108
---
The present invention relates generally to an improved data processing system and in particular to a computer implemented method system and computer usable program code for optimizing performance in a data processing system. Still more particularly the present invention provides a computer implemented method system and computer usable program code for correcting a received e mail having an erroneous header.

As the Internet has matured so has electronic mail which is also referred to as e mail. However humans make errors even with features such as e mail address books and other tools provided by e mail user client software known as e mail clients. One example of a human error that may occur is when an e mail user acts as an e mail sender by sending out an e mail to a group of e mail recipients and enters an erroneous address for an intended e mail recipient. An e mail address for each intended recipient is included in a header for an e mail. An erroneous header may be erroneous because it contains an e mail address that the e mail sender accidentally entered erroneously or the erroneous header may be erroneous because it contains any e mail address that an e mail sender believes to be correct but which is actually erroneous.

If the e mail sender entered an erroneous e mail address in an e mail sent to only one intended e mail recipient the solution is simple. A mail server is a computer program or software agent that transfers electronic mail from one computer to another computer and such a mail server may be unable to deliver the original e mail to the intended recipient that is erroneously addressed. An intended recipient that is erroneously addressed is any intended e mail recipient whose e mail address is erroneous in the header. When an attempted delivery of the original e mail fails a mail server sends a delivery failure e mail that contains the erroneous header with the failed e mail address to the e mail client for the e mail sender. The delivery failure e mail informs the e mail client for the e mail sender of the delivery failure for the original e mail. After being informed of the delivery failure of the original e mail to the erroneous e mail address the e mail sender may correct the erroneous e mail address in the erroneous header that the mail server returned in the delivery failure e mail and send a copy of the original e mail using the corrected e mail address.

However when an e mail sender sends out an e mail to a group of e mail recipients and enters an erroneous address of an intended e mail recipient additional problems may arise. One such problem is illustrated by the following example. An e mail sender Oprah plans to send an e mail to the following intended e mail recipients Bob Sam and John whose e mail addresses are bob abc.net sam ibm.com and johni ln.abc.net respectively. However Oprah enters the e mail address of John as johnny ln.abc.net. A mail server sends a delivery failure e mail that contains the erroneous header with the failed e mail address for John to the e mail client for Oprah. The delivery failure e mail informs the e mail client for Oprah of the delivery failure for the original e mail that Oprah attempted to send to John. Because Oprah correctly entered the e mail addresses for Bob and Sam the e mail clients for Bob and Sam received the e mail that Oprah sent. A received e mail is an e mail that a mail server has transferred to the e mail client for the e mail recipient. A recipient of a received e mail is anyone whose e mail client received the received e mail. At this point Oprah has sent the original e mail to Bob and Sam but not to John.

Oprah then corrects the erroneous e mail address for John in order to send a copy of the original e mail. Oprah has a first option of sending a copy of the e mail with the corrected e mail address for John to all of the original intended recipients Bob Sam and John. Oprah also has a second option of sending a copy of the e mail with the corrected e mail address for John to John alone which is the most often used approach.

The problem with the first option is that both Bob and Sam receive two e mails with the same content the original e mail with the erroneous e mail address for John and the second e mail with the same content and the correct e mail addresses for all of the original intended recipients. This problem is amplified when the e mail sender sends the e mail to a large number of intended e mail recipients. The problem with the second option occurs if Bob or Sam wish to use a reply all feature of the e mail client to respond to the e mail. Because under the second option Bob and Sam have only the erroneous e mail address for John in the received e mail Bob and Sam receive a delivery failure e mail for any attempts to reply to all e mail addresses listed in the original e mail and any attempts to reply to all e mail addresses do not send a reply to John. Additionally similar problems occur when a recipient changes their e mail address instead of when an e mail sender enters an erroneous e mail address for an intended recipient.

These and similar problems result in greater overhead in terms of data transmission in addition to a tedious correction process.

Embodiments of the present invention provide a computer implemented method system and computer usable program code for correcting a received e mail having an erroneous header. Responsive to a recipient receiving an e mail indicating the erroneous header the recipient corrects the erroneous header to form a corrected header. Responsive to the recipient correcting the erroneous header to form the corrected header a received e mail is updated for other recipients and the sender of the received e mail with the corrected header.

With reference now to the figures depicts a pictorial representation of a network of data processing systems in which aspects of the present invention may be implemented. Network data processing system is a network of computers in which embodiments of the present invention may be implemented. Network data processing system contains network which is the medium used to provide communication links between various devices and computers connected together within network data processing system . Network may include connections such as wire wireless communication links or fiber optic cables.

In the depicted example server and server connect to network along with storage unit . In addition clients and connect to network . These clients and may be for example personal computers or network computers. In the depicted example server provides data such as boot files operating system images and applications to clients and . Clients and are clients to server in this example. Network data processing system may include additional servers clients and other devices not shown.

In the depicted example network data processing system is the Internet with network representing a worldwide collection of networks and gateways that use the Transmission Control Protocol Internet Protocol TCP IP suite of protocols to communicate with one another. At the heart of the Internet is a backbone of high speed data communication lines between major nodes or host computers consisting of thousands of commercial governmental educational and other computer systems that route data and messages. Of course network data processing system also may be implemented as a number of different types of networks such as for example an intranet a local area network LAN or a wide area network WAN . is intended as an example and not as an architectural limitation for different embodiments of the present invention.

With reference now to a block diagram of a data processing system is shown in which aspects of the present invention may be implemented. Data processing system is an example of a computer such as server or client in in which computer usable code or instructions implementing the processes for embodiments of the present invention may be located.

In the depicted example data processing system employs a hub architecture including north bridge and memory controller hub NB MCH and south bridge and input output I O controller hub SB ICH . Processing unit main memory and graphics processor are connected to NB MCH . Graphics processor may be connected to NB MCH through an accelerated graphics port AGP .

In the depicted example local area network LAN adapter connects to SB ICH . Audio adapter keyboard and mouse adapter modem read only memory ROM hard disk drive HDD CD ROM drive universal serial bus USB ports and other communication ports and PCI PCIe devices connect to SB ICH through bus and bus . PCI PCIe devices may include for example Ethernet adapters add in cards and PC cards for notebook computers. PCI uses a card bus controller while PCIe does not. ROM may be for example a flash binary input output system BIOS .

HDD and CD ROM drive connect to SB ICH through bus . HDD and CD ROM drive may use for example an integrated drive electronics IDE or serial advanced technology attachment SATA interface. Super I O SIO device maybe connected to SB ICH .

An operating system runs on processing unit and coordinates and provides control of various components within data processing system in . As a client the operating system may be a commercially available operating system such as Microsoft Windows XP Microsoft and Windows are trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States other countries or both . An object oriented programming system such as the Java programming system may run in conjunction with the operating system and provides calls to the operating system from Java programs or applications executing on data processing system Java is a trademark of Sun Microsystems Inc. in the United States other countries or both .

As a server data processing system may be for example an IBM eServer pSeries computer system running the Advanced Interactive Executive AIX operating system or the LINUX operating system eserver pSeries and AIX are trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the United States other countries or both while LINUX is a trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States other countries or both . Data processing system may be a symmetric multiprocessor SMP system including a plurality of processors in processing unit . Alternatively a single processor system may be employed.

Instructions for the operating system the object oriented programming system and applications or programs are located on storage devices such as HDD and may be loaded into main memory for execution by processing unit . The processes for embodiments of the present invention are performed by processing unit using computer usable program code which may be located in a memory such as for example main memory ROM or in one or more peripheral devices and .

Those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the hardware in may vary depending on the implementation. Other internal hardware or peripheral devices such as flash memory equivalent non volatile memory or optical disk drives and the like may be used in addition to or in place of the hardware depicted in . Also the processes of the present invention may be applied to a multiprocessor data processing system.

In some illustrative examples data processing system may be a personal digital assistant PDA which is configured with flash memory to provide non volatile memory for storing operating system files and or user generated data.

A bus system may be comprised of one or more busses such as bus or bus as shown in . Of course the bus system may be implemented using any type of communication fabric or architecture that provides for a transfer of data between different components or devices attached to the fabric or architecture. A communication unit may include one or more devices used to transmit and receive data such as modem or LAN of . A memory may be for example main memory ROM or a cache such as found in NB MCH in . The depicted examples in and above described examples are not meant to imply architectural limitations. For example data processing system also may be a tablet computer laptop computer or telephone device in addition to taking the form of a PDA.

Embodiments of the present invention may be implemented using components of the network for the data processing system in such as server or storage . These embodiments may be implemented to serve the users of a network such as network for the data processing system in such as client client or client .

Illustrative embodiments of the present invention seamlessly integrate a correction to a received e mail having an erroneous header. After an e mail sender has entered an erroneous e mail address when sending an e mail an e mail user corrects the erroneous header after receiving an e mail either a delivery failure e mail that contains the erroneous header with the failed e mail address or the original e mail.

Embodiments of the present invention offer the capability to correct a received e mail having an erroneous header. Either the e mail sender or an e mail recipient may correct the erroneous header in the received e mail. This correction eliminates the need for an e mail user to send a copy of the received e mail to all of the original e mail recipients.

Instead illustrative embodiments of the present invention send the mail servers for the recipients of the received e mail the corrected e mail address in the corrected header and have the option of prompting the original recipients of the received e mail to electronically update their e mail address books with the corrected e mail address.

In a prior art example sender composes an e mail to three different recipients user user and user . Sender composes the e mail using e mail client and instructs e mail client to send the e mail. E mail client sends the e mail to user agent which delivers the e mail to mail server for sender . Essentially e mail client activates user agent as an application program interface. Mail server delivers the e mail to the corresponding mail servers . Mail servers use user agents and to deliver the e mail to the mailboxes in e mail clients and . E mail clients and are for the recipients user user and user to whom sender has addressed the e mail. As the e mail from sender is routed to the network of mail servers and for its destination path information is stored in the e mail header. Path information includes a list of the mail servers in the network of mail servers that conveyed the e mail from the mail server of the e mail sender to the mail server of the e mail recipient. Forward and reverse routing paths and are stored by mail servers and in the e mail header at each hop. The purpose of the path information such as information about forward and reverse routing paths and is to help mail server to find the destination for each copy of the e mail. For example mail server uses path to deliver an e mail to mail server . Mail server uses path for user to reply to the e mail from sender . In case of a delivery failure the network of mail servers and use path information stored in the e mail header to find e mail client of sender in order to inform e mail client of the delivery failure. More detailed descriptions of e mail clients such as e mail client and mail servers such as mail server may be found at RFC821 RFC2821 Simple mail transfer protocol RFC822 Standard for the format of ARPA Internet text messages and RFC2822 Internet message format.

Sender sends an e mail with an erroneous e mail address for an intended e mail recipient. A mail server is unable to deliver the e mail to the intended e mail recipient that is erroneously addressed. The mail server sends a delivery failure e mail that contains an erroneous header with the erroneous e mail address to e mail client for e mail sender . Sender receives a delivery failure e mail that contains the erroneous header with the failed e mail address through e mail client for the e mail intended for recipient user . Sender corrects the erroneous e mail address for user in a copy of the original e mail to the correct e mail address for user and sends a corrected copy of the original e mail to user only. User receives the corrected e mail through e mail client but user and user still have only the original e mail with the erroneous e mail address for user . Therefore if a reply all option is selected for e mail client or e mail client by user or user respectively user does not receive the reply and whoever sent the reply receives a delivery failure e mail that contains the erroneous header with the failed e mail address because both user and user still have the erroneous e mail address for user . In this example the erroneous header is erroneous because it contains the erroneous or failed e mail address. The description of below discusses an example of a header in more detail. The erroneous header problem creates not only a greater overhead for each e mail recipient but user and user still have to correct the e mail address for user even though sender has already made this correction. Additionally more roundtrip traffic has to occur before user and user are informed of the erroneous e mail address for user in the original e mail. Each e mail client such as e mail clients and contain a correcting e mail editor such as correction e mail editors and . Specifics regarding a correction e mail editor are discussed below in reference to . The e mail addresses for sender user user and user are oprah ibm.com bob abc.net sam ibm.com and johni ln.abc net respectively.

Embodiments of the present invention send a correction note with corrected header information to the mailboxes of the recipients that successfully received the original e mail or received e mail including the e mail sender. In some embodiments of the present invention this correction note is referred to as a phantom e mail because the note contains only header information and no e mail body. Another reason that the correction note may be referred to as a phantom note is because once the correction note arrives at an e mail inbox an e mail mailbox for a recipient the correction note may instruct a user agent not to inform the e mail client for the recipient about the presence of the correction note. A correcting user agent is a user agent such as user agent in for correction notes specifically designed to both send and receive a correction note as well as to carry out instructions given by the correction note. An example of carrying out these instructions is when the correction note instructs the correcting user agent not to inform the e mail client for the recipient about the presence of the correction note.

When an e mail sender such as sender in has entered an erroneous e mail address when sending an e mail each e mail recipient receives the received e mail and the e mail sender receives a delivery failure e mail that contains the erroneous header with the failed e mail address.

These options are offered only as an illustrative example and not to imply any limitation for embodiments of the present invention. The e mail user may have other options depending upon the e mail client. A receipt of an e mail such as e mail may be a receipt of an original e mail sent by the e mail sender or a receipt of a delivery failure e mail that contains the erroneous header with the failed e mail address. In this illustrative example e mail is a delivery failure e mail that contains the erroneous header with the failed e mail address.

Selecting reply enables an e mail user such as user in to reply to an e mail sent by another e mail user such as sender in . Selecting reply all enables an e mail user to reply to an e mail sent by another e mail user and also to reply to all other recipients of the e mail such as user and user in . Selecting forward enables an e mail user to forward an e mail to recipients to be specified by the e mail user. Selecting delete enables an e mail user to delete an e mail. Selecting move to folder enables an e mail user to move an e mail to a folder to be specified by the e mail user. Selecting print enables an e mail user to print a hard copy of an e mail.

A selection of a correct option such as correct is a selection that enables an e mail user to correct any erroneous e mail address in an e mail in a mailbox such as mailbox . A selection of a correct option enables an e mail user to correct the erroneous header in the received e mail in the mailboxes of the original recipients and send a copy of the original e mail to the intended recipient that was erroneously addressed.

By selecting correct to correct an e mail the e mail client for the e mail user may generate a correction note to correct the erroneous header in the e mail in the mailboxes for the other recipients of the received e mail. In contrast to the selection of reply reply all and forward which use a standard e mail editor to format an e mail for composition the selection of correct uses a correction e mail editor to format an e mail for composition. A correction e mail editor such as correction e mail editor in is an e mail editor that gives an e mail user the option of generating a correction note instead of simply correcting an e mail. A correction e mail editor formats a copy of a received e mail when the e mail editor enables an e mail user to compose a correction of a received e mail based upon the received e mail.

If an e mail user selects notify recipients and selects a notify e mail option the correction e mail editor instructs correction note to notify the e mail recipients about the existence of correction note that is sent to the e mail recipients. A notify option is a set of options presented by a correction e mail editor for an e mail user to select whether e mail recipients are notified about a correction note and how a correction to the erroneous header and any annotation may appear in the received e mail.

The correction e mail editor stores each addition and each deletion in correction note when the e mail user selects send or save draft as an option presented by the correction e mail editor of the e mail client. A correction note is an electronic note that contains each correction which is each addition and each deletion to erroneous header. The correction note may contain instructions from a correction e mail editor for a correcting user agent for the e mail client of the recipient to find and correct the received e mail for which the correction note is sent. An instruction such as send for the correction editor to send the correction note for the erroneous header in the e mail is any instruction made by the e mail user that indicates the correction note is complete and ready to be sent to the original e mail recipients.

The options mentioned above are offered only as an illustrative example and not to imply any limitation for embodiments of the present invention. The e mail user may have other options depending upon the standard editor for the e mail client. When the e mail user selects send the correction e mail editor sends correction note to the addresses of the original recipients and sends a copy of the original e mail to the correct e mail address for the intended recipient that was erroneously addressed.

One alternative for an e mail user is to select a correct option in an inbox such as correct in mailbox in to correct the erroneous header through corrections to the delivery failure e mail that contains the erroneous header with the failed e mail address. In another alternative illustrative embodiments of the present invention offer an e mail user a pop up screen to correct an erroneous header in received electronic mail in remote mailboxes.

Pop up screen lists failed e mail address for each intended recipient that was erroneously addressed. The e mail sender views copy of the received e mail such as e mail in . Then the e mail sender makes each addition and each deletion to failed e mail address . The combination of each addition and each deletion that an e mail sender makes to an erroneous header for an e mail is the correction for the e mail. If the e mail sender selects notify recipients the e mail sender may select a notify e mail option. If the notify e mail option is selected the correction e mail editor instructs correction note to notify the e mail recipients about the existence of correction note that is sent to the e mail recipients. The correction e mail editor stores each addition and each deletion in correction note when the e mail sender selects send or save draft . These options are listed only as an illustrative example and not to imply any limitation for embodiments of the present invention. The e mail sender may have other options depending upon the standard editor for the e mail client. When the e mail sender selects send the correction e mail editor sends correction note to the addresses of the original recipients and sends a copy of the original e mail to the correct e mail address for the intended recipient that was erroneously addressed. Pop up screen pops up in mailbox which may be the same as mailbox in . Each addition each deletion and correction note may be the same as each addition each deletion and correction note in .

When an e mail user selects an option to notify recipients such as notify recipients in and selects an indicate option the correction e mail editor may instruct the correction note to indicate to recipients of the correction note that the received e mail is seamlessly corrected. An indication to recipients of the correction note that the received e mail header is seamlessly corrected may be made by displaying the corrected text in a different font size color or format such as bold or italics from the original text. Alternatively the corrected e mail header may offer a link to the erroneous header. In one embodiment of the present invention if a recipient of the correction note with corrected header information has already acted on the received e mail the recipient of the corrected header information is notified about the correction note. The recipient of the corrected header information has already acted on the received e mail if the recipient of the corrected header information has already viewed the received e mail or if the recipient of the corrected header information has already deleted the received e mail. If the recipient of the corrected header information has not already acted on the received e mail the recipient of the corrected header information is not notified about the correction note. Annotations in the corrected header may indicate the identity of the e mail user that corrected the erroneous header and when the e mail user corrected the erroneous header.

Alternatively once a correction note arrives at a recipient s mailbox the correction note may instruct the correcting user agent for the recipient to notify the e mail client for the recipient about the correction note. The correcting user agent for the recipient may notify the e mail client for the recipient about the correction note by setting a flag in the mailbox of the recipient to indicate that the received e mail is seamlessly corrected. All other features for the correction note remain the same as described above. Notification by the correction note containing corrected header information may inform the recipient of the corrected header information containing a correction to an e mail address and prompt the recipient to update the address book of their e mail client with the corrected e mail address.

The correction e mail editor receives a selection of the correct option by the e mail user step . Then the correction e mail editor formats a copy of a received e mail step . A received e mail is an e mail received by an e mail recipient that may be either a delivery failure e mail that contains the erroneous header with a failed e mail address or an e mail sent by an e mail sender. The correction editor may be offered in an inbox or a sent messages folder of the e mail client for the e mail user or the correction editor may be offered in a pop up screen for the e mail user. The correction e mail editor receives a correction by the e mail user of an erroneous header in a copy of the received e mail step . Next the correction e mail editor generates a correction note step .

The correction e mail editor receives an instruction by the e mail user to send the correction note step . Then the correction e mail editor determines if a notify option is selected by the e mail user step . If the notify option is selected by the e mail user the correction e mail editor instructs the correction note to notify each recipient of the received e mail including the e mail sender about the correction note step . Regardless of whether the notify option is selected by the e mail recipient the correction e mail editor sends a copy of the received e mail to each intended recipient that was erroneously addressed step . Next the correction e mail editor sends the correction note to each recipient of a received e mail including the e mail sender step with the process terminating thereafter.

Once a correction note such as correction note in has arrived at a mail server for a recipient of the note the correction note instructs a correcting user agent for the e mail client of the recipient to find and correct the received e mail for which the correction note was sent. In these illustrative examples the mail server may be implemented using a mail server such as mail server and the e mail client may be implemented using an e mail client such as e mail client in . Also the correcting user agent may be a user agent such as user agent and the recipient may be a recipient such as user in . The correcting user agent has all of the capabilities of a standard user agent but is also specifically designed to both send and receive a correction note as well as to carry out instructions given by the correction note. The correction note contains a message identification number of the received e mail such as message identification of for the correcting user agent to use in finding the received e mail in the e mail client.

The correcting user agent uses the message identification number of the received e mail to find the received e mail in the e mail client by comparing the message identification number of the received e mail to the message identification numbers of e mail in the e mail client. After the correcting user agent finds the received e mail in the e mail client the correcting user agent uses the correction in the correction note to correct the erroneous header for the received e mail. A correction to an erroneous header is the corrected portion of the header seamlessly integrating the correction made by the e mail user. The correction note contains each addition and each deletion made by an e mail user for the erroneous header. The correcting user agent may not find the received e mail if the recipient of the correction note has already deleted the received e mail. In this instance no further processing is necessary but an indication may be made to the recipient of the correction note that a correction note arrived for the deleted e mail.

Each original recipient of the received e mail and the e mail sender now have the corrected header as part of only one e mail in their respective mailboxes. The next time that a recipient opens the corrected e mail in order to select the reply all option of the e mail client the reply is routed correctly to each intended recipient including the intended recipient that was erroneously addressed in the received e mail.

The option of correcting an erroneous header is not limited to the e mail sender as any e mail user that is a recipient of the received e mail may correct an erroneous header. Furthermore the recipients of the e mail may correct an erroneous header and send a copy of the received e mail. For example in the case of location organization based e mail addresses there may be two or more e mail users with the same name who are at different locations. An organization may have a James Smith in the Austin office of the organization and a different James Smith in the Dallas office of the organization. The e mail sender may have intended an e mail for the James Smith in Austin but accidentally addressed the e mail to the James Smith in Dallas.

In response to a selection of the correct option by James Smith in Dallas the correction e mail editor formats a copy of a received e mail. In response to a correction of an e mail address to James Smith in Austin by James Smith in Dallas the correction e mail editor generates a correction note. In response to an instruction by James Smith in Dallas for the correction e mail editor to send the correction note the correction e mail editor determines if a notify option is selected by James Smith in Dallas. If the notify option is selected by James Smith in Dallas the correction e mail editor instructs the correction note to notify each original recipient of the received e mail including the e mail sender about the correction note. The correction e mail editor sends a copy of the received e mail to James Smith in Austin. The correction e mail editor sends the correction note to each recipient of the received e mail including the e mail sender. The correction note instructs a correcting user agent to find and correct an erroneous header in the received e mail for each recipient of the received e mail by using the message identifications and the correction of the erroneous header contained in the correction note.

In summary when an e mail sender has used an erroneous e mail address when sending an e mail and an e mail user corrects the erroneous header embodiments of the present invention correct the erroneous header in the received e mail of the e mail recipients of the received e mail. These features result in a reduction of overhead in terms of data transmission in addition to the elimination of a tedious correction process.

The invention can take the form of an entirely hardware embodiment an entirely software embodiment or an embodiment containing both hardware and software elements. In an illustrative embodiment the invention is implemented in software which includes but is not limited to firmware resident software microcode etc.

Furthermore the invention can take the form of a computer program product accessible from a computer usable or computer readable medium providing program code for use by or in connection with a computer or any instruction execution system. For the purposes of this description a computer usable or computer readable medium can be any apparatus that can contain or store the program for use by or in connection with the instruction execution system apparatus or device.

Examples of a computer readable medium include a semiconductor or solid state memory magnetic tape a removable computer diskette a random access memory RAM a read only memory ROM a rigid magnetic disk and an optical disk. Current examples of optical disks include compact disk read only memory CD ROM compact disk read write CD R W and digital video disc DVD .

A data processing system suitable for storing and or executing program code will include at least one processor coupled directly or indirectly to memory elements through a system bus. The memory elements can include local memory employed during actual execution of the program code bulk storage and cache memories which provide temporary storage of at least some program code in order to reduce the number of times code must be retrieved from bulk storage during execution.

Input output or I O devices including but not limited to keyboards displays pointing devices etc. can be coupled to the system either directly or through intervening I O controllers.

Network adapters may also be coupled to the system to enable the data processing system to become coupled to other data processing systems or remote printers or storage devices through intervening private or public networks. Modems cable modems and Ethernet cards are just a few of the currently available types of network adapters.

The description of the embodiments of the present invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description and is not intended to be exhaustive or limited to the invention in the form disclosed. Many modifications and variations will be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art. The embodiment was chosen and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention the practical application and to enable others of ordinary skill in the art to understand the invention for various embodiments with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.

