---

title: Communications system, methods and apparatus
abstract: An OFDM wireless communications system includes terrestrial and satellite based base stations. Mobile nodes support two uplink modes of operation, multi-tone mode for terrestrial station interaction and single tone mode for satellite base station interaction. In single tone mode the peak to average power ratio is lower than in the multi-tone mode allowing the same power amplifier to transmit higher average power signals and thus extend range and reach a satellite in geostationary orbit. In multi-tone mode, the mobile node: is temporarily assigned a multi-tone uplink traffic channel segment for user data, is assigned a dedicated control channel for uplink control signals, and supports slaved Ack/Nak for traffic channels. In single tone mode, the mobile node: is assigned a single logical uplink dedicated tone to use for transmitting both user data and control data, and does not use a slaved Ack/Nak mechanism for traffic channels.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07403470&OS=07403470&RS=07403470
owner: Qualcomm Incorporated
number: 07403470
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050718
---
The present application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 689 911 filed on Jun. 13 2005 titled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR IMPLEMENTING A HYBRID TERRESTRIAL SATELLITE OFDM SYSTEM which is hereby expressly incorporated by reference.

The present application is directed to methods and apparatus which can be used in implementing an OFDM system which uses OFDM tones for communicating uplink signals to terrestrial and or satellite base stations.

The ability to communicate using a handheld communications device e.g. a portable telephone regardless of one s location in a wide area is of great value. The value of such a device is important to military applications as well as in the case of conventional consumer based applications.

Terrestrial base stations have been installed at various earth based locations to support voice and or data services. Such base stations normally have a coverage area of a few miles at most. Accordingly the distance between a conventional cell phone and a base station during use is normally only a few miles. Given the relatively small distance between a cell phone and a terrestrial base station during normal use a hand held cell phone normally has sufficient power to transmit to the base station e.g. on an uplink using bandwidth that is relatively wide and in many cases capable of supporting relatively high data rates.

In the case of one known system based on the use of terrestrial base stations a plurality of OFDM tones e.g. in some cases 7 or more tones are used in parallel by a wireless terminal to transmit user data to the base stations. In the known system user data to be communicated via an uplink and control signals to be communicated via an uplink are normally coded separately. In the known system a wireless terminal may be assigned a dedicated tone for uplink control signaling with uplink traffic segments which correspond to tones being assigned in response to one or more uplink requests transmitted to the terrestrial base station. In the known system uplink traffic channel segment assignment information is broadcast to the wireless terminals which monitor assignment signals that may indicate assignment of uplink traffic channel segments in response to a transmitted request. On a recurring basis the base station of the known system also broadcasts signals which can be used for timing synchronization with the timing synchronization signals referred to as beacon signals recurring over a time period sometimes referred to as a beacon slot.

While terrestrial base stations are useful in areas where the population is sufficient to justify the cost of a terrestrial base station in many locations on the planet there is insufficient commercial justification to deploy a base station and or due to geographic issues it is impractical to deploy a permanent terrestrial base station. For example in physically inhospitable areas such as the open ocean dessert regions and or regions which are covered by ice sheets it may be difficult or impractical to deploy and maintain a terrestrial base station.

The lack of base stations in some geographic regions leads to dead zones in which is not possible to communicate using a cell phone. In order to try and eliminate the number of areas where cell phone coverage is missing companies are likely to continue to deploy new base stations but for the reasons discussed above for the foreseeable future there are likely to remain large areas of the planet where cell phone coverage from terrestrial base stations can not be obtained.

An alternative to terrestrial base stations is to use satellites as base stations. Satellite base stations are extremely costly to deploy given the cost of launching satellites. In addition there is limited space above the planet in which geostationary satellites can be placed. While satellites in geostationary orbit have the advantage of being in a fixed position relative to the earth lower earth orbiting satellites can also be deployed but such satellites remain costly to deploy and will remain in orbit for a shorter period of time due to their initially lower orbit than a geostationary satellite. The distance from the surface of the earth where a mobile phone may be located and geostationary orbit is considerable e.g. approximately 22 226 miles although some estimates suggest that 22 300 miles is a better estimate. To put this in perspective the diameter of the Earth is approximately 7 926 miles. Unfortunately the distances which signals must travel in the case of satellite base stations is considerable longer than the distance signals normally travel to reach a conventional terrestrial base station which is usually a few miles at most.

As can be appreciated given the distance to geostationary orbit it is often necessary to transmit signals to satellites at higher power level than is required to transmit signals to terrestrial base stations. As a result most satellite phones normally are relatively large and bulky compared to conventional cell phones due to the size of the batteries power amplifiers and other circuitry which has been used to implement cell phones. The need for a relatively large and therefore often bulky power amplifier results in part from the fact that many conventional communications systems have a less than ideal peak to average power ratio. As is widely known for a given signal the peak to average power ratio is the ratio of the peak power over a time interval and the average power of the signal over the same time interval. The relatively large peak to average power ratio requires that a larger amplifier be included to support peak power output than could be used in the case of the same average power output but where the peak to average power ratio is lower.

Given that terrestrial base station coverage is likely to remain limited in terms of geographic area which is covered for the foreseeable future it would be desirable if methods and systems could be developed to provide the area coverage benefits of satellite base stations without requiring large bulky phones and or the need for the system to be implemented completely as a satellite system. In particular it would be desirable if methods and apparatus could be developed which would allow for communications devices such as mobile phones to be the same or approximately the same size as convention communications devices which are designed to operate solely with terrestrial base stations but which could operate with a satellite base station when terrestrial base station coverage is not available.

The present invention is directed to communications methods and apparatus which are suitable for use in a communications system including both relatively near base stations and remote base stations.

For geo stationary satellites with a beam covering a large geographical area there may be a significant difference in the round trip time between the center of the beam and the edge. To resolve this RTT ambiguity a ranging scheme capable of resolving delta RTT of several milliseconds may be desirable.

Such a scheme can use the existing access interval in OFDM with additional time varying coding on the access tone set to indicate which forward link super slot the revere link transmission is associated with. This coding can resolve ambiguity to the super slot level. The terminal may need to try repeated access attempts at varying time offsets to cover the sub superslot 

In some embodiments the system of the present invention is implemented as a hybrid system where both satellite and terrestrial base stations are used in combination and where mobiles can establish communications links with either type of base station. To do this two different modes of timing synchronization are supported in a WT. In one mode used for remote base stations e.g. satellite base stations multiple access probe signals are sent with different coding and or timing offsets with respect to signals received from the base station e.g. beacon signals or other high power signals which can be used for timing synchronization purposes. The remote base station accepts and decodes probe signals received within an access interval that occurs on a recurring basis and responds assuming it is able to receive and decode the probe signal. The response may include a base station assigned wireless terminal identifier and timing synchronization information e.g. a timing correction value. The response may also indicate which particular probe is being responded to. The WT monitors for response to probes and bases timing correction operations on the received response.

While not necessary to the timing features of the invention the timing methods and apparatus can be used with single tone modes of operation where a single tone is used for uplink signaling to remote base stations.

In various embodiments a remote base station is a base station which has a minimum distance from a wireless terminal during use which is measured in terms of tens hundreds or even thousands of miles. A geostationary satellite base station is one example of a remote base station. Geostationary satellite base stations are positioned thousands of miles above the earth s surface in which case the minimum distance to a communications device on the earth s surface or even in a commercial airplane is measured in thousands of miles. This is in contrast to a near base station which might be a terrestrial base station located within e.g. up to 50 miles of a wireless terminal during normal use but more typically up to 5 miles.

While the methods and apparatus of the present invention including the cell phones of the present invention are well suited for use in communications systems which have both terrestrial and satellite base stations the methods and apparatus of the present invention are well suited for a wide range of communications applications where a large difference in the amount of output power for a fixed amount of bandwidth is required. In the satellite example it should be appreciated that a far greater amount of output power for a fixed amount of bandwidth is normally required for successful uplink signaling to the satellite base station than is required for successful uplink signaling using the same amount of transmission bandwidth to a terrestrial base station.

Various features of the present invention are directed to methods and apparatus which can be used to implement portable communications devices capable of communicating with both remote and comparatively near base stations e.g. satellite base stations and terrestrial base stations. A system implemented in accordance with the invention may include a plurality of near and remote base stations. In one such system terrestrial base stations are used to provide communications coverage with sufficient communications traffic to justify the deployment of a terrestrial base station. Satellite base stations are used to provide fill in coverage in regions where terrestrial base stations are not deployed e.g. due to the nature of the physical environment the lack of a site for a base station or for other reasons. Portable communications devices in the exemplary system are capable of communicating with both the terrestrial and satellite base stations e.g. by switching between different modes of operation.

As will be discussed below in various embodiments the system is implemented as an OFDM system. In some embodiments OFDM signaling is used for uplink as well as downlink signaling. First and second modes of OFDM uplink operation are supported.

During normal operation with terrestrial base stations the wireless terminal uses multiple tones in parallel in the uplink to transmit user data on multiple tones to a base station simultaneously. This allows relatively high data rates to be supported. When operating in multi tone mode the average peak to average power ratio during portions of time in which user data is transmitted on multiple tones is a first ratio. As will be discussed below when operating in a single tone mode of operation e.g. used for communicating with a satellite base station a second lower peak to average power ratio is achieved. Thus when operating in the single tone mode the power amplifier can be used in a more efficient manner. In various embodiments the difference is 4 or more db and commonly 6 db in the peak to average power ratio between the multi tone mode of operation and the single tone mode of operation which is achieved for a period of several symbol times.

Single tone mode is a method of operating an OFDM wireless terminal to maximize its coverage range under typical transmission power budget constraints encountered when communicating with terrestrial base stations so that satellite communications can be supported while staying within the typical terrestrial transmission power budget constraints. This mode is well suited for low rate data of voice links in which multi tone uplink channels and ACKs may not be and in some embodiments are not supported. In single tone mode the terminal will transmit on an OFDM single tone at a time. This tone is represented as a single constant logical tone however it can and in various embodiments does hop from physical tone to physical tone on dwell boundaries as consistent with other OFDM channels used in some systems. In one embodiment this logical tone replaces a UL DCCH channel used to communicate with a terrestrial base station thus maintaining compatibility with other OFDM users operating in standard multi tone mode.

The contents of the single tone uplink channel used by a wireless terminal include in some embodiments a multiplex of control data and user data. This multiplex may be at the field level within a code word i.e. some bits from a channel coding block are used to represent control data the remainder represent user data. However in other embodiments the multiplexing in the single tone uplink channel is at the code word level e.g. control data is coded within a channel coding block user data is coded within a channel coding block and the blocks are multiplexed together for transmission in the single tone uplink channel. In one embodiment when the single tone channel is not fully occupied with user data e.g. during silence suppression of a voice call it is possible to blank the transmitter during the un need transmit symbols thereby conserving transmitter power since no signals need be sent during this period. User data may be multiplexed packet data or regularly scheduled voice data or a mix of the two.

For a terminal operating in single tone mode downlink acknowledgement signals can not be transmitted in a separate channel as is done in the multi tone mode and thus downlink acknowledgements are either multiplexed into the logical single tone uplink channel tone or ACKs are not used. In such a case the base station may assume that downlink traffic channel segments have been successfully received with the wireless terminal expressly requesting retransmission if needed.

In accordance with the invention a wireless terminal operating in single tone mode can achieve a benefit in transmitted power while using standard OFDM components to implement the transmitter. In standard mode the average power transmitted is normally limited below the peak power capacity of the transmitter s power amp to allow for peak to average ratio PAR typically 9 dB and avoid peak clipping which can cause excessive out of band emission. In single tone mode in various embodiments the PAR is limited to approximately 3 dB thus the average transmit power can be increased by almost 6 dB without increasing the probability of clipping.

At frequency hops changes in the physical tone corresponding to the single logical tone which occur at dwell boundaries the phase of the transmitted waveform can be controlled so as to be phase continuous across frequencies. This can and is accomplished in some but not necessarily all embodiments by changing the carrier frequency of the tone during the cyclic extension of the OFDM symbol from one symbol transmitted in the uplink to the next so that the signal phase at the end of the symbol is at a desired value equal to the starting phase of the subsequent symbol. This phase continuous operation will allow the PAR of the signal to be bounded at 3 dB.

OFDM over geo stationary satellite is possible with a few modifications of the basic existing basic OFDM communications protocols. Due to the extremely long round trip time RTT there is little or no value of slaved acknowledgments for traffic channels. Thus in some embodiments of the invention when operating in single tone uplink mode downlink acknowledgments are not sent. In some such embodiments downlink acknowledgements are replaced with a repeat request mechanism in which a request is transmitted in the UL for a repeat transmission of the data which was not received successfully.

Numerous features benefits and embodiments of the present invention are discussed in the detailed description which follows.

Other MNs may exist in the system that support communications with one type of base station e.g. a terrestrial base station but do not support communications with the other type of base station e.g. the satellite base station .

Data information includes user data information which includes a plurality of sets of information user 1 MN session A session B data information user N MN session X data information corresponding to the wireless terminals using the base station as their point of network attachment. Such WT user data information may include e.g. WT identifiers routing information segment assignment information user data information e.g. voice information data packets of text video music etc. coded blocks of information. Data information also includes system information including multi tone UL user frequency timing power tone hopping coding structure information .

Data information includes user data information which includes a plurality of sets of information user 1 MN session A session B data information user N MN session X data information corresponding the wireless terminals using the base station as their point of network attachment. Such WT information may include e.g. WT identifiers routing information assigned uplink single logical tone downlink segment assignment information user data information e.g. voice information data packets of text video music etc. coded blocks of information. Data information also includes system information including single tone UL user frequency timing power tone hopping coding structure information .

The transmitter also includes a power amplifier . The same power amplifier is used by the WT for both the multi tone uplink mode of operation and the single tone uplink mode of operation. For example in the multi mode uplink operational mode where the uplink traffic channel segments may typically use 7 14 or 28 tones simultaneously the power amplifier needs to accommodate peak conditions where the 28 signals corresponding to the 28 tones simultaneously constructively align this tends to limit the average output level. However when the WT is operated in a single uplink tone mode of operation using the same power amplifier the concern constructive alignment between signals from different tones is not an issue and the average power output level for the amplifier can be considerably increased over the multi tone operational mode. This approach in accordance with the present invention allows for a conventional terrestrial mobile node to be adapted with minor modifications and used to communicate uplink signals to a satellite base station at a substantially increased distance.

The memory includes routines and data information . The processor e.g. a CPU executes the routines and uses the data information in memory to control the operation of the wireless terminal and implement the methods of the present invention. The routines include a communications routine and wireless terminal control routines . The communications routine implements the various communications protocols used by the wireless terminal . The wireless terminal control routines include an initialization module a handoff module an uplink mode switching control module uplink single tone mode module uplink multi tone mode module an uplink tone hopping module a coding module and a modulation module .

The initialization module controls operations regarding start up of the wireless terminal e.g. including start up from a power off to a power on state of operation and operations related to the wireless terminal seeking to establish a wireless communications link with a base station. The handoff module controls operations related to handoffs form one base station to another e.g. the WT may be currently connected with a terrestrial base station but be involved in a handoff to a satellite base station. Uplink switching control module controls switching between different modes of operation e.g. switching from a multi tone uplink mode of operation to a single tone uplink mode of operation when the wireless terminal switches from communicating with a terrestrial base station to a satellite base station. Uplink single tone mode module includes modules used in the single tone mode of operation with satellite base stations while UL multi tone mode module includes modules used in the multi tone mode of operation with terrestrial base stations.

Uplink single tone mode module includes a user data transmission control module a transmission power control module a control signaling module a UL single tone determination module a control data user data multiplexing module a DL traffic channel retransmission request module a dwell boundary and or inter symbol boundary carrier adjustment module and an access module . The user data transmission module controls operations related to uplink user data while in the single tone mode of operation. The transmission power control module controls the transmission of power during the single tone uplink mode to maintain an average peak to average power ratio which is at least 4 dB lower than a peak to average power ratio maintained during said multi tone uplink mode of operation. The control signaling module controls signaling during the single tone mode of operation and such control operations include reducing the frequency and or number of the uplink control signals which are transmitted from the WT when operation switches from the multi tone mode of operation to the single tone mode of operation. The uplink single tone determination module determines the single logical tone in the uplink timing structure which has been assigned to the WT to be used for uplink signaling e.g. via an association with a base station assigned WT identifier. The control data user data multiplexing module multiplexes user data information bits with control data bits providing a combined input that may be coded as a block. The downlink traffic channel retransmission request module issues requests for retransmission of downlink traffic channel segment which were not successfully decoded e.g. provided the WT deems the data would still be valid given the large delay involved due to the long round trip signaling time. Dwell boundary carrier adjustment module slightly changes the carrier frequency of the tone during the cyclic extension of the OFDM symbol that terminates a dwell so that the signal phase at the end of the symbol is at a desired value equal to the starting phases of the subsequent symbol. In this way in accordance with a feature of some embodiments of the present invention at frequency hops the phase of the transmitted waveform can be controlled to be phase continuous across frequencies. In some embodiments the frequency adjustment is performed e.g. as part of a multi part cyclic prefix included in each of successive OFDM symbols to provide continuity between successive uplink OFDM symbols transmitted by the WT over the uplink during the single UL tone mode of operation. This continuity between symbols of the signal is advantageous in maintaining peak power level control which affects the level to which the power amplifier can be driven while in the single tone mode of operation.

The access module controls operations related to establishing a new wireless link with a satellite base station. Such operation may include e.g. timing synchronization operations including access probe signaling in accordance with various features of some embodiments of the present invention. For geo stationary satellites with a beam covering a large geographical area there may be significant differences in the round trip time between the center of the beam and the edge. To resolve this RTT ambiguity a ranging scheme capable of resolving delta RTT of several milliseconds is used. For example the timing structure may be divided into different time segments such as e.g. superslots where a superslot represents successive OFDM symbol transmission time intervals and different coding of the access probe signal may be used for different superslots. This can be used to allow timing ambiguity between the WT and satellite BS to be resolved to within a superslot. In addition repeated access attempts at various time offsets can be attempted repeatedly to cover the superlot ambiguity e.g. 

The uplink multi tone module includes a user data transmission control module a transmission power control module a control signaling module an uplink traffic channel request module an uplink traffic channel tone set determination module an uplink traffic channel modulation coding selection module a downlink traffic channel ack nak module and an access module . The user data transmission control module includes operations including controlling transmission of uplink traffic channel segments assigned to the WT.

User data transmission control module controls uplink transmission related operations of user data in the multi tone mode of operation wherein user data is communicated in an uplink traffic channel segment temporarily assigned to the WT and including signals to be transmitted using multiple tones simultaneously. Transmission power control module controls uplink transmission power levels in the multi tone mode of uplink operation e.g. adjusting output power levels in accordance with received base station uplink power control signals and within the capabilities of the power amplifier e.g. in terms of not exceeding peak power output capability of power amplifier. Control signaling module controls power and timing control signaling operations while in the multi tone uplink mode of operation the rate of control signaling being higher than in the single tone uplink mode of operation. In some embodiments control signaling module includes the use of a dedicated control channel logical tone dedicated to the WT by the BS e.g. corresponding to a BS assigned WT identifier for use in uplink control signaling. Control signaling module may code control information for transmission in uplink control channel segments which do not include user data. UL traffic channel request module generates requests for traffic channel segments to be assigned e.g. when the WT has user data to communicate on the uplink. UL traffic channel tone set determination module determines the set of tones to use corresponding to an assigned uplink traffic channel segment. The set of tones includes multiple tones to be used simultaneously. In the multi tone mode of operation the logical tone set assigned to a WT for communicating uplink traffic channel user data at one time may differ from the logical tone set assigned to the WT for communicating uplink traffic channel user data at a different time even though the WT may have been assigned the same WT identifier by the same BS. Module can also use tone hopping information to determine the physical tones corresponding to the logical tones. UL traffic channel modulation coding selection module selects and implements the uplink coding rate and modulation method to be used for an uplink traffic channel segment. For example in the UL multi tone mode the WT may support a plurality of user data rates implemented using different coding rates and or different modulation methods e.g. QPSK QAM . DL traffic channel Ack Nak module controls Ack Nak determination and response signaling of received downlink traffic channel segments while in the uplink multi tone mode of operation. For example for each downlink traffic channel segment in the downlink timing structure there may be a corresponding Ack Nak uplink segment in the uplink timing structure for the UL multi tone mode of operation and the WT if assigned the downlink traffic channel segment sends an Ack Nak back to the BS conveying the result of the transmission e.g. to be used in an automatic retransmission mechanism. Access module controls access operations while in the multi tone mode of operation e.g. access operations to establish a wireless link with a nearby e.g. terrestrial base station and achieve timing synchronization. In some embodiments the access module for multi tone mode has a lower level of complexity than the access module for single tone mode.

Data information includes uplink operational mode base station identifier base stations system information base station assigned wireless terminal identifier user device session resource information uplink user voice data information bits uplink user multiplexed packet data information bits uplink control data information bits coded block including uplink user data and control data coded user data block coded control data block frequency and timing structure information single tone mode coding block information multi tone mode coding block information single tone mode transmitter blanking criteria information single tone mode transmitter power adjustment information multi tone mode transmitter power adjustment information and single tone mode carrier frequency cyclic extension adjustment information . The uplink operational mode includes information identifying whether the WT is currently in the multi tone uplink mode e.g. for communications with a terrestrial base station or in the single tone uplink mode e.g. for communications with a satellite base station. BSs system information includes information associated with each of the base stations in the system e.g. type of base station satellite or terrestrial carrier frequency or frequencies used by the base station base station identifier information sectors in the base station timing and frequency uplink and downlink structures used by the base station etc.

BS identifier includes an identifier of the BS the WT is using as its current point of network attachment e.g. distinguishing the BS from other BSs in the overall system. BS assigned WT identifier may be an identifier e.g. a value in the range 0 . . . 31 assigned by the BS being used as the WTs point of network attachment. In the single tone tone uplink mode of operation the identifier may be associated with a single dedicated logical tone in the uplink timing structure to be used by the WT for uplink signaling including both user data and control data. In the multi tone uplink mode of operation the identifier may be associated with a logical tone in the uplink timing structure to be used by the WT for a dedicated control channel for uplink control data. The BS assigned WT identifier may also be used by the BS when making segment assignments e.g. of an uplink traffic channel segment in the multi tone mode of uplink operation.

User device session resource information includes user and device identification information routing information security information ongoing session information and air link resource information. Uplink user voice data information bits include input user data corresponding to a voice call. Uplink user multiplexed packet data information bits includes input user data e.g. corresponding to text video music a data file etc. Uplink control data information bits includes power and timing control information that the WT desires to communicate to the BS. Coded block including uplink user data and control bits is the coded output block corresponding to a mixture of user information bits and or in combination with control information bits which is formed in some embodiments during the UL single tone mode of operation. Coded user data block is a coded block of user information bits and or while coded control data block is a coded block of control information bits . Data and control information are coded separately in the UL multi tone mode of operation and in some embodiments of the UL single tone mode of operation. In some embodiments of the single tone mode of operation where coding between uplink user data and uplink control data is separate the ability to blank the transmitter when there is no user data to communicate is facilitated. Single tone mode transmitter blanking criteria information is used in the blanking decisions e.g. applying no output transmitter power on the single uplink tone during some intervals dedicated to user data where there is no data to communicate e.g. due to a lull in an ongoing conversation. This approach of transmitter blanking results in power saving for the wireless terminal an important considerations where the average power output is relatively high to facilitate communications with a satellite in geo stationary orbit. In addition levels of interference may be reduced.

Single tone mode coding block information includes information identifying the coding rate and modulation method used for the uplink in the single tone mode of operation e.g. a low coding rate using QPSK modulation e.g. supporting at least 4.8 KBits sec. Multi tone mode coding block information includes a plurality of different data rate options that are supported for uplink traffic channel segments in the uplink during the multi tone mode of operation e.g. various coding rates and modulation schemes including QAM e.g. QPSK and QAM such as to support at least the same coding rate as in the single tone mode plus some additional higher data rates.

Frequency and timing structure information includes dwell boundary information and tone hopping information corresponding to the BS being used as the point of network attachment. Frequency and timing structure information also includes information identifying logical tones within the timing and frequency structure.

Single tone mode transmitter power adjustment information and multi tone mode power adjustment information includes information such as peak power average power peak to average power ratio maximum power levels for operation and control of the power amplifier when in the single tone mode and multi tone mode of operation respectively. Single tone mode carrier frequency cyclic extension adjustment information includes information used by the dwell boundary and or inter symbol boundary carrier adjustment module to implement continuity between signals at symbol boundaries in the uplink during the single tone mode of operation e.g. especially during hops at a dwell boundary from one physical tone to another.

MNs communicating with a satellite base station may be operating in a single tone mode of operation where a single tone is used for the uplink e.g. supporting a voice channel. In the downlink a larger set of tones may be used e.g. 113 downlink tones which are received and processed by the WT. For example in the downlink the WT may be assigned temporarily as needed a downlink traffic channel segment using a plurality of tones simultaneously. In addition the WT may receive control signaling simultaneously over different tones. Cell includes MN MN N communicating with satellite BS via wireless links respectively. Cell includes MN MN N communicating with satellite BS via wireless links respectively. Cell N includes MN MN N communicating with satellite BS N via wireless links respectively. In some embodiments the downlink between the satellite BS and the MN supports a higher rate of user information than the corresponding uplink e.g. supporting voice data and or digital video broadcast in the downlink. In some embodiments the downlink user data rate provided a WT using a satellite BS as its point of network attachment is approximately the same as the uplink user data rate e.g. 4.8 Kbit sec thus supporting a single voice call but tending to conserve power resources of the satellite base station.

MNs communicating with a terrestrial base stations may be operating in a conventional mode of operation e.g. where multiple tones e.g. seven or more are used simultaneously for uplink traffic channel segments. Cell includes MN MN N communicating with terrestrial BS via wireless links respectively. Cell includes MN MN N communicating with terrestrial BS via wireless links respectively. Cell N includes MN MN N communicating with terrestrial BS N via wireless links respectively.

Operation of the method of flowchart starts in step in response to a wireless terminal having powered on or in response to a handoff operation. Operation proceeds from start step to step . In step the wireless terminal determines whether the network attachment point that it intends to use as its new point of network attachment is a terrestrial base station or a satellite base station. If it is determined in step that the new network attachment point is a terrestrial base station then operation proceeds to step where the wireless terminal sets its operating mode to a first operating mode e.g. a multiple tone uplink mode of operation. However if it is determined in step that the new network attachment point is a satellite base station then operation proceeds to step where the wireless terminal sets its operating mode to a second operating mode e.g. a one tone uplink mode of operation.

Returning to step operation proceeds from step to step where the WT having been accepted by the new terrestrial base station receives a base station assigned wireless terminal user identifier. Operation proceeds from step to step and . In step the WT is operated to receive signals corresponding to downlink traffic channel segments conveying downlink user data from the terrestrial base station. Operation proceeds from step to step where the WT sends an Acknowledgment Negative Acknowledgment Ack Nak response signal to the base station.

Returning to step in step the WT determines a dedicated control channel logical tone from the WT user ID received in step . Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT determines the physical tone corresponding to the logical tone to use based upon tone hopping information. For example the WT assigned ID variable may have a range of 32 values 0 . . . 31 each ID corresponding to a different single logical tone in a uplink timing structure e.g. an uplink timing structure including 113 tones. The 113 logical tones may be hopped in accordance with an uplink tone hopping pattern within the uplink timing structure. For example excluding access intervals the uplink timing structure may be subdivided into dwell intervals each dwell interval having a duration of a fixed number e.g. seven successive OFDM symbol transmission time intervals and tone hopping occurs at the dwell boundaries but not in between. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT is operated to transmit uplink control channel signals using the dedicated control channel tone.

Returning to step in step the WT checks as to whether there is user data to transmit on the uplink. If there is no data waiting to be transmitted operation proceeds back to step where the WT continues to check for data to transmit. However if in step it is determined that there is user data to transmit on the uplink then operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT requests an uplink traffic channel assignment from the terrestrial base station. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT receives an uplink traffic channel segment assignment. Operation proceeds to step where the WT selects a modulation method to use e.g. QPSK or QAM. In step the WT selects a coding rate to be used. Operation proceeds from step to step where the WT codes the user data for the assigned uplink traffic channel segment in accordance with the selected coding rate of step and maps the coded bits to modulation symbol values in accordance with the selected modulation method of step . Operation proceeds from step to step where the WT determines the logical tones to use based on the uplink traffic channel segment assignment. In step the WT determines the physical tones corresponding to the logical tones to use based on tone hopping information. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT transmits user data to the terrestrial base station using the determined physical tones.

Returning to step operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT having been accepted by the satellite base station receives a BS assigned WT user ID from the satellite base station. Operation proceeds from step to steps and step .

In step the WT is operated to receive signals corresponding to downlink traffic channel segments conveying downlink user data from the satellite base station. Operation proceeds from step to step where the WT request retransmission of the downlink traffic channel user data in response to an error. If the downlink transmission was successfully received and decoded no response is communicated from the wireless terminal to the base station. In some embodiments where an error is detected in the information recovery process a request for retransmission is not sent e.g. as the time window of validity for the lost downlink data will expire before a retransmission could be completed or due to a low priority level of the data.

Returning to step in step the WT determines the single uplink logical tone to use for both control data and user data for the assigned WT user ID. Operation proceeds to either step or step depending on the particular embodiment.

In step the WT multiplexes user data and control data to be communicated on the uplink. The multiplexed data of step is forwarded to step where the WT codes the mixture of user and control information bits into a single coded block. Operation proceeds from step to step where the WT determines the physical tone to use for each dwell based on the determined logical tone and tone hopping information. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT is operated to transmit the coded block of combined user data and control data to the satellite base station using the determined physical tone for each dwell.

In step the WT is operated to code the user data and control data in independent blocks. Operation proceeds from step to step where the WT is operated to determine the physical tone to be used for each dwell based on the determined logical tone and the tone hopping information. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT is operated to transmit coded blocks of user data and coded blocks of control data to the satellite base station using the determined physical tone determined on a per dwell basis. With regard to step in accordance with a feature of some embodiments of the present invention during time intervals dedicated to user data where there is no user data to be transmitted the single tone is allowed to go unused.

Operating a wireless terminal in accordance with the method of flowchart can result in operating the wireless terminal during a first period of time including a first plurality of consecutive OFDM symbol transmission time periods in the first mode of operation during which multiple OFDM tones are used simultaneously to transmit at least some user data in a first uplink signal having a first peak to average power ratio. For example the WT may using a terrestrial base station as its point of network attachment and may be communicating uplink user data over air link resources corresponding to an uplink traffic channel segment using a plurality of tones simultaneously for uplink traffic channel data e.g. 7 14 or 28 tones an additional tone or tones may also be used in parallel for control signaling e.g. a dedicated control channel tone. Operating a wireless terminal in accordance with the method of flowchart can also result in operating the wireless terminal during a second period of time including a second plurality of consecutive OFDM symbol transmission time periods in the second mode of operation during which at most one OFDM tone is used to transmit at least some user data in a second uplink signal having a second peak to average power ratio which is different from said first peak to average ratio. For example during the second period of time the WT may be using a satellite base station as its point of network attachment and may be communicating uplink user data and control data over air link resources corresponding to a single dedicated logical tone associated with a base station assigned WT user identifier said single dedicated logical tone may be hopped to different physical tones on dwell boundaries.

In some embodiments the second peak to average power ratio is lower than the first peak to average power ratio e.g. by at least 4 dB. In some embodiments the WT uses an omni directional antenna. User data communicated over the uplink during the first mode of operation during the first period of time can include user data at a rate of at least 4.8 Kbits sec. User data communicated over the uplink during the second mode of operation during the second period of time can include user data at a rate of at least 4.8 Kbits sec. For example a voice channel may be supported for WT operation in both the first and second modes of operation. In some embodiments the WT supports a plurality of different uplink coding rate options in the first mode of operation including a plurality of different coding rates and a plurality of different modulation schemes e.g. QPSK QAM. In some embodiments the WT supports a single uplink rate option for operation in the second mode e.g QPSK using a single coding rate. In some embodiments the information bit rate regarding uplink user data signals in the second mode of operation is less than or equal to the minimum information bit rate regarding uplink user data signal in the first mode of operation.

In some embodiments the distance between the satellite base station and the wireless terminal when said satellite base station is being used by the WT as its point of network attachment is at least 3 times the distance between the terrestrial base station and the wireless terminal when said terrestrial base station is being used by the WT as its point of network attachment. In some embodiments at least some of the satellite base stations in the communications system are geo stationary or geo synchronous satellites. In some such embodiments the distance between the geo stationary or geo synchronous satellite base station and the WT using it as its point of network attachment is at least 35 000 km while the distance between a ground base station and the WT using it as its point of network attachment is at most 100 km. In some embodiments the satellite base station being used by the WT as its point of network attachment is at least a distance away from the WT such that a signal round trip time exceeds 100 OFDM symbol transmission time period each OFDM symbol transmission time period including an amount of time used to transmit one OFDM symbol and a corresponding cyclic prefix.

In some embodiments switching from a first mode of operation to a second mode of operation occurs when a handoff occurs between a terrestrial base station and a satellite base station. In some such embodiments wherein switching from the first mode of operation to the second mode of operation occurs the WT ceases to send acknowledgment signals in response to received downlink user data. In some such embodiments wherein switching from the first mode of operation to the second mode of operation occurs the WT reduces the frequency and or number of uplink control signals which are transmitted.

Other embodiments in accordance with various features of the present invention may include systems that include space based base stations but do not include terrestrial based base stations systems that include terrestrial base stations but do not include space based base stations and various combinations including airborne platform based base stations.

In systems such as the uplink system of the present invention in addition to power issues uplink symbol timing synchronization may be an issue in some but not necessarily all applications e.g. applications in which there are multiple WTs which may transmit in an uplink to a satellite at the same time as occurs in a multi user system. In OFDM it is important that symbols transmitted by different WTs arrive at the base station at the same time. Various methods of achieving uplink timing synchronization may be used. At least some exemplary timing synchronization methods are described in U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 689 910 filed on Jun. 13 2005 titled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR SUPPORTING OFDM UPLINKS WITH REMOTE BASE STATIONS and in U.S. utility Patent Application titled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR SUPPORTING UPLINKS WITH REMOTE BASE STATIONS filed on the same date as the present application. Both of the preceding applications are hereby expressly incorporated by reference and which is being filed on the same date as this Provisional Patent application and which names the same individuals as are named on the present application as inventors.

In various embodiments of the invention when communicating with remote base stations some of which use multiple tones in an uplink uplink segment assignments are used with the UL assignment slave structure being adjusted to account for assignment of traffic segments 2 the maximum RTT round trip time . In some but not necessarily all cases of terminals without high gain antennas e.g. handsets with omni directional antennas or nearly omni directional antennas the extreme link budget requirements for successful receipt of a transmitted signal by a satellite base station may limit communication through the use of single one mode. Accordingly in some embodiments when a handoff occurs from a terrestrial base station to a satellite base station the wireless terminal detects the change and switches from multi tone uplink mode to a single OFDM tone uplink mode operation.

For geo stationary satellites with a beam covering a large geographical area there may be a significant difference in the round trip time between the center of the beam and the edge. To resolve this RTT ambiguity a ranging scheme capable of resolving delta RTT of several milliseconds may be desirable.

Such a scheme can use the existing access interval in OFDM with additional time varying coding on the access tone set to indicate which forward link super slot the revere link transmission is associated with. This coding can resolve ambiguity to the super slot level. The terminal may need to try repeated access attempts at varying time offsets to cover the sub superslot 

The receiver is coupled to a receive antenna through which WT receives downlink signals from base stations. Receiver includes a decoder for decoded received downlink signals. Transmitter is coupled to a transmit antenna through which WT transmits uplink signals to base stations. In some embodiments transmit antenna is an omni directional antenna. In some embodiments the same antenna is used for both transmit and receive functions. Transmitter includes a power amplifier and an encoder . Power amplifier is controlled in accordance with the present invention to control the transmit power of uplink signaling. Encoder is operated to encode e.g. via coded blocks data information to be communicated in uplink signals to base stations. In some embodiments the coding implementation changes as a function of whether the WT is operating in a single uplink tone mode of operation or a multi tone uplink mode of operation.

Memory includes routines and data information . The processor e.g. a CPU executes routines and uses the data information in memory to control the operation of the WT and implement methods of the present invention.

Routines include a communications routine and wireless terminal control routines . Communications routine implements the communications protocols used by the wireless terminal . Wireless terminal control routines includes a switching control module a single tone mode transmission control module a multi tone mode transmission control module an uplink signaling frequency control module an uplink traffic channel request module an uplink traffic channel segment transmission termination module and a power transmission control module .

Wireless terminal supports a first multi tone OFDM uplink mode of operation in which the WT uses multiple OFDM tones at the same time to transmit signals to a base station and a second single tone OFDM uplink mode of operation in which the WT uses a single tone at a time to transmit signals to a base station. Switching control module controls switching between the first multi tone OFDM uplink mode of operation and the second single tone OFDM mode of operation. For example switching control module may control operations to transfer control back and forth between single tone transmission control module and multi tone transmission control module . Switching control module includes a terrestrial satellite switching module . Module operations include switching the WT from a multi tone uplink mode of operation to the single tone uplink mode of operation when the wireless terminal switches from communicating with a terrestrial base station to a satellite base station.

Single tone mode transmission control module controls the transmitter to transmit user data using a single OFDM tone during the single tone uplink mode of operation. Multi tone mode transmission control module controls the transmitter to transmit user data using multiple OFDM tones at the same time in the multi tone uplink mode of operation.

Power transmission control module controls the transmitter including control of power amplifier to control the transmission power during the single tone uplink mode of operation to maintain an average peak to average power ratio which is at least 4 dB lower than a peak to average power ratio maintained during the multi tone uplink mode of operation. Uplink signaling frequency control module reduces the frequency of uplink control signals which are transmitted from the wireless terminal when operation switches from the multi tone uplink mode of operation to the single tone uplink mode of operation. Uplink traffic channel request module controls the generation and transmission of requests for uplink traffic channel segments during the multi tone uplink mode of operation e.g. requests for uplink traffic channel segments that could be assigned to any of a plurality of potential wireless terminals currently coupled to the base station e.g. a terrestrial base station and operating in a multi tone uplink mode of operation. Uplink traffic channel segment transmission termination module controls operations such that the transmitter ceases the transmission of requests for uplink traffic channel segments and or uplink traffic channel segment signals e.g. uplink traffic channel segments using multiple tones simultaneously and associated with an assignment corresponding to a request. For example in some embodiments when WT is switched to operate in a single tone uplink mode of operation the WT is assigned a dedicated single tone to use for uplink data information instead of having to request and be assigned uplink traffic channel segments as is the case in the uplink multi tone mode of operation where the uplink traffic channel segments in the uplink multi tone mode of operation could be assigned to different wireless terminals at different times.

Data information includes current uplink mode of operation base stations system information BS identifier BS assigned WT identifier user device session resource information user data data information for uplink modes of operation . Current uplink operational mode includes the present state of operation of the WT with regard to uplink signaling e.g. multi tone uplink mode of operation used with terrestrial base stations or single tone uplink mode of operation used with satellite base stations. BSs system information includes system information corresponding to each of plurality of BSs that WT may use as its point of network attachment. BSs system information may include e.g. type of base station e.g. satellite or terrestrial base station identifier information base station sector identifier information carrier frequency used for uplink signaling tone block used for uplink signaling tone hopping information used for uplink signals carrier frequency used for downlink signaling tone block used for downlink signaling tone hopping information used for downlink signals timing and frequency structure information OFDM symbol timing information including cyclic prefix specifications grouping of OFDM symbol transmission time intervals e.g. slots half slots superslots beaconsslots ultra sots etc. access interval information and protocols etc. BS identifier includes information identifying which BS is being currently used as the WT s point of network attachment which may be used to correlate with a set of information in BSs system information . BS assigned WT identifier may be an identifier assigned to the WT by the BS being used as a point of network attachment. For example with a satellite BS the BS identifier may be used to associate with a single dedicated logical tone to be used by the WT for uplink signaling while with a terrestrial BS the BS assigned WT identifier may be used by the WT to identify itself when sending requests for traffic channel segments and when processing assignment signals to identify whether an uplink traffic channel segment has been assigned to itself or to some other WT in the system.

User device session resource information includes information about WT e.g. identification information WT control information WT option information an IP address information about other WTs in a communications session with WT routing information and information pertaining to allocated air link resources to use. User data includes voice data information and or multiplexed packet data info e.g. corresponding to video text audio etc. User data may include information bits code bits blocks of information bits and blocks of coded bits.

Data information for uplink modes of operation includes multi tone mode data information and single tone mode data information . Multi tone mode data information includes tone information and power control information while single tone mode data information includes tone information and power control information .

First type WTs transmit uplink signals using a first number of OFDM tones when communicating with a terrestrial base station and transmit uplink signals using a second number of tones when communicating with a satellite base station the second number of tones being smaller than the first number of tones. In some embodiments the second number of tones is one. In some embodiments multi tone refers to multiple tones e.g. seven fourteen or twenty eight tones being used simultaneously by a WT to transmit uplink traffic channel segment signals e.g. including coded user data. In such an exemplary embodiment additional tones may be used simultaneously to transmit control signals. In some embodiments although a WT may be in an uplink multi tone mode of operation e.g. communicating with a terrestrial BS and using multiple tones simultaneously for uplink traffic channel signaling of user data the WT may use a single tone for an access request and a single or multiple tones simultaneously for control signaling with respect to the terrestrial base station.

Second type WTs support a multi tone uplink mode of operation but do not support a single tone mode of operation and such WTs can communicate with terrestrial BS but cannot communicate with satellite BS .

Dash lines indicate that type WT can communicate with terrestrial BS terrestrial BS N satellite BS satellite BS N and operate in the multi tone multi tone single tone single tone uplink mode of operation respectively e.g. with the WT using different BS as its point of network attachment at different times. Dash lines indicate that type WT N can communicate with terrestrial BS terrestrial BS N satellite BS satellite BS N and operate in the multi tone multi tone single tone single tone uplink mode of operation respectively e.g. with the WT N using different BS as its point of network attachment at different times.

Dash lines indicate that type WT can communicate with terrestrial BS terrestrial BS N and operate in the multi tone multi tone uplink mode of operation respectively e.g. with the WT using different BS as its point of network attachment at different times. Dash lines indicate that type WT N can communicate with terrestrial BS terrestrial BS N and operate in the multi tone multi tone uplink mode of operation respectively e.g. with the WT N using different BS as its point of network attachment at different times.

In step the wireless terminal determines if the distance between the WT and the base station that it wishes to use as its point of network attachment exceeds 100 mi. In some embodiments some BSs e.g. satellite base stations in geo stationary orbit may be known by the WT to be always at least 100 mi away from the WT. In some embodiments some base stations may be more or less than 100 mi from the WT depending upon WT position BS position date and or time of day.

Assuming that the base station was a base station which was more than 100 mi away from the WT e.g. a satellite base station operation proceeds from step to step otherwise operation proceeds from step to step .

In step the WT determines an uplink carrier frequency corresponding to the base station from within a frequency band e.g. a carrier frequency and associated tone block within a 1500 MHz frequency band the band including frequencies in the range of 1500 MHz to 1599 MHz. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT is operated to determine one logical tone dedicated by the base station to the WT for the WT to use for uplink signaling to the exclusion of other WTs. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT is operated to determine the physical tone corresponding to the logical tone in accordance with a pre determined hopping sequence. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the wireless terminal is operated to transmit uplink signals using at most one tone at time. Step includes operation of sub step and sub step . In sub step the WT is operated to include a cyclic prefix with an OFDM symbol e.g. a cyclic prefix for each OFDM symbol transmitted in the uplink where a cyclic prefix time duration is less than the maximum round trip propagation delay between the WT and the BS. In sub step the WT is operated to constrain the peak power to a first level and transmit using a first average power.

Assuming that the base station was a base station which was 100 mi or less away from the WT operation proceeds from step to step . For example the base station could be a terrestrial base station with a cellular coverage area having a radius of approximately 25 mi 5 mi 2 mi or 1 mi and the WT could be currently within that coverage area.

In step the WT determines an uplink carrier frequency corresponding to the base station from within a frequency band e.g. a carrier frequency and associated tone block within a 1500 MHz frequency band the band including frequencies in the range of 1500 MHz to 1599 MHz. In some embodiments the terrestrial base station corresponding to step and the satellite base station corresponding to step use the same frequency band but different non overlapping carrier frequencies and tone blocks. Operation proceeds from step to step .

In step the WT is operated to determine logical tones assigned e.g. temporarily to a WT for uplink signaling. For example the WT may have requested an uplink traffic channel segment and has been assigned temporarily e.g. for one corresponding iteration in the uplink timing structure an uplink traffic channel segment having a certain index number in the uplink timing structure the uplink traffic channel segment using multiple e.g. 7 14 or 28 tones simultaneously. Operation proceeds from step to step .

In step the WT is operated to determine physical tones corresponding to logical tones in accordance with a pre determined hopping sequence. In some embodiments the determined uplink tone hopping sequence is a function of a base station identifier value. In some embodiments the same hopping sequence equation which is a function of a base station identifier value is used when determining uplink tone hopping for both single uplink tone operations e.g. with satellite base stations and multi uplink tone operations e.g. with nearby terrestrial base stations. Operation proceeds from step to step .

In step the wireless terminal is operated to transmit uplink signals to communicate with a terrestrial base station using multiple tones simultaneously for uplink communications. The operation of step includes the operation of sub step . In sub step the wireless terminal is operated to constrain peak power to the first peak power level and to transmit using a second average power the second average power being lower than the first average power.

In step the wireless terminal decides which operational uplink mode should be used a first mode of operation or a second mode of operation. For example in the first mode of operation during a first period of time including a first plurality of consecutive OFDM symbol transmission time periods the wireless terminal is operated to use multiple OFDM tones simultaneously to transmit at least some user data in a first uplink signal to a first base station the first signal having a first peak to average power ratio in the second mode of operation during a second period of time including a second plurality of OFDM symbol transmission time periods the wireless terminal is operated to use at most one OFDM tone to transmit at least some user data in a second signal to a second base station the second signal having a peak to average power ratio which is different from the first peak power ratio. In some embodiments the second peak to average power ratio is lower than the first peak to average power ratio e.g. at least 4 dB lower. In some embodiments the mode selection is a function of the distance between the base station of interest and the wireless terminal. For example in some embodiments the second base station is during said second period of time at least 3 times further away from the wireless terminal than the first base station is during the first period of time. In some embodiments the second base station is at least a distance away from the wireless terminal during the second period of time such that a signal round trip time between the wireless terminal and base station exceeds a symbol transmission time period said symbol transmission time period including an amount of time used to transmit one OFDM symbol and a corresponding cyclic prefix. In some embodiments the first base station is a terrestrial base station and the second base station is a satellite base station. In some embodiments each of a plurality of potential base stations which the WT may access are identified with an uplink mode of operation. For example terrestrial type base stations may be identified with the first mode of operation while satellite type base stations may be identified with the second mode of operation.

If the wireless terminal determines that the operational mode should be the first mode operation proceeds from step to steps and . If the wireless terminal determines that the operational mode should be the second mode operation proceeds to connecting node A .

In step the WT selects between a plurality of coding rates which can be used to code user data for transmission during a first period of time. In some embodiments the first base station has selected the uplink coding rate from among a plurality of coding rates for the wireless terminal to use and the WT implements the base station selection in step . Then in step the WT codes at least some user data to be transmitted during the first period of time in a code block separate from a code block used to communicate control information during the first period of time. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT is operated to select one of a plurality of supported modulation methods to be used in transmitting at least some user data during at least a portion if said first period of time. In some embodiments the first base station selects the modulation method for the wireless terminal to use from among a plurality of modulation methods and the wireless terminal implements the selection in step . In some embodiments the WT supports different modulation methods including QAM and QAM in the first uplink mode of operation. Then in step the WT is operated to map coded bits to modulation symbol values.

Returning to step in step the wireless terminal is operated during said first mode of operation to receive at least one traffic channel uplink segment assignment signal from said first base station. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the WT determines which tones are to be used as some of said multiple OFDM tones during said first period of time from said at least one traffic channel segment assignment signal e.g. in combination with known timing and frequency structure information corresponding to said first base station. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the wireless terminal is operated to hop during said first period of time the multiple OFDM tones used to simultaneously transmit at least some user data during the first period of time at a first rate. In some embodiments said first rate is a multiple of a symbol transmission time period said hopping rate resulting in the same physical tones being used for a plurality of consecutive symbol transmission time periods in said first time period e.g. seven consecutive symbol transmission time periods.

Operation proceeds from steps and to step . In step the wireless terminal is operated to associate modulation symbol values from step with hopped tones from step . Operation proceeds from step to step . In step during the first period of time including a plurality of consecutive OFDM symbol transmission time periods the wireless terminal is operated to simultaneously transmit at least some user data in a first uplink signal to the first base station the first uplink signal having a first peak to average power. In some embodiments transmitting at least some user data during said first period of time includes transmitting user data at a rate of at least 4.8 Kbits sec. In some embodiments during the first mode of operation the wireless terminal uses at least one tone having a fixed one to one association with a base station assigned wireless terminal identifier assigned by said first base station for transmission of control signals to said first base station.

Returning to step during step the wireless terminal is operated during said first period of time to receive user data from said first base station. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the wireless terminal is operated to transmit acknowledgements to the first base station according to a first predetermined acknowledgement scheme.

In step if the WT determined that the operation uplink mode should be the second mode then operation proceeds via connecting node A to step or step and step . In step the WT codes user data and control data into separate coded blocks to be transmitted during the second period of time. Following the alternative path in step the wireless terminal multiplexes user data to be transmitted during the second period of time with control data which is also to be transmitted during the second period of time. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the wireless terminal codes the multiplexed control and user data of step into a single code block.

In some embodiments the wireless terminal codes data at single coding rate for transmission during the second period of time the single coding rate being equal to or lower than the lowest coding rate in said plurality of coding rates which can be used to code user data for transmission during said first period of time.

Operation proceeds from either step or step to step . In step the wireless terminal uses a single supported modulation method e.g. QPSK during the second period of time. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the wireless terminal is operated to map code block bits to modulation symbol values.

In step the wireless terminal is operated to determine the single tone used during said second mode of operation from a wireless terminal identifier assignment without the use of a traffic channel uplink segment assignment signal. For example when a wireless terminal registers with the second base station e.g. a satellite base station the wireless terminal may be assigned an active user identifier value and each active user identifier value may be associated with a different logical uplink tone in the uplink timing and frequency structure used by the base station. In some embodiments the single tone used during said second mode of operation occupies a position in a logical uplink transmission timing structure which is dedicated during the first mode of operation to a dedicated control channel used during said first period of time exclusively for control signaling. In some embodiments the single tone used during the second mode of operation has a fixed one to one association with a base station assigned wireless terminal identifier while during the first mode of operation said tones used to transmit user data do not have a fixed one to one association with a base station assigned wireless terminal identifier. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the wireless terminal is operated to hop during the second period of time the single OFDM tone used to transmit at least some user data during the second period of time at the first rate. In some embodiments said first rate is a multiple of a symbol transmission time period said hopping rate resulting in the same physical tones being used for a plurality of consecutive symbol transmission time periods in said second time period e.g. seven consecutive symbol transmission time periods.

Operation proceeds from step and step to step . In step the wireless terminal is operated to associate modulation symbol values with hopped tones. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the wireless terminal is operated during the second period of time including a second plurality of consecutive OFDM symbol transmission time periods to simultaneously transmit at least some user data in a second uplink signal to the second base station the second signal having a second peak to average power which is different than the first peak to average power. In some embodiments transmitting at least some user data during said second period of time includes transmitter user data at a rate of at least 4.8 Kbits sec. In some embodiments e.g. some embodiments where user data and control data are coded into separate blocks in the second mode of operation the single tone is allowed to go unused and no signal is transmitted on said single tone during periods of time dedicated to the transmission of user data when there is no user data to be transmitted. In some embodiments the step of transmitting during said first period of time and the step of transmitting during the second period of time include using an omni directional antenna to transmit signals to first and second base stations.

Returning to step in step the wireless terminal is operated during the second period of time to receive user data from the second base station without acknowledgement of said user data. Operation proceeds from step to step . In step the wireless terminal is operated to check if there was an error detected in the received downlink user data of step . If an error was detected operation proceeds to step where the wireless terminal is operated to request retransmission of user data. In some embodiments the decision as to whether or not to perform step is further qualified e.g. by the importance of the data the level of service of the wireless terminal and or time staleness consideration of the data.

The techniques of the present invention may be implemented using software hardware and or a combination of software and hardware. The present invention is directed to apparatus e.g. mobile nodes such as mobile terminals base stations communications system which implement the present invention. It is also directed to methods e.g. method of controlling and or operating mobile nodes base stations and or communications systems e.g. hosts in accordance with the present invention. The present invention is also directed to machine readable medium e.g. ROM RAM CDs hard discs etc. which include machine readable instructions for controlling a machine to implement one or more steps in accordance with the present invention.

In various embodiments nodes described herein are implemented using one or more modules to perform the steps corresponding to one or more methods of the present invention for example signal processing message generation and or transmission steps. Thus in some embodiments various features of the present invention are implemented using modules. Such modules may be implemented using software hardware or a combination of software and hardware. Many of the above described methods or method steps can be implemented using machine executable instructions such as software included in a machine readable medium such as a memory device e.g. RAM floppy disk etc. to control a machine e.g. general purpose computer with or without additional hardware to implement all or portions of the above described methods e.g. in one or more nodes. Accordingly among other things the present invention is directed to a machine readable medium including machine executable instructions for causing a machine e.g. processor and associated hardware to perform one or more of the steps of the above described method s .

While described in the context of an OFDM system at least some of the methods and apparatus of the present invention are applicable to a wide range of communications systems including many non OFDM and or non cellular systems.

Numerous additional variations on the methods and apparatus of the present invention described above will be apparent to those skilled in the art in view of the above description of the invention. Such variations are to be considered within the scope of the invention. In some embodiments the base stations server as access nodes which establish communications links with mobile nodes WTs using OFDM signals. In various embodiments the WTs are implemented as cell phones notebook computers personal data assistants PDAs or other portable devices including receiver transmitter circuits and logic and or routines for implementing the methods of the present invention.

