---

title: AI-2 compounds and analogs based on LsrB structure
abstract: This invention relates to crystals comprising apo-LsrB and holo-LsrB. The structure of holo-LsrB identifies a tetrahydroxytetrahydrofuran derived from 4,5-dihydroxy-2,3-pentanedione (DPD) as the active autoinducer-2 (AI-2) molecule in . The X-ray crystallographic data can be used in a drug discovery method. Additionally the invention provides AI-2 analogs based on this discovery as well as pharmaceutical compositions containing those analogs.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07547726&OS=07547726&RS=07547726
owner: The Trustees of Princeton University
number: 07547726
owner_city: Princeton
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050916
---
This application is a continuation in part of U.S. Ser. No. 11 104 681 filed Apr. 12 2005 which claims benefit under 35 U.S.C. 119 e of U.S. Provisional Ser. No. 60 561 659 filed Apr. 12 2004 each of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

This invention was funded in part through a grant from the National Institutes of Health. Therefore the federal government has certain rights in this invention.

This invention relates to crystals comprising apo LsrB and holo LsrB. The structure of holo LsrB identifies a tetrahydroxytetrahydrofuran derived from 4 5 dihydroxy 2 3 pentanedione DPD as the active autoinducer 2 AI 2 molecule in . The X ray crystallographic data can be used in a drug discovery method. Additionally the invention provides AI 2 analogs based on this discovery as well as pharmaceutical compositions containing those analogs.

Many bacteria modulate their behavior in response to cell cell communication in a process termed quorum sensing Bassler 2002 . Intercellular communication is accomplished through the production release and detection of small signaling molecules called autoinducers. Typically Gram negative bacteria use acylated homoserine lactones as autoinducers whereas Gram positive bacteria use modified oligopeptides. In its simplest form quorum sensing consists of the accumulation of high autoinducer concentrations at high bacterial population densities. The bacteria respond with a population wide alteration of gene expression allowing the community to coordinate behavior in a manner akin to cells in a multicellular organism. Quorum sensing provides a mechanism for the collective regulation of processes including biofilm formation and virulence in and antibiotic production in and light production in Miller et al. 2001 . In general different bacterial species produce and respond to chemically distinct autoinducers restricting quorum sensing to intraspecies communication.

Genetic and biochemical studies of quorum sensing in the marine bacterium led to the identification of a novel autoinducer used to control bioluminescence Bassler et al. 1994 1997 Chen et al. 2002 Schauder et al. 2001 Surette et al. 1999 . This autoinducer signal termed AI 2 is unusual in that it is produced by a large number of bacterial species in addition to . Furthermore AI 2 responsive genes have been identified in a variety of bacteria Xavier et al. 2003 . Consequently AI 2 has been proposed to serve as a universal quorum sensing signal that enables interspecies communication Schauder et al. 2001 .

The enzyme LuxS which has been identified in more than 55 Gram negative and Gram positive bacterial species is responsible for AI 2 biosynthesis Surette et al. 1999 Xavier et al. 2003 . AI 2 signals are derived from S adenosylmethionine SAM whose consumption as a methyl donor yields S adenosylhomocysteine SAH . SAH is metabolized to adenine and S ribosylhomocysteine SRH Cornell et al. 1998 . SRH is the substrate for LuxS Lewis et al. 2001 Schauder et al. 2001 which cleaves it to generate homocysteine and 4 5 dihydroxy 2 3 pentanedione DPD .

The products of the LuxS reaction strongly stimulate light production in Meijler et al. 2004 Schauder et al. 2001 Zhao et al. 2003 . One of these products homocysteine has no autoinducer activity. The other product DPD is expected to cyclize spontaneously to form two epimeric furanoses 2R 4S and 2S 4S 2 4 dihydroxy 2 methyldihydrofuran 3 one R and S DHMF respectively . Hydration of R and S DHMF would give rise to 2R 4S and 2S 4S 2 methyl 2 3 3 4 tetrahydroxytetrahydrofuran R and S THMF respectively .

Because DPD exists in equilibrium with other chemical species in solution this work and Meijler et al. 2004 identifying the form that is active in AI 2 signaling in proved difficult. Trapping AI 2 in its receptor LuxP greatly facilitated its identification. X ray crystallography allowed direct visualization at 1.5 resolution of the ligand bound to LuxP Chen et al. 2002 establishing that the signal molecule is S THF borate . Formation of this molecule from DPD can be explained by a simple mechanism. Since borate reacts readily with adjacent hydroxyl groups on furanosyl rings Loomis et al. 1992 it is chemically reasonable that S THMF borate forms spontaneously by addition of borate which is abundant ca. 0.4 mM in marine environments to S THMF . Consistent with this scheme chemically synthesized DPD induces bioluminescence in but only in the presence of boric acid Meijler et al. 2004 . S THMF borate is unrelated to previously characterized autoinducers and is highly unusual in containing boron an element rarely observed in biological molecules.

The presence of boron in the LuxP ligand raised the question of whether S THMF borate is the sole bacterial signaling molecule derived from DPD. Hence this question was addressed by determining whether other bacteria that respond to AI 2 signals recognize S THMF borate or whether instead they recognize different derivatives of DPD. In the latter case the use of S THMF borate as a signaling molecule might be confined for example to bacteria such as marine vibrios that live in relatively high borate environments. The identification of LsrB as an AI 2 binding protein in and Taga et al. 2001 2003 provided a starting point for characterizing the spectrum of AI 2 signal molecules.

The structure of LsrB both unliganded and in complex with its DPD derived ligand was determined. Like other periplasmic binding proteins LsrB undergoes a significant conformational change upon ligand binding. Most strikingly the LsrB ligand differs from the LuxP ligand and lacks boron. Thus two different bacterial AI 2 receptors bind chemically distinct derivatives of DPD. These findings mean that the earlier use of the term AI 2 to refer exclusively to S THMF borate is not accurate. Instead the AI 2 response in different bacterial species can be triggered by at least two different derivatives of the LuxS product DPD.

The present invention is directed to crystals comprising apo LsrB or holo LsrB i.e. an LsrB ligand complex. The crystals diffract X rays to a resolution of greater than. 5.0 and preferably to a resolution greater than 1.5 or 1.3 . In accordance with the discoveries of the invention the ligand comprises an autoinducer 2 AI 2 molecule which comprises a furan moiety. In one embodiment the ligand is R THMF as having the chemical formula 

In accordance with the invention another embodiment relates to methods of using the crystal structures from the crystals of the invention to identify whether a ligand binds to LsrB. This method involves obtaining the atomic coordinates for at least a selected portion of LsrB and using those atomic coordinates to computer model the identification of and or docking of potential ligands that can bind to the selected portion of LsrB. The selected portion preferably includes the R THMF binding site and more preferably includes one or more amino acid residues selected from the group consisting of Lys35 Asp116 Asp166 Gln 167 Pro220 and Ala 222.

In a further aspect of the invention the potential ligand is tested for AI 2 antagonist or agonist activity by obtaining a sample of the potential ligand contacting a prokaryotic cell with the sample under conditions to asses whether the ligand can bind to LsrB and or affect the quorum sensing activity of the cells exposed to the potential ligand. Those ligands identified by these methods and pharmaceutical compositions containing those ligands are contemplated as part of the instant invention.

Another aspect of the invention provides pharmaceutical compositions with a compound having the chemical formula 

Another aspect of the invention relates to AI 2 antagonists agonists designed to bind to LsrB LuxP and or LuxQ or their counterparts from any bacterial species based on the formation pathways for the AI 2 signaling molecules recognized by upper branch and shown in . These analogs are based on both the R and S stereoisomers at the 2 position of the furan ring.

The set of analogs based upon the S stereoisomer are the Series A H compounds. The Series A H compounds are specifically represented by the following formulas 

The set of analogs based upon the R stereoisomer are the Series I P compounds. The Series I P compounds are specifically represented by the following formulas 

The invention also includes pharmaceutical compositions comprising one or more of the foregoing compounds in admixture with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.

A still further aspect of the invention is directed to methods of regulating the activity of an autoinducer 2 AI 2 receptor by contacting the AI 2 receptor with an AI 2 analog for a time and in an amount sufficient to regulate said activity wherein said AI 2 analog is a compound represented by any one of Series A to Series P. These compounds can be used to regulate activity of the AI 2 receptors LsrB LuxP and or LuxQ or their analogs i.e. counterparts from any bacterial species. Preferably the receptors are found on a bacterial cell including bacteria in warm blooded hosts. The regulated activity includes any regulated by quorum sensing such as bacterial cell growth siderophore expression bacterial virulence biofilm formation exopolysaccharide production in bacterial cells and bacterial colony morphology.

Yet another aspect of the invention provides a method for treating a subject infected with a pathogenic bacteria by administering a therapeutically effective amount of a pharmaceutical composition containing at least one of the Series A Series P compounds to a subject for a time and in an amount sufficient to inhibit AI 2 activity.

The present invention provides a crystal comprising LsrB without any ligand bound. This form is also referred to herein as apo LsrB. In this context those skilled in the art will understand that the term crystal refers to an ordered arrangement of atoms the crystal having an overall size and quality sufficient for the elucidation of the atomic arrangement by X ray crystallography. Preferably the crystal diffracts X rays to a resolution of greater than about 5.0 Angstroms more preferably greater than about 2.5 even more preferably greater than about 1.5 or 1.3 . A resolution greater than a particular value means a resolution that numerically exceeds the recited value. For example in X ray crystallography a resolution of 2.8 is greater than a resolution of 5.0 . Crystals comprising LsrB are preferably prepared by the methods described in the Examples below. The atomic coordinates for LsrB are preferably determined by X ray crystallography of a crystal comprising LsrB preferably by the methods described in the Examples below but can be determined using other methods known in the crystallographic art. A set of atomic coordinates for the apo LsrB crystal has been deposited in the Protein Data Bank under accession codes 1TM2.

Another crystal of the invention comprises LsrB and a ligand. That ligand has been identified as containing a furan moiety. As used herein the term ligand refers to a molecule or ion that binds to LsrB. Preferably binding between the ligand and LsrB occurs at an LsrB binding site which a region of LsrB that interacts with the ligand to produce an LsrB ligand complex in which the ligand binds relatively tightly to LsrB. Such strong binding may be produced for example when the shapes of the binding site and ligand are mutually compatible e.g. lock and key and or when at least some of the ligand atoms are attracted to at least some of the LsrB atoms in the vicinity of the binding site by intermolecular forces e.g. dipole dipole interactions Van der Waals attractions hydrogen bonding etc. A set of atomic coordinates for the holo LsrB crystal has been deposited in the Protein Data Bank under accession codes 1TJY. The binding site for the LsrB ligand complex is shown schematically in left panel.

Binding sites have significant utility in fields such as drug discovery. The association of natural ligands with the binding sites of their corresponding proteins enzymes or receptors is the basis of many biological mechanisms of action. Similarly many drugs exert their biological effects through association with the binding sites of proteins enzymes and receptors. Such associations may occur with all or any parts of the binding site. An understanding of such associations enables the design of drugs having more favorable associations with their target proteins enzymes or receptors and thus improved biological effects. Therefore this information is valuable in designing potential inhibitors of the binding sites of biologically important targets.

For example the holo LsrB structure can be used to computationally dock compounds into the binding pocket. Compounds with high affinity may block transport via LsrB whether or not the bound conformation closely resembles holo LsrB. In another example the apoLsrB structure or the two domains of the holo LsrB structure separately can be used to search for compounds that bind in the interdomain interface. Such compounds do not necessarily need to bind to the exact same site as R THMF and could prevent LsrB from adopting the holo LsrB conformation thereby preventing it from interacting functionally with the LsrC D transporter. In either case the crystal structures are used to carry out virtual screening. Potential hits can then be tested in quorum sensing assays. The high resolution structures of holo and apo LsrB will aid in such rationale design and search for LsrB ligands

Hence the atomic coordinates of the apo LsrB and holo LsrB can be used to identify whether a ligand binds to LsrB and thus may be used for a variety of purposes such as drug discovery. A preferred method comprises obtaining the atomic coordinates in the crystal of at least a selected portion of LsrB. Preferably the selected portion comprises the ligand binding site. More preferably the selected portion includes the amino acid residue found at the ligand binding site including residues Gln167 Asp116 Pro220 Ala 222 Lys35 and Asp166. Lys35 Asp116 and Asp166 are involved in hydrogen bonding with the R THMF. Additionally hydrophobic residues near the methyl group of R THMF include Phe41 and Leu265.

The atomic coordinates are preferably used to model the selected portion. Such modeling is preferably accomplished by storing crystallographic information about the selected portion on a computer and then using the computer to translate the atomic coordinates into the three dimensional structure of the selected portion of LsrB. Computers and software suitable for carrying out these functions are commercially available. Computer packages include Sybyl version 6.8 from Tripos Inc. and MacroModel version 8.0 from Schrodinger Software. A potential ligand is then identified and the likelihood of binding between the ligand and LsrrB is determined by docking the potential ligand to the selected portion of holo LsrB. Such docking preferably involves computationally evaluating the ligand for its ability to bind with LsrB preferably using the commercially available computational packages described above. Ligands that bind with LsrB are potential drug candidates. The LsrB structure encoded by the crystallographic data may be displayed in a graphical three dimensional representation on a computer screen. This allows visual inspection of the structure as well as visual inspection of the structure s association with the ligand. Preferably a computer is used for the identifying of the potential ligand or the docking of the potential ligand to the binding site or both. A general review of computation docking methods is found in Perola et al. 2004 and Kellenberger et al. 2004 .

After docking preferably by the computational methods described above indicates that a particular ligand has the potential to bind to LsrB the interaction of the indicated ligand is preferably examined by obtaining a sample of the potential ligand and testing that ligand for activity. Preferably the compounds are tested in quorum sensing assays using prokaryotic cells e.g. bacteria to determine whether and to what extent the ligand affects quorum sensing.

The final biosynthetic product in the AI 2 signaling pathway is DPD. This molecule can cyclize to give two furanoketones S DHMF and R DHMF as shown in . Each of these can add water hydrate leading to S THMF and R THMF also shown in . Addition of borate to S THMF produces the AI 2 signaling molecule for S THMF borate which acts through binding to the periplasmic protein LuxP. The hydrated version R THMF is the member of this set which is active in binding to the sugar transport protein LsrB. The hydration reaction and boron complexation are spontaneous for these molecules under physiological conditions. DPD and these isomers are in rapid equilibrium and are relatively unstable.

Accordingly another aspect of the present invention provides a series of stable compounds that exhibit antagonist agonist activity for AI 2. These compounds are also referred to herein as AI 2 analogs. The discovery that LsrB binds R THMF provides a new mechanism of bacterial control.

These compounds were designed to satisfy three criteria. The compounds of the invention were designed to be 1 chemically stable 2 capable of spontaneous favorable hydration in the case of analogs S DHMF and R DHMF and 3 to optimize binding to the receptor proteins via matching of the shape and positioning of functional groups. These compounds of the present invention are analogs of the monocyclic forms of DPD and hydrated DPD.

Compounds designated herein as Series A and B represent agonists antagonists which are direct analogs of monocyclic structure S DHMF. A preferred set of these compounds have one or two fluoride substituents on the carbon at C 1 and C 5. The electron withdrawing effect of the fluoride favors hydration of the carbonyl group at C 3 and mimics the natural signals S DHMF and R DHMF. The compounds represented in Series A and B are stable toward ring opening when X is CH CFH or CFand give static cyclic structures.

The compounds of Series A are represented by formula A and the compounds of Series B are represented by formula B in the structures shown below 

with the proviso that when X is O in formula A then simultaneously R cannot be methyl Y cannot be hydroxyl and Z cannot be hydroxyl.

Compounds designated herein as Series C and D represent agonists antagonists which have substituents positioned to mimic closely the hydrated form S THMF. In particular the stereoconfiguration at position C 2 parallels the arrangement in S THMF. Lacking a carbonyl group at C 3 these compounds are generally stable with respect to hydroxy keto exchange and loss of water and are capable of spontaneously binding borate to produce analogs of S THMF borate.

The compounds of Series C are represented by formula C and the compounds of Series D are represented by formula D in the structures shown below 

Compounds designated herein as Series E and F are stereoisomers of those in Series C and D also generally stable but cannot complex with borate at C 2 C 3. However borate binding is possible at C 3 C 4 when Y is OH or NH.

The compounds of Series E are represented by formula E and the compounds of Series F are represented by formula F in the structures shown below 

Compounds designated herein as Series G and H are the hydrated analogs of the Series A and B compounds and spontaneously dehydrate to be in equilibrium with the isomers with a carbonyl group at C 3. In Series G those compounds with X being O NH and S can equilibrate through the same processes as represented in reversible hydration at C 3 and reversible ring opening at C 1 C 2. In series H ring opening is possible only for the compounds having X be O NH or S and simultaneously having Y be OH or NH.

The compounds of Series G are represented by formula G and the compounds of Series H are represented by formula H in the structures shown below 

with the proviso that when X is O in formula G then simultaneously R cannot be methyl Y cannot be hydroxyl and Z cannot be hydroxyl.

Compounds designated herein as Series I and J represent agonists antagonists which are direct analogs of monocyclic structure R DHMF. A preferred set of these compounds have one or two fluoride substituents on the carbon at C 1 and C 5. The electron withdrawing effect of the fluoride favors hydration of the carbonyl group at C 3 and mimics the natural signals S DHMF and R DHMF. The compounds represented in Series I and J are stable toward ring opening when X is CH CFH or CFand give static cyclic structures.

The compounds of Series I are represented by formula I and the compounds of Series J are represented by formula J in the structures shown below 

with the proviso that when X is O in formula I then simultaneously R cannot be methyl Y cannot be hydroxyl and Z cannot be hydroxyl.

Compounds designated herein as Series K and L represent agonists antagonists which have substituents positioned to mimic closely the hydrated form R THMF. In particular the stereoconfiguration at position C 2 parallels the arrangement in R THMF. Lacking a carbonyl group at C 3 these compounds are generally stable with respect to hydroxy keto exchange and loss of water but cannot complex with borate.

The compounds of Series K are represented by formula K and the compounds of Series L are represented by formula L in the structures shown below 

Compounds designated herein as Series M and N are stereoisomers of those in Series K and L also generally stable and are capable of spontaneously binding borate at C 2 C 3 to produce R THMF borate analogs. Borate binding is also possible at C 3 C 4 when Y is OH or NH.

The compounds of Series M are represented by formula M and the compounds of Series N are represented by formula N in the structures shown below 

Compounds designated herein as Series O and P are the hydrated analogs of the Series I and J compounds and spontaneously dehydrate to be in equilibrium with the isomers with a carbonyl group at C 3. In Series O those compounds with X being O NH and S can equilibrate through the same processes as represented in reversible hydration at C 3 and reversible ring opening at C 1 C 2. In series P ring opening is possible only for the compounds having X be O NH or S and simultaneously having Y be OH or NH.

The compounds of Series O are represented by formula O and the compounds of Series P are represented by formula P in the structures shown below 

with the proviso that when X is O in formula O then simultaneously R cannot be methyl Y cannot be hydroxyl and Z cannot be hydroxyl.

As used herein lower alkyl means both branched and straight chain saturated aliphatic hydrocarbon groups having 1 to 6 carbon atoms. Lower alkyl groups include but are not limited to for example methyl ethyl propyl isopropyl butyl isobutyl and the like.

As used herein alkenyl means hydrocarbon chains of either a straight or branched configuration and one or more unsaturated carbon carbon bonds such as ethenyl propenyl and the like. Such alkenyl groups have 2 to 6 carbon atoms.

As used herein aryl includes aryl and substituted aryl. Thus aryl of this invention means any stable 6 to 14 membered monocyclic bicyclic or tricyclic ring containing at least one aromatic carbon ring for example phenyl naphthyl indanyl tetrahydronaphthyl tetralinyl and the like. The presence of substitution on the aryl group is optional but when present the substituents can be halo alkyl alkoxy hydroxyl amino cyano nitro trifluoromethyl acylamino or carbamoyl.

As used herein stable compound or stable structure means a compound that is sufficiently robust to survive isolation to a useful degree of purity from a reaction mixture and formulation into an efficacious therapeutic agent. When it is clear from the context preferred stable compounds are those which are chemically stable and do not readily isomerize in accordance with the pathways shown in .

As those of skill in the art appreciate the actual chemical stability of each compound will however vary depending on the particular substituents and their positions relative to one another. Methods to measure chemical stability are known to those of skill in the art. Certain AI 2 analogs of the invention while sufficiently stable for isolation and formulation as therapeutic agents however may undergo isomerization and ring opening. Such compounds remain within the scope of stable compounds suitable for uses as AI 2 analogs. Hence the invention contemplates use of isolated isomers mixtures of isomers isolated stereoisomers and racemic mixtures of stereoisomers as therapeutic agents. Those AI 2 analogs expected to isomerize and undergo ring opening are those compounds where X is O NH or S and the X position in the ring is adjacent to a carbon atom with an OH or NHgroup. For example such analogs include compounds of formula A with X being O NH or S at the C1 position and the C2 position having Z as OH or NHas well as compounds of formula B having X be O NH or S at the C5 position while the C4 position has Y as OH or NH. Similar combinations and positioning of substituents exist for the series C P compounds.

As used herein pharmaceutically acceptable salts refer to derivatives of the disclosed compounds that are modified by making acid or base salts. Examples include but are not limited to mineral or organic acid salts of basic residues such as amines alkali or organic salts of acidic residues and the like. Pharmaceutically acceptable salts include but are not limited to hydrohalides sulfates methosulfates methanesulfates toluenesulfonates nitrates phosphates maleates acetates lactates and the like.

Pharmaceutically acceptable salts of the compounds of the invention can be prepared by reacting the free acid or base forms of these compounds with a stoichiometric or greater amount of the appropriate base or acid in water or in an organic solvent or in a mixture of the two generally nonaqueous media like ether ethyl acetate ethanol isopropanol or acetonitrile are preferred. The salts of the invention can also be prepared by ion exchange for example. Lists of suitable salts are found in Remington s Pharmaceutical Sciences 17th ed. Mack Publishing Company Easton Pa. 1985 p. 1418 the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

A general procedure for preparation of the fluorine containing analogs Series A B I and J compounds is illustrated with the preparation of 5 as shown below in Scheme 1. Hydroxylation of the cyclopentenone 1 with standard methods followed by protection of the secondary hydroxyl group gives 2. Then fluorination with one of several fluorinating agents gives 3. Deprotection and oxidation gives the ketone 4. Standard alpha hydroxylation conditions produce 5. Examples of fluorinating agents can be found for example in Chaddick et al. 2001 . For the general synthesis method see Singh et al. 2002 .

Examples of structures in the Series C and D are synthesized by a general method involving standard cis hydroxylation of an alkene 

Examples of structures in the Series E F M and N are synthesized by a general method involving standard cis hydroxylation of an alkene 

Examples of structures in the Series G H O and P are prepared by the addition of water to the corresponding ketones with acid catalysis 

The compounds of the invention can be synthesized using the above methods or by methods known to those of skill in the art. The methods outlined above can be improved by one skilled in the art by for instance changing the temperature duration stoichiometry or other parameters of the reactions. Any such changes are intended to fall within the scope of this invention.

 Autoinducer 2 analog or AI 2 analog means any compound of the Series A Series P compounds. Such compounds may act to inhibit AI 2 activity or to induce or enhance AI 2 activity. AI 2 inhibition refers to compounds that interfere with the ability of the AI 2 moiety in a particular species to be detected recognized or bound by its receptor to act as a signal for luminescence bacterial growth or pathogenesis or any other activity controlled by quorum sensing and includes molecules that degrade sequester or bind to AI 2 and the compounds act to inhibit or reduce the activity of AI 2 to any degree. Such inhibition can be partial or complete. AI 2 activation is similar except that the compounds act to enhance or stimulate the activity of AI 2 to any degree.

Another embodiment of the invention provides a method of regulating the activity of an autoinducer 2 AI 2 receptor which comprises contacting said AI 2 receptor with an AI 2 analog for a time and in an amount sufficient to regulate said activity wherein said AI 2 analog is any one of the Series A Series P compounds. This method can be used for any bacterial species and thus can be used with the AI 2 receptor is LsrB LuxP or LuxQ or the equivalent receptor from the bacterial species in question. The methods can be conducted in vitro or in vivo on cells or with extracts. Regulation of activity can be assessed by any convenient measurements means such as assays for the level of AI 2 DPD consumption or bioluminescence assays. These methods are well known to those of skill in the art and some are described below in the Examples. Preferably AI 2 activity is regulated by the AI 2 analogs of the inventions when the AI 2 receptor is found on a bacterial cell as distinguished from the receptor being in an extract or cell lysate.

The regulated activities include any associated with or regulated in response to quorum sensing and can be regulated both positively or negatively i.e. the compounds can activate or inhibit AI 2 activity. Examples of activities that can be regulated include but are not limited to bacterial cell growth siderophore expression bacterial virulence biofilm formation exopolysaccharide production in bacterial cells and bacterial colony morphology. In the case of siderophore expression the activity can preferably be inhibition of siderophore expression. For exopolysaccharide production the activity includes rugose polysaccharide production. With bacterial colony morphology the activity is smooth colony morphology formation.

This method can be used to regulate the AI 2 receptor when the bacterial cell is found in a warm blooded host. Warm blooded hosts includes domesticated animals including pets and livestock humans rodents primates and other mammals.

In accordance with the invention the AI 2 receptor is preferably on or from a bacterial cell of one of the following species and

The invention further provides methods of inhibiting the infectivity of a pathogenic organism as well as therapeutic compositions containing the AI 2 analogs of the present invention. The methods comprise administering to a subject a therapeutically effective amount of a pharmaceutical composition that inhibits the activity of naturally occurring AI 2.

When used therapeutically the Series A to P compounds of the invention are administered in a therapeutically effective amount. Such an amount refers to that amount necessary to administer to a host to inhibit or activate the pathways regulated by quorum sensing including but not limited to virulence gene expression biofilm formation production of antibiotic to modulate bioluminescence to inhibit siderophore production to inhibit exopolysaccharide and or to modulating the mammalian inflammatory response and particularly for ameliorating or reducing inflammation in inflammatory diseases and conditions associated with production of IL 1 and IL 6. Those compounds which act as inhibitors of AI 2 induced responses are also therapeutically useful as antibiotics. Methods of determining therapeutically effective amounts are well known.

The Series A to P compounds of the invention can be formulated as pharmaceutical compositions comprising one or more of those molecules together with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. Pharmaceutically acceptable carriers can be sterile liquids such as water and oils including those of petroleum animal vegetable or synthetic origin such as peanut oil soybean oil mineral oil sesame oil and the like. Water is a preferred carrier when the pharmaceutical composition is administered intravenously. Saline solutions and aqueous dextrose and glycerol solutions can also be employed as liquid carriers particularly for injectable solutions. Suitable pharmaceutical carriers are described in Gennaro et al. 1995 . In addition to the pharmacologically active agent the compositions can contain suitable pharmaceutically acceptable carriers comprising excipients and auxiliaries which facilitate processing of the active compounds into preparations which can be used pharmaceutically for delivery to the site of action. Suitable formulations for parenteral administration include aqueous solutions of the active compounds in water soluble form for example water soluble salts. In addition suspensions of the active compounds as appropriate in oily injection suspensions may be administered. Suitable lipophilic solvents or vehicles include fatty oils for example sesame oil or synthetic fatty acid esters for example ethyl oleate or triglycerides. Aqueous injection suspensions can contain substances which increase the viscosity of the suspension include for example sodium carboxymethyl cellulose sorbitol and dextran. Optionally the suspension can also contain stabilizers. Liposomes can also be used to encapsulate the agent for delivery into the cell.

The pharmaceutical formulation for systemic administration according to the invention can be formulated for enteral parenteral or topical administration. Indeed all three types of formulations can be used simultaneously to achieve systemic administration of the active ingredient.

Suitable formulations for oral administration include hard or soft gelatin capsules pills tablets including coated tablets elixirs suspensions syrups or inhalations and controlled release forms thereof.

The Series A to P compounds of the invention can also be incorporated into pharmaceutical compositions which allow for the sustained delivery of those compounds to a mammal for a period of several days to at least several weeks to a month or more. Such formulations are described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 968 895 and 6 180 608 B1.

For topical administration any common topical formation such as a solution suspension gel ointment or salve and the like can be employed. Preparation of such topical formulations are well described in the art of pharmaceutical formulations as exemplified for example by Remington s Pharmaceutical Sciences. For topical application the Series A to P compounds of the invention can also be administered as a powder or spray particularly in aerosol form. The active ingredient can be administered in pharmaceutical compositions adapted for systemic administration. As is known if a drug is to be administered systemically it can be confected as a powder pill tablet or the like or as a syrup or elixir for oral administration. For intravenous intraperitoneal or intra lesional administration the active ingredient will be prepared as a solution or suspension capable of being administered by injection. In certain cases it may be useful to formulate the active ingredient in suppository form or as an extended release formulation for deposit under the skin or intramuscular injection. In a one embodiment quorum sensing regulators can be administered by inhalation. For inhalation therapy the compound can be in a solution useful for administration by metered dose inhalers or in a form suitable for a dry powder inhaler.

It will be appreciated by those skilled in the art that various omissions additions and modifications may be made to the invention described above without departing from the scope of the invention and all such modifications and changes are intended to fall within the scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims. All references patents patent applications or other documents cited are herein incorporated by reference in their entirety.

Both apo LsrB and holo LsrB crystallized by the hanging drop method in 0.1 M Tris HCl pH 8.5 22 25 PEG 4000 w v in space group P222. The apo LsrB crystals initially obtained a 38.0 b 74.0 c 116.2 were used to seed crystallization in 0.1 M Tris HCl pH 8.5 18 24 PEG 4000. Crystals were cryoprotected by brief soaks in 0.1 M Tris HCl pH 8.5 20 PEG 4000 16 v v glycerol and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Native crystals diffracted to 1.9 and data were collected at 100 K using an R AXIS IV image plate detector mounted on a Rigaku 200HB generator. Selenomethionine LsrB crystals were grown and frozen in the same conditions as native crystals. Selenomethionine crystals diffracted to 2.1 resolution at NSLS beam line X25 where MAD data were collected using an ADSC Q315 CCD detector. Holo LsrB crystals a 37.8 b 76.6 c 109.7 were prepared by addition of approximately 0.25 mM in vitro LuxS reaction product Schauder et aL 2001 to the native LsrB crystallization conditions giving a DPD LsrB molar ratio of slightly over 1 1. Crystals diffracted to 1.3 resolution at NSLS beam line X25. To test the possibility that LsrB can bind a borated adduct of DPD crystals of LsrB were grown as above with both 0.25 mM in vitro LuxS reaction product and 0.5 or 5 mM boric acid. Crystals grown under these conditions were isomorphous with native crystals. Data were collected at NSLS beam line X25 where crystals diffracted to 1.3 for 0.5 mM boric acid and 2.0 for 5 mM boric acid. In all cases data were processed using the HKL package Otwinowski and Minor 1998 .

Positions of the selenium atoms were determined using SOLVE Terwilliger et. al. 1999 with subsequent density modification and initial automatic model building by RESOLVE Terwilliger 2002 . The automatically generated partial model was used as a starting point for model building using the program O Jones et al. 1991 . The apo LsrB structure was refined using native data to 1.9 and water molecules added with the program CNS Brunger et al. 1998 . The final model contains all LsrB residues present in the protein 27 340 plus 348 ordered water molecules and has good geometry Table 1 with only one residue Asp116 outside of the allowed regions of the Ramachandran plot see below .

The structure of holo LsrB was solved via molecular replacement using CNS treating the two domains of apo LsrB as separate objects in the search. The model was built in O and refined with CNS and CCP4 CCP4 1994 to 1.3 resolution. Asp116 again lies in a disallowed region of the Ramachandran plot with both backbone and side chain conformations identical to those observed in apoLsrB. Its proper positioning is nevertheless unambiguous in both the 1.9 apo LsrB and 1.3 holo LsrB electron density maps. The ligand present in the holo LsrB crystals was not built until the Rand Rhad dropped to 0.18 and 0.20 respectively and water molecules had been included in the model but not in the ligand binding site . The electron density in the binding site was well ordered and clearly interpretable and was modeled as 2R 4S 2 methyl 2 3 3 4 tetrahydroxytetrahydrofuran R THMF . The ligand was refined using CNS with parameter files generated by the HIC Up server Kleywegt et al. 1998 . Given the high resolution of the data the geometric terms were relaxed during later cycles of refinement. Omitting all waters and examining a simulated annealing omit map revealed 11 side chains with multiple conformations. The final model contains 399 water molecules and the two heterologous N terminal residues Gly Ser remaining after removal of the GST tag. Molecular images were prepared using PyMOL DeLano 2002 .

The structures of the holo LsrB complex crystallized in the presence of 0.5 and 5 mM boric acid were determined by molecular replacement using holo LsrB with the ligand omitted via the program EPMR Kissinger et al. 1999 . The structures were partially refined to Rvalues of 24.3 data to 1.3 and 24.0 data to 2.0 respectively by which point it was clear that the ligand was identical to that present in the fully refined holo LsrB complex.

Holo LuxP was purified as described previously Chen et al. 2002 exchanged into NMR buffer 20 mM potassium phosphate pH 7.5 150 mM NaCl 1 mM dithiothreitol using a small gel filtration column PD10 Amersham Biosciences and concentrated to 200 M. To prepare holo LsrB GST LsrB was incubated overnight with an approximately equimolar amount of in vitro LuxS reaction product Schauder et al. 2001 . Unbound ligand was removed by immobilizing the protein on glutathione agarose beads and washing extensively with NMR buffer. Finally the fusion protein was eluted using NMR buffer plus 10 mM glutathione and concentrated to approximately 1 mM. B NMR spectra were collected on each sample before and after addition of boric acid to a final concentration of 5 mM. Then each sample was heated 3 min at 70 C. to release the ligand from the protein the denatured protein was pelleted and spectra were collected for the ligand containing supernatants. All B NMR spectra were collected at 4 C. using a Varian Unity INOVA spectrometer at 128.4 Mhz equipped with a 8 mm tunable X H probe Nalorac and were referenced to BFO Et 2. 180 000 scans were averaged for each spectrum with a 0.25 s recycle time using an approximately 30 flip angle pulse.

AI 2 dependent induction of the lsr operon in was measured by determining the galactosidase activity of the lsr lacZ promoter fusion in strain MET844. Overnight cultures were grown in borate depleted LB medium at 37 C. with aeration and were diluted 1 100 into fresh borate depleted LB medium in the presence or absence of 5 mM boric acid. To the diluted cells 900 l 10 v v autoinducer samples were added 100 l and cells were grown for 4 hr. Cell lysates were prepared and galactosidase activity was measured as described previously Taga et al. 2003 . galactosidase units are defined as ODmin dilution factor OD .

Ligands were released from LsrB and LuxP as described above. All ligand concentrations were estimated by B NMR in NMR buffer supplemented with 5 mM boric acid the area of the boric acid peak served as an internal concentration standard.

The IUPAC carbohydrate nomenclature for the structures in is as follows DPD L glycero 1 dehydro penta 2 3 diulose S DHMF L glycero 1 dehydro penta 2 3 diulo 2 5 furanose S THMF L glycero 1 dehydro 3 hydro penta 2 3 diulo 2 5 furanose S THMF borate L glycero 1 dehydro 3 hydro penta 2 3 diulo 2 5 furanosyl 2 3 cyclic borate R DHMF L glycero 1 dehydro penta 2 3 diulo 2 5 furanose R THMF L glycero 1 dehydro 3 hydro penta 2 3 diulo 2 5 furanose.

Atomic coordinates for apo LsrB and holo LsrB have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank under accession codes 1TM2 and 1TJY respectively.

The structure of LsrB was determined to 2.1 resolution using multiwavelength anomalous diffraction MAD phasing and subsequently refined to 1.9 resolution Table 1 . Despite low sequence identity 11 LsrB exhibits the same fold as the AI 2 signaling receptor LuxP Chen et aL 2002 with a three stranded hinge connecting two similar domains . LsrB also has strong structural homology with several other sugar binding proteins including ribose binding protein RBP and galactose binding protein as well as repressors such as purine nucleotide synthesis repressor and trehalose repressor Hars et al. 1998 Mowbray et al. 1992 Mowbray et al. 1983 Schumacher et al. 1994 . In periplasmic binding proteins including LuxP the ligand binding site is near the hinge between the two domains. In the crystal structure of LsrB the domains are in an open conformation similar to though less pronounced than the open conformations observed in unliganded RBP Bjorkman and Mowbray 1998 leaving the putative binding site exposed to solvent . While several well ordered water molecules are visible in this region no density corresponding to an autoinducer molecule can be identified. This structure is apo LsrB.

To identify the LsrB ligand LsrB was crystallized in the presence of DPD and the other products generated by incubating SAH with recombinant Pfs and LuxS enzymes as previously described Schauder et al. 2001 . The structure was determined by molecular replacement and refined to 1.3 resolution Table 1 . In this structure the domains of LsrB have closed around the binding site rotating shut about the hinge region by 21 relative to one another Hayward et al. 2002 . Nonprotein electron density is prominent between the two domains in a location analogous to the ligand binding sites of LuxP and other periplasmic binding proteins. As detailed below this electron density is consistent with R THMF a DPD derivative not previously known to be biologically active .

The LsrB ligand R THMF differs from the LuxP ligand S THMF borate in two respects . First no borate is present. Second the stereochemistry of the LsrB ligand appears to be opposite to that of the LuxP ligand at position 2 the anomeric center see . This stereochemical assignment is supported by the crystallographic data. Specifically examination of a 1.3 resolution F Fmap at high contour level shows stronger electron density in the position modeled as a hydroxyl group . Indeed the oxygens in the ligand all display stronger electron density in the F Fmap than the carbons . To eliminate phase bias the map was calculated using a model in which the ligand had never been present and from which any water molecules in or around the ligand binding site had been removed. In addition the proposed stereochemistry places the methyl group in a hydrophobic environment the nearest residues are Phe41 and Leu265 3.6 and 3.9 away respectively while the hydroxyl group is situated near polar atoms the closest of which is the backbone oxygen of Pro220 3.3 away . A possibility remains that the S stereoisomer or a mixture of the R and S stereoisomers is present in the crystal structure and their chemical interconvertability prevents us from testing their biological activity individually. Nonetheless both the electron density and the placement of polar and hydrophobic residues within the binding site support the identification of the LsrB ligand as R THMF .

While LsrB and LuxP share the same fold their binding sites are distinctive and appear to be designed to accommodate different ligands . Key residues involved in hydrogen bonding between LuxP and S THMF borate are not conserved in LsrB. Gln77 Ser79 and Thr266 polar residues in the LuxP binding site that hydrogen bond with S THMF borate are replaced in LsrB by the nonpolar residues Val39 Gly40 and Ala222 respectively. LuxP residues Arg215 and Arg310 each of which makes multiple hydrogen bonds with S THMF borate are replaced in LsrB by Trp170 and Trp266 respectively whose ring nitrogens are too distant from R THMF to participate in hydrogen bonding. LuxP Trp82 whose ring nitrogen hydrogen bonds with S THMF borate corresponds to Phe42 in LsrB.

Perhaps the most striking difference between the LsrB and LuxP ligand binding sites is that they differ in net charge . The binding site in LsrB has three charged residues Lys35 Asp116 and Asp166. Lys35 and Asp166 are positioned to form a salt bridge neutralizing their respective charges while still contributing to ligand binding. Asp116 does not have a salt bridge partner leaving a net negative charge in the binding pocket. This contrasts with the binding pocket in LuxP which contains two positively charged residues Arg215 and Arg310 that stabilize the negative charge on S THMF borate. The negative charge in the LsrB binding pocket makes it unlikely that S THMF borate would bind to LsrB.

The furanosyl rings of the two DPD derivatives are oriented differently in the LsrB and LuxP binding pockets compare . The furanosyl ring in LsrB occupies roughly the same position as the boratering in LuxP and the ribose ring in RBP. Barring a large structural rearrangement there does not appear to be sufficient room in the LsrB binding pocket to accommodate S THMF borate. Overall because of hydrogen bonding electrostatic and steric differences LsrB and LuxP have binding sites that accommodate chemically distinct signaling molecules derived from the same precursor DPD. Consistent with this proposal LsrB crystallized in the presence of both DPD and boric acid 0.5 or 5 mM displayed electron density at 1.3 and 2.0 respectively in the ligand binding pocket indistinguishable from the ligand density in holo LsrB. Thus even with the addition of high levels of boric acid the analyzed crystals of LsrB have never been observed to bind the borated form of AI 2 responsible for quorum sensing in

For comparison an identical set of experiments was carried out using GST LsrB preincubated with the same in vitro DPD synthesis reaction products used for crystallization of holo LsrB unbound ligand was chromatographically removed. In this case no boron peak was observed in B NMR spectra top trace . Addition of 5 mM boric acid had no effect on the NMR spectrum middle trace . In a separate experiment simultaneous incubation of unliganded GST LsrB with both 5 mM borate and the in vitro DPD synthesis reaction products gave identical results. Thus within the detection limits of this experiment LsrB does not bind a borated derivative of DPD. Strikingly however thermal release of the bound LsrB ligand into 5 mM boric acid bottom trace led to the appearance of a peak at 5.8 ppm exactly as observed upon release of the bound LuxP ligand. This result is consistent with the chemical scheme in according to which upon release into excess boric acid THMF would be converted spontaneously into THMF borate. Taken together the B NMR results are in agreement with the hypothesis based on crystallographic evidence that LsrB binds an unborated ligand. Furthermore they indicate directly that the LsrB ligand once released can be converted into a borated form. This property may underlie the ability of AI 2 activity secreted by to stimulate light production in Bassler et al. 1997 Surette et al. 1999 .

The crystallographic and B NMR results imply that and recognize different derivatives of DPD one that contains boron and one that does not. That this distinction was not previously recognized may stem in part from the ability of the molecules to interconvert as indicated by chemical considerations earlier functional studies and the NMR results Bassler et al. 1997 Chen et al. 2002 Meijler et al. 2004 Schauder et al. 2001 Surette et al. 1999 . To test these ideas further and bioassays were used to examine whether AI 2 signaling molecules released from the two receptors are in equilibrium with one another. Furthermore the position of this equilibrium and thus the signaling activity can be influenced by the presence of boric acid. The model predicts that boric acid should enhance AI 2 signaling in but inhibit AI 2 signaling in

To directly examine the influence of borate on AI 2 dependent signaling in and borate depleted medium was prepared. AI 2 responses bioluminescence in lsr operon induction in were measured both with and without added boric acid. In this experiment strain MM32 was used because this strain lacks the LuxS enzyme needed to biosynthesize DPD and thus produces no endogenous AI 2 signal. This strain also has the AI 1 pathway inactivated. Bioluminescence was measured following addition of enzymatically synthesized DPD or alternatively ligand released from either LsrB or LuxP.

No light was produced when the reporter strain was exposed to DPD or to the released LsrB ligand in borate depleted medium black bars . The released LuxP ligand also failed to stimulate light production. The inability of the released ligand to stimulate light production suggests that in borate depleted medium S THMF borate dissociates into THMF and boric acid see . In all cases a large increase in ligand stimulated light production occurred when boric acid 5 mM was added to the borate depleted medium white bars . The ability of both DPD and the released ligand to stimulate light production in the presence of boric acid confirms that DPD and THMF are in equilibrium with one another and that THMF once borated is active in AI 2 signaling Meijler et al. 2004 .

AI 2 induction of the lsr operon of can be monitored by measuring galactosidase activity in strain MET844 lsr lacZ luxS . shows that even in borate depleted medium addition of DPD or the ligand released from either LsrB or LuxP induces lsr expression black bars . Note that approximately 2.5 fold less LuxP ligand was used in this experiment compared to DPD and the LsrB ligand. Strikingly whereas boric acid strongly enhances the ability of DPD or either receptor s ligand to activate the assay it inhibits the ability of the same molecules to activate the assay .

The results demonstrate that borate is required for the AI 2 response in but inhibits the AI 2 response in . These findings are consistent with the model shown in which posits that DPD R THMF and S THMF borate are in equilibrium with one another. This equilibrium as expected can be shifted toward borated forms by the addition of boric acid and toward unborated forms by borate depletion. Hence in accordance with the the crystallographic results it appears that R THMF is the active species for AI 2 signaling whereas S THMF borate is the active species for AI 2 signaling.

Bassler B. L. et al. 1994 Mol. Microbiol. 13 273 286. Bassler B. L. et al. 1997 J. Bacteriol. 179 4043 4045.

CCP4 Collaborative Computational Project Number 4 1994 Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 50 760 763.

