---

title: Methods, systems, and computer program products for supporting database access in an internet protocol multimedia subsystem (IMS) network environment
abstract: Methods, systems, and computer program products for supporting database access in an Internet protocol (IP) multimedia subsystem (IMS) network environment are disclosed. At least one call state control function (CSCF) entity generates subscriber-related queries according to an abstracted profile (AP) protocol. At an abstracted profile server (APS), a CSCF-generated, subscriber-related query is received, subscriber information is gathered related to the CSCF-generated, subscriber-related query from at least one subscriber information database using a native protocol of the subscriber information database, a reply message for the CSCF-generated, subscriber-related query is generated based on the gathered subscriber information and the reply message is forwarded to a respective CSCF that generated the CSCF-generated subscriber-related query, the reply message being forwarded according to the AP protocol.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07916685&OS=07916685&RS=07916685
owner: Tekelec
number: 07916685
owner_city: Morrisville
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051216
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 637 426 and U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 637 337 both filed Dec. 17 2004 the disclosure of each of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The subject matter described herein relates to multimedia services and more particularly to supporting database access in an Internet protocol multimedia subsystem network environment.

Internet protocol IP multimedia subsystem IMS is defined by the Third Generation Partnership Project 3GPP as a new mobile network infrastructure that enables the convergence of data speech and mobile network technology over an IP based infrastructure. IMS bridges the gap between the existing traditional telecommunications technology and Internet technology allowing network operators to offer a standardized reusable platform with new innovative services by enhancing real time multimedia mobile services such as voice services video telephony messaging conferencing and push services. IMS can be used to provide services for both mobile networks and fixed networks at the same time providing unique mixtures of services with transparency to the end user.

IMS supports the establishment of any type of media session e.g. voice video text etc. and provides the service creator the ability to combine services in the same session and dynamically modify sessions on the fly e.g. adding a video component to an existing voice session . As a result new and innovative user to user and multi user services become available such as enhanced voice services video telephony chat push to talk and multimedia conferencing all of which are based on the concept of a multimedia session. The underlying IMS infrastructure enables mobile IP communication services via its ability to find a user in the network and then to establish a session with the user. The key IMS components enabling mobility management are the call session control function CSCF and home subscriber server HSS . The CSCF is essentially a proxy which aids in the setup and management of sessions and forwards messages between IMS networks. The HSS holds all of the key subscriber information and enables users or servers to find and communicate with other end users.

IMS uses session initiation protocol SIP for multimedia session negotiation and session management. For example SIP REGISTER and INVITE messages are used in communication with P CSCF I CSCF and S CSCF in . The IMS is essentially a mobile SIP network designed to support this functionality providing routing network location and addressing functionalities. The DIAMETER protocol is used between I CSCF and HSS and between S CSCF and HSS . DIAMETER provides an authentication authorization and accounting AAA framework for applications such as network access or IP mobility in both local and roaming situations.

P CSCF is the first contact point within the IMS and behaves like a proxy. The P CSCF forwards the SIP REGISTER request received from the subscriber s user equipment UE not shown via GGSN SGSN and RAN to l CSCF whose identity is determined using the home domain name as provided by the UE. The SIP messages are forwarded to S CSCF whose identity P CSCF received as a result of the registration procedure. P CSCF also forwards SIP requests or responses to the UE generates call detail records CDRs maintains a security association between itself and each UE performs SIP message compression and decompression and authorizes bearer resources and QoS management.

I CSCF is the contact point within the subscriber s home network for all connections destined to the subscriber or for a roaming subscriber currently located within that network operator s service area. The I CSCF assigns S CSCF to a user performing SIP registration routes a SIP request received from another network towards S CSCF obtains the address of S CSCF from HSS and forwards the SIP request or response to the S CSCF .

S CSCF performs the session control services for the UE and maintains session state as needed by the network operator for support of the services. S CSCF accepts registration requests makes its information available through HSS and provides session control. S CSCF also acts as a proxy server i.e. it accepts requests and services them internally or forwards them on and behaves as a User Agent i.e. it terminates and independently generates SIP transactions. S CSCF is responsible for interaction with services platforms for the support of services on behalf of an originating endpoint.

HSS holds the subscriber profile and keeps track of the core network node that is currently holding the subscriber. HSS provides mobility management call and or session establishment support and supports the call and or session establishment procedures in IMS. HSS supports user security information generation authentication procedures user identification handling access authorization service authorization support service provisioning support and provides support for application services. HSS may also communicate with an application server not shown to offer value added services. The application server and can reside either in the user s home network or in a third party location and enables different services in the IMS network like call forwarding call waiting presence instant messaging. The application server communicates with the HSS using the DIAMETER protocol.

IMS network operators adopting an IMS infrastructure early stand to gain sizeable competitive advantages. Despite those benefits it is still desirable to evolve network infrastructure incrementally rather than make radical changes. Accordingly network operators must provide support for other legacy networks while implementing an IMS infrastructure. A need therefore exists for supporting database access in internet protocol multimedia subsystem network environment while supporting legacy network subscriber database access.

In one aspect the subject matter described herein includes a system for supporting database access in an IMS network environment. The system includes at least one CSCF entity for generating subscriber related queries according to an abstracted profile AP protocol. The system also includes an abstracted profile server APS for receiving a CSCF generated subscriber related query and for gathering subscriber information related to the CSCF generated subscriber related query from at least one subscriber information database using a native protocol of the subscriber information database generating a reply message for the CSCF generated subscriber related query based on the gathered subscriber information and forwarding the reply message to a respective CSCF that generated the CSCF generated subscriber related query the reply message being forwarded according to the AP protocol.

According to another aspect the subject matter described herein includes an abstracted profile server APS for supporting database access in an IMS network environment. The APS is configured for gathering subscriber information from at least one subscriber information database using a native protocol of the subscriber information database wherein the native protocol is at least one of RADIUS DIAMETER MAP and LDAP generating a reply message to a subscriber related query based on the gathered subscriber information and forwarding the reply message to a source of the subscriber related query the reply message being forwarded using a protocol other than the native protocol of the subscriber information database.

According to yet another aspect the subject matter described herein includes a method is disclosed for supporting database access in an IMS network environment. At least one CSCF entity generates subscriber related queries according to an abstracted profile AP protocol. At an abstracted profile server APS a CSCF generated subscriber related query is received subscriber information is gathered related to the CSCF generated subscriber related query from at least one subscriber information database using a native protocol of the subscriber information database a reply message for the CSCF generated subscriber related query is generated based on the gathered subscriber information and the reply message is forwarded to a respective CSCF that generated the CSCF generated subscriber related query the reply message being forwarded according to the AP protocol.

To facilitate an understanding of exemplary embodiments many aspects are described in terms of sequences of actions that can be performed by elements of a computer system. For example it will be recognized that in each of the embodiments the various actions can be performed by specialized circuits or circuitry e.g. discrete logic gates interconnected to perform a specialized function by program instructions being executed by one or more processors or by a combination of both.

Moreover the sequences of actions can be embodied in any computer readable medium for use by or in connection with an instruction execution system apparatus or device such as a computer based system processor containing system or other system that can fetch the instructions from a computer readable medium and execute the instructions.

As used herein a computer readable medium can be any means that can contain store communicate propagate or transport the program for use by or in connection with the instruction execution system apparatus or device. The computer readable medium can be for example but not limited to an electronic magnetic optical electromagnetic infrared or semiconductor system apparatus device or propagation medium. More specific examples a non exhaustive list of the computer readable medium can include the following an electrical connection having one or more wires a portable computer diskette a random access memory RAM a read only memory ROM an erasable programmable read only memory EPROM or Flash memory an optical fiber and a portable compact disc read only memory CDROM .

Thus the subject matter described herein can be embodied in many different forms and all such forms are contemplated to be within the scope of what is claimed. Any such form of embodiment can be referred to herein as logic configured to perform a described action or alternatively as logic that performs a described action.

This approach requires the simultaneous support of a multitude of native protocols by S CSCF which is often impractical from a network operation standpoint due to the complex nature of the required multi protocol control logic. For example in certain signaling scenarios it may be necessary to query several network entities e.g. HSS HLR AAA EIR AuC presence server and the like in a particular sequence where the sequence is based at least in part on the responses obtained from the various network entities. In a single subscriber related transaction AAA may be queried using RADIUS protocol and based on the response returned by the AAA server it may be determined that HSS should be queried using the DIAMETER protocol. Based on the response provided by HSS it may then be determined that HLR should be queried using MAP protocol. This multi protocol multi step approach is believed to consume a significant amount of available resources at S CSCF which in turn may have a direct impact on the call control processing capabilities of S CSCF .

In operation when S CSCF requires subscriber information a subscriber related query is generated according to the AP protocol and forwarded to APS . APS receives the S CSCF generated subscriber related query and gathers subscriber information related to the CSCF generated subscriber related query from at least one subscriber information database such as HLR HSS AAA and LDAP server using a native protocol of the subscriber information database. APS generates a reply message for the CSCF generated subscriber related query based on the gathered subscriber information and forwards the reply message to S CSCF according to the AP protocol.

For example I CSCF may send an AP protocol query to APS via communication bus . In the implementation of APS generates and sends a DIAMETER protocol query to HSS via NIC . In the implementation of APS generates and sends a DIAMETER protocol query to HSS processor via communication bus . In either case a response is received according to the DIAMETER protocol at APS . and in the protocol response is generated at APS and forwarded to I CSCF . Although an HSS is used by way of example in it will be appreciated that the above described procedure can be used with any subscriber information database using the appropriate native protocol for the subscriber information database.

As used herein a subscriber information database may be a network node or a database application residing on a processor within or without an IMS cluster node or other similar distributed processing system.

It will be understood that various details of the invention may be changed without departing from the scope of the claimed subject matter. Furthermore the foregoing description is for the purpose of illustration only and not for the purpose of limitation as the scope of protection sought is defined by the claims as set forth hereinafter together with any equivalents thereof entitled to.

