---

title: Induced answering method and system for circuit switching-based telephony
abstract: Induced answering method and system for CS-based telephony. A user terminal () for communication over a telecommunications network () includes at least a CS-telephony device (CSO) for processing CS-based telephony signals (CS, CS), the CS-based telephony signals being received and transmitted over a circuit switched bearer service. The user terminal is arranged for receiving an additional answer-related signal (PS; CS), the additional answer-related signal being associated with an incoming CS-alert signal (CS) of an incoming call. Further, the user terminal is arranged for transmitting a response signal or CS-answer signal (CS) over the circuit switched bearer service in response to information included in, or derived from, the additional answer-related signal.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08077703&OS=08077703&RS=08077703
owner: Telefonaktiebolaget LM Ericsson (publ)
number: 08077703
owner_city: Stockholm
owner_country: SE
publication_date: 20051223
---
The present invention relates to a user terminal as defined in claim . Also the present invention relates to a method for answering CS based telephony. Moreover the present invention relates to a network exchange or network service or network application server and to a call initiating terminal.

In circuit switched CS telephony a set up of a call between parties comprises a number of steps. A call is initiated by a first party A who dials on his A terminal a telephone number of a B terminal of second party B. Then the telephony network routes the call to the B terminal by using the information of the dialed telephone number. Next the call is announced to party B by a signal generated on the B terminal. Then the B party can answer the call by some interaction with the B terminal. The B terminal signals the network that the call is accepted. After the answer generated by the B terminal the call is connected between the A terminal and the B terminal and a speech communication between parties A and B is established.

This set up of a call is implemented in both the wired and the mobile network. Both the A terminal and B terminal may be a wired or mobile telephone.

From the prior art a specification for mobile CS telephony is known GSM TS 04.07 version 7.3.0 chapter 6.2 which describes a sequence of states of a finite state machine of a telephone device during set up progress and termination of a call. shows a part of the CS call state diagram from the prior art.

The finite state machine of the telephone B terminal can be in a number of various states. Normally when the telephone is idle and not in communication the state of the telephone is the null state .

From the network as an incoming signal a call request by the A terminal may be received. Due to this signal the finite state machine changes its state to a call received state . The finite state machine arrives at the call received state through some intermediate state s . In this state the user party B of the B terminal is notified of the incoming call. Due to a user generated answer e.g. pressing an acknowledge key on the keypad of the B terminal the finite state machine changes to an active state in which speech communication between the party A of the A terminal and the party B of the B terminal can be executed. The action of a user generated answer to the incoming call is schematically indicated by block A connected by a dotted arrow line to the call received state .

The finite state machine arrives at the active state through an intermediate state . At the same time a CS call answer signal is returned to the exchange to establish the speech communication phase.

Upon termination of the call the finite state machine changes to the null state possibly through some further intermediate state s . At this time termination of the call is indicated to the exchange.

In the prior art the party B is required to activate the B terminal by performing some manipulation of the B terminal e.g. by pressing some acknowledge button on the terminal.

The above mentioned method of answering the incoming call adversely restricts the usability and functionality of the telephone i.e. the method of the prior art may limit user directed services.

It is an object of the present invention to provide a terminal which has improved answering capabilities in view of the prior art.

To solve this object the present invention provides a user terminal for communication over a telecommunications network comprising at least a CS telephony device for processing CS based telephony signals the CS based telephony signals being received and transmitted over a circuit switched bearer service 

the user terminal being arranged for receiving an additional answer related signal the additional answer related signal being associated with an incoming CS alert signal of an incoming call 

the user terminal being arranged for transmitting a response signal or CS answer signal over the circuit switched bearer service in response to information comprised in or derived from the additional answer related signal.

Advantageously the present invention provides a possibility for automatic answering an incoming call on the user terminal which does not require a user interaction.

Also the present invention relates to a network service on a telecommunications network comprising at least a circuit switched bearer service for receiving and transmitting CS based telephony signals the circuit switched bearer service being arranged for sending an CS alert signal of an incoming call to a user terminal the network service being arranged for sending an additional answer related signal to the user terminal the additional answer related signal being associated with the CS alert signal of the incoming call and being arranged for causing the user terminal to provide a response signal or CS answer signal over the circuit switched bearer service.

Moreover the present invention relates to a call initiating terminal or A terminal for communication over a telecommunications network comprising a CS telephony device for processing CS based telephony signals the CS based telephony signals being received and transmitted over a circuit switched bearer service the call initiating terminal being arranged for transmitting an additional answer related signal being associated with a transmitted CS call setup signal for an outgoing call with a user terminal the additional answer related signal comprising information on the outgoing call which causes the receiving user terminal to provide a response signal or CS answer signal over the circuit switched bearer service.

Furthermore the present invention relates to a method for communication over a telecommunications network comprising 

Also the present invention relates to a computer program for a user terminal for communication over a telecommunications network the user terminal comprising at least a CS telephony device for processing CS based telephony signals the CS based telephony signals being received and transmitted over a circuit switched bearer service wherein the user terminal further comprises a processing unit and memory the memory being coupled with the processing unit 

the computer program after being loaded enabling the processing unit to control the following functions of the user terminal 

Throughout the figures entities with the same reference number refer to identical entities as shown in the other figures.

The terminal is typically a mobile telephone but may also be a wired telephone. The terminal is arranged for communication over a telecommunications network .

The terminal as an electronic device comprises a CS telephony device CS which is arranged for processing CS based telephony signals. CS based telephony signals may be implemented for example by means of the DTAP protocol Direct Transfer Application Part as used in GSM Global System for Mobile communications . Further the terminal may comprise a further device D which may be arranged for providing a graphical user interface GUI and for providing execution of one or more applications which may be executed locally and possibly but not necessarily within the GUI. The further device D typically comprises memory for storing data and or applications.

In the CS telephony device CS a finite state machine FSM is present which is capable of managing CS based telephony functions.

From the network a CS alert signal CS is provided to the terminal to indicate a call request for an incoming call. As described above with reference to the finite state machine FSM provides a notification of the incoming call to the user of the terminal .

The user responds by some action e.g. pressing an acknowledge button depicted here as an action signal A.

The signal A from the user action is provided to the finite state machine FSM. The finite state machine FSM now prepares for speech communication in active state by an acceptance signal A. At this time a CS based answer signal CS is sent to the network to indicate the call is being answered and a speech communication is opened with the call initiating terminal or A terminal not shown .

In entities with the same reference number refer to identical entities as shown in the preceding figures.

In the present invention it is recognized that an automatic answer may be provided by a user terminal when in relationship with the CS alert signal CS an additional packet switched signal PS of a packet switched network source on the network is provided to the user terminal of the present invention.

The user terminal of the present invention comprises electronic circuitry in which the CS telephony device CS and a packet switched data processing device PS reside. Devices CS and PS are schematically depicted by dashed line rectangles. Further the user terminal may comprise the further device D as described above which may be arranged for providing a graphical user interface GUI and locally executable applications related to the GUI.

Within the packet switched data processing device PS a processing application HA for processing a packet switched signal is located. Also a storage device or memory MP for storing data relating to the additional packet switched signal PS may be located here.

The processing application HA has an output which is in connection to the finite state machine FSM for transmitting information signals from the processing application HA to the finite state machine FSM. The processing application is capable of deriving information from the additional packet switched signal PS. Such information signals comprise at least an answering control signal ACS.

The finite state machine FSM is capable of changing its state in relation to the answering control signal ACS received from the processing application HA as will be explained in more detail below.

A network service or network application server NS on the network is capable of providing the CS alert signal CS in combination with the additional packet switched signal PS to the user terminal .

Within the network the signals CS and PS are transmitted over their respective bearer services. The CS alert signal CS is transmitted over a first circuit switch based bearer service. The packet switched signal PS is transmitted over a second packet switch based bearer service.

The CS alert signal CS is guided to the CS telephony device CS. The CS alert signal CS will have an interaction with the finite state machine FSM as described above with reference to . The finite state machine FSM will change its state to the call received state if not busy .

The finite state machine FSM is arranged to expect an additional packet switched signal PS in conjunction with the receipt of the CS alert signal CS. In one embodiment the finite state machine FSM derives from the CS alert signal CS that such an additional packet switched signal PS is to be expected. For example this can be based on the received Caller Line Identity signal or a modification of the CS alert signal CS. The received Caller Line Identity signal or modification of the CS alert signal CS may be compared to some stored data in the memory MP to determine if the CS alert signal relates to a relevant network service and if a related additional packet switched signal PS can be expected. In another embodiment the finite state machine FSM may be arranged to expect to receive a related additional packet switched signal PS within a fixed predetermined interval of time. While expecting the additional packet switched signal PS the finite state machine FSM may be arranged to postpone generation of an alarm audible visible or tactile for the user. The predetermined interval of time may be such that the CS alert signal CS and the packet switched signal PS are received substantially simultaneously at the user terminal .

Also it is feasible that the packet switched signal PS arrives before the CS alert signal CS but is withheld until arrival of the corresponding CS alert signal CS.

After receipt the additional packet switched signal PS is guided to the processing application HA in the packet switched data processing device PS. The additional packet switched signal PS contains at least answering related data that relate to the ongoing CS alert signal CS. The processing application HA is arranged to determine from the answering related data in the packet switched signal PS if the network service requests that an automatic answer by the user terminal is executed.

If an automatic answer is requested the processing application HA may provide the answering control signal ACS over the connection to the finite state machine FSM.

Upon receipt of the answering control signal ACS the finite state machine FSM changes it s state by transition from the call received state through the intermediate state to the active state.

By consequence the user terminal provides the CS answer signal CS to the network that the pending call is answered. Speech communication can be initiated.

In the manner as described above the additional packet switched signal PS provides a network induced answer for the CS telephony based device CS.

In accordance with the present invention the transition from the call received state to the active state is triggered by a network induced answer provided by the additional packet switched signal PS or by call acceptance by the mobile terminated user of the user terminal .

The finite state machine FSM of the user terminal is very similar to the finite state machine of the prior art except that additionally the finite state machine FSM is capable of accepting a primitive ACS in the CS call state. Primitive ACS is derived from the answering control signal ACS that was generated by the processing application HA. The primitive ACS may influence dotted line the finite state machine FSM to change the state from call received state to the active state.

The step of determining by the processing application HA that an automatic answer by the user terminal is to be executed requires that the CS alert signal CS and the additional packet switched signal PS are correlated in some way. For example the additional packet switched signal PS may contain data that relate to the CS alert signal CS such as the Calling Line Identity CLI of the party A which typically is included in the CS alert signal CS. Also the CS alert signal CS may contain some data to indicate that the additional packet switched signal PS will be sent along.

Moreover from the additional packet switched signal PS the processing application may derive an identification of the network service NS that sent the combined CS alert signal CS and the additional packet switched signal PS.

Further from the additional packet switched signal PS the processing application may derive authentication information about the network service NS which enables the processing application HA to check the authentication of the network service NS. In this manner the user of the user terminal can be sure of the identity of the network service .

Finally the data of the additional packet switched signal PS may contain additional information which indicates the reason that the network service NS requests the call to be answered automatically by the user terminal .

The information comprised in the signal PS for at least one of identification authentication and reason allows the processing application HA to apply a services filter FL on which network services are allowed to be answered automatically.

The services filter FL comprises data that are associated with the above mentioned information within the additional packet switched signal PS for identification and or for authentication purposes of the network service NS that transmitted or generated the signal PS.

The services filter FL may be user defined by means of e.g. an possibly GUI based application on the user terminal . A user may use the application to define one or more network services NS for which he she allows the user terminal to automatically answer an incoming call. The application is capable of defining services filtering data which are accessible by the processing application HA for use during the process of determining if an automatic answer may be generated for an incoming call. The services filtering data are typically stored in a memory associated with the services filter FL.

In one embodiment the user terminal is arranged to process both the CS alert signal CS and the additional packet switched signal PS automatically without notifying the user about the incoming message i.e. have a silent alerting pattern . Carrying out this process may be for example be done by using applications for mobile terminals such as SIM Application Toolkit SAT and MExE. The processing application HA may use an application programming interface such as J2ME. The skilled person will however appreciate that alternative protocols and programming environments may be equally suitable.

Depending on the actual nature of the incoming call and its reliability the present invention may allow the combination of CS alert signal CS and additional packet switched signal PS to be generated by either the network service NS or the A terminal of party A.

In this embodiment the combination of CS alert signal CS and additional packet switched signal PS is generated by the network service NS on the network .

The call setup is initiated by an A terminal which transmits CS alert signal or in general a CS call setup CS to the network . In the network a network service NS generates the additional packet switched signal PS which is transmitted to the user terminal or B terminal not shown in detail in combination with the CS alert signal CS. As mentioned above the CS alert signal CS may be altered in that a silent alerting pattern is sent to the user terminal .

As explained before the user terminal will generate an automatic answer CS answer CS based on the information received in the combination of CS alert signal CS and additional packet switched signal PS. The CS answer CS is transmitted to the network and the A terminal to establish a speech communication .

In this embodiment the combination of CS alert signal CS and additional packet switched signal PS is generated by the A terminal .

The CS alert signal CS and the additional packet switched signal PS are both generated by an A terminal and transmitted over the network to the user terminal . The network in this case appears transparent for both the CS and PS signals. It is noted that the CS call setup or CS alert signal CS generated by the A terminal may comprise a silent alerting pattern.

As explained before the user terminal will generate an automatic answer by means of CS answer CS based on the information received in the combination of CS alert signal CS and additional packet switched signal PS. The CS answer CS is transmitted to the network and to the A terminal to establish speech communication .

In the embodiment of the user terminal receives an incoming call with a CS alert signal CS in combination with an additional circuit switched signal CS from a network service NS on network .

A network service NS generates the CS alert signal CS and in addition a network induced answer signal CS.

The CS alert signal CS is guided to the CS telephony device CS. The CS alert signal CS will have an interaction with the finite state machine FSM as described above with reference to . The finite state machine FSM will change its state to the call received state if not busy .

The finite state machine FSM is arranged to expect the additional circuit switched signal CS in conjunction with the receipt of the CS alert signal CS. The finite state machine FSM is arranged to derive from the CS alert signal CS that such an additional network induced answer signal as CS is to be expected.

While expecting the additional circuit switched signal CS the finite state machine FSM may be arranged to postpone generation of an alarm audible visible or tactile for the user for a predetermined interval of time in which the additional circuit switched signal or network induced answer signal CS may be received at the user terminal .

Also it is feasible that the additional circuit switched signal CS arrives before the CS alert signal CS but is withheld until arrival of the corresponding CS alert signal CS.

After receipt the additional circuit switched signal CS is also guided to the finite state machine FSM. The additional circuit switched signal CS may contain at least answering related data that relate to the ongoing CS alert signal CS.

The finite state machine FSM may be arranged to determine from the additional circuit switched signal CS if the network service requests that an automatic answer by the user terminal is executed.

If an automatic answer is requested the finite state machine FSM changes it s state by transition from the call received state through intermediate state s to the active state and transmits the CS answer CS to the network network service NS .

In the embodiment of the user terminal receives an incoming call with a CS alert signal CS in combination with an additional circuit switched signal CS from a network service NS on network .

A network service NS generates the CS alert signal CS and in addition the additional circuit switched signal CS both transmittable over the circuit switched bearer service.

In the embodiment of the user terminal receives an incoming call with a CS alert signal CS in combination with an additional circuit switched signal CS from a call initiating A terminal .

The A terminal which initiates the incoming call for the user terminal generates the CS alert signal CS and in addition the additional circuit switched signal CS both over the circuit switched bearer service.

The network in this case appears transparent for both the CS and CS signals. It is noted that the CS call setup or CS alert signal CS generated by the A terminal may comprise a silent alerting pattern.

Again as described above with reference to the finite state machine FSM is arranged for determining from the network induced answer signal CS if the network service requests that an automatic answer by the user terminal is executed.

If so the finite state machine can change it s state by transition from the call received state through the intermediate state s to the active state and transmit the CS answer CS to the network and the A terminal . Next speech communication between A terminal and user terminal can be initiated.

In the embodiment of the user terminal receives an incoming call with a CS alert signal CS in combination with an additional packet switched signal PS which comprises an invitation signal IS.

The additional packet switched signal PS over the packet switched bearer service may be generated by a network service NS or by a call initiating A terminal as explained above with reference to and respectively.

The processing application HA is arranged to extract the invitation signal IS from the additional packet switched signal PS and to transmit the invitation signal IS to the further device D. The further device D is arranged for processing the invitation signal IS by some GUI based application which now presents information related to the incoming call to the user. After receiving a feed back signal FS for this information from the user the user terminal transmits the information related to the feed back signal SF in packet switched format back to the network service NS over the PS bearer service.

The network service NS is arranged for recognizing the feed back signal from the user terminal . Accordingly the network service NS now responds by sending a induced CS answer signal CS over the circuit switched bearer service to the user terminal to inform it CS about the user interaction with packet switched signal PS comprising the invitation signal IS. The finite state machine FSM receives the network induced CS answer CS and changes it s state to the active state . Accordingly the CS telephony based device CS transmits a CS answer CS to the network network service NS and or A terminal .

In this embodiment similar to the embodiment shown in the combination of CS alert signal CS and additional packet switched signal PS is generated by the network service NS on the network .

The call setup is initiated by an A terminal which transmits a CS alert signal CS to the network . In the network a network service NS generates the additional packet switched signal PS over the packet switched bearer service which is transmitted to the user terminal or B terminal not shown in detail in combination with the CS alert signal CS. As mentioned above the CS alert signal CS may be altered in that a silent alerting pattern is sent to the user terminal .

The additional packet switched signal PS comprises a ring delay signal RS which contains information on a number of rings or time interval before the automatic CS answer CS is to be transmitted to the network . The processing application HA processes the additional packet switched signal PS and extracts the ring delay signal RS information. Through the connection the processing application HA sends the information relating to the ring delay signal RS to the finite state machine FSM which determines from the received ring information after how many rings or when to change from the call received state to the active state and to transmit the CS answer signal CS to the network .

As explained before the CS answer CS is transmitted to the network and the A terminal to establish a speech communication .

In this embodiment of the invention the user terminal has given privilege to the A terminal to break in into a conversation during a possibly ongoing first other call between the user terminal and another A terminal. In this situation the present invention may provide a network induced forced call hold as explained below.

The principle of call hold is described in GSM TS 04.83 v.7.0.1. Chapter 2.1.5 of GSM TS 04.83 describes states for call hold . The call hold states are considered in this document as auxiliary states that are part of the general active state .

The privileged A terminal sets up a call to the user terminal and includes a forced call hold instruction in the call set up or a network service NS may provide the forced hold instruction on behalf of the privileged A terminal . This forced call hold instruction is transported as the additional packet switched signal PS through the bearer service in the PS domain. This forced call hold instruction may have the effect that when received by the user terminal the processing application HA provides a hold signal or hold primitive HS over connection to the finite state machine FSM.

Depending on the actual state of the user terminal when the call of the privileged A terminal comes in i.e. the null state idle or the active state busy the finite state machine FSM may interpret the hold signal HS differently.

During the null state the finite state machine FSM will change it s state to the call received state as described above and may ignore the hold signal In this case the incoming call can be handled by the party B as a normal call from the prior art . Alternatively in accordance with one or more of the embodiments as described above the finite state machine FSM may interpret the hold signal HS as a network induced instruction for automatically answering the incoming call and change to the active state .

However when the hold signal comes in at the finite state machine FSM during an active state of the first other call the finite state machine FSM is arranged to change the state for that first other active call to a hold state change indicated by arrow H and change the state of the incoming call from the privileged A terminal to the active state arrow H .

After termination of the call from the privileged A terminal the finite state machine restores it s state to the preceding state the first other call on hold in the hold state is retrieved and restored to the active state arrow H or if no other call was present the state is changed to the null state.

Note that both the transfer H of the other call from the active state to the hold state and the restoration H of the other call from the hold state to the active state may per se be carried out in accordance with the GSM TS 04.83 specification. The additional packet switched signal PS a network induced signal in accordance with the present invention instructs the user terminal to carry out either of both actions H H.

The inclusion of the forced call hold may be done manually by party A. Alternatively including the forced call hold may be done automatically by the A terminal by some recognition procedure for the B number of the user terminal .

For example the B number of the user terminal and an indication for application of forced call hold for that B number may be stored in a memory of the A terminal. When the B number of the user terminal is called the A terminal may use the data stored in the memory to transmit the forced call hold instruction automatically.

Furthermore the additional information of the forced call hold instruction in the additional packet switched signal PS can contain references to announcements audible on a speaker or visible on a display of the respective terminals that must be presented to the user terminal and or the other A terminal in the first other call.

For example the party of the other A terminal that is going to be placed on hold may receive an appropriate announcement and the party B of the user terminal that is going to be automatically through connected with the party of the privileged A terminal may receive an appropriate announcement. These announcements may differ from one another. The announcements may be provided by a network service NS in response to an announcement signal in the PS domain from the user terminal .

The additional information in the additional packet switched signal PS can also indicate to the B party s user terminal that the network induced forced call hold should occur after a defined number of rings e.g. 3 rings . That enables the party B to answer the phone by itself instead of having it answered .

Network induced call hold can be a good extension to an application of providing spoken content during route navigation via the mobile phone while driving. When a driver expects route information e.g. next exit on the highway he also expects to receive this information in the case that he has an ongoing phone conversation. So the spoken route information must automatically put the ongoing conversation on hold possibly play the announcement s disconnect and restore the original conversation.

It is noted that the method for the user terminal according to the present invention may be implemented in hardware and or software. In case of software the user terminal comprises a processing unit and memory the memory being coupled with the processing unit. The user terminal is capable of loading a computer program which implements the method as described above. After loading of the computer program the processing unit of the user terminal is arranged for executing the program so as to obtain the functionality as described above.

Similarly software programs may be used within the network service and or the call initiating A terminal in order to obtain the functionalities as described above with reference to the network service NS and the A terminal respectively.

In a first CS based application the user terminal is arranged for receiving spoken content of a guided tour. The user terminal may be any suitable mobile communication device in accordance with any one of the embodiments.

Each time when new content becomes available e.g. in reaction to a location of the user terminal the CS based application initiates a call to the user terminal by means of the additional packet switched signal PS. Each call is automatically answered without interaction by the user in accordance with one or more of the embodiments described above.

In another application the user terminal is arranged to have a function of a babyphone. The user terminal may be located in a room with a child for example a baby or toddler. Any call to the user terminal results in a connection for recording sound from the room. The call contains the additional packet switched signal PS for automatically answering the call and may also contain an instruction for a silent alerting pattern.

The babyphone can be embodied by any one of the embodiments of a user terminal as described above in which the user terminal is arranged for communication over a telecommunications network which comprises at least a CS telephony device CS for processing CS based telephony signals CS CS the CS based telephony signals being received and transmitted over a circuit switched bearer service. The user terminal is arranged for receiving an additional answer related signal PS CS with the additional answer related signal being associated with an incoming CS alert signal CS of an incoming call. Further the user terminal is arranged for transmitting a response signal or CS answer signal CS over the circuit switched bearer service in response to information comprised in or derived from the additional answer related signal.

In a further application the present invention provides the network induced call hold as described above. An A terminal calls the user terminal of the present invention. The user terminal is busy in a call to another terminal. The A terminal is privileged to break in in the ongoing call as explained before. The user of the A terminal receives the busy signal and may by giving an instruction on the A terminal force the user terminal to hold the other call and connect to the A terminal in speech communication. The instruction triggers the generation of the additional packet switched signal PS which causes the user terminal to respond to the A terminal when PS has been received. The other call is put on hold. A message may be presented to the party of the other call that the call is put on hold.

In still another application the present invention provides the network induced call hold as described above. An A terminal calls the user terminal of the present invention. The user terminal is busy in another call to another terminal. The A terminal is privileged to break in in the ongoing call as explained before. In this case no user interaction on the A terminal is required. The busy signal is not transmitted to the party of the A terminal . The additional packet switched signal PS may be sent directly with the call setup signal or may be generated by a network service NS when a busy signal is detected for the user terminal . The user terminal responds to the A terminal the other call is put on hold . A message may be presented to the party of the other call that the call is put on hold .

Although specific embodiments of the invention have been described it should be understood that the embodiments are not intended to limit the invention. The invention may embody any further alternative modification or equivalent only limited by the scope of the appended claims.

