---

title: Alkali-hydroxide modified poly-vinylidene fluoride/polyethylene oxide protective polymer blend coating for lithium metal
abstract: An anode for a metal-air battery has an electrode and a metal foil interconnected with the electrode. A barrier layer surrounds the metal foil and includes a polymer blend that substantially reduces the passage of moisture therethrough while permitting the passage of ions therethrough. A method of making the barrier layer is also presented.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07598000&OS=07598000&RS=07598000
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07598000
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050105
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured used imported sold and licensed by or for the Government of the United States of America without the payment of any royalty thereon or there for.

The present invention relates generally to electrochemical power sources and more particularly to metal air batteries.

Metal air batteries may provide a very desirable power source for many small portable electronic devices. For example lithium air batteries may have a relatively large specific capacity of 3 861 Ah kg and energy density of 13 kW h kg while also having relatively small spatial requirements. However a problem that arises in the use of metal air batteries involves e.g. the non compatibility of the metal with the moisture in the air. In particular lithium may be oxidized violently in the presence of the moisture or water whereby safety concerns may be raised.

Currently no suitable means of substantially reducing the effects of moisture in metal air batteries is available.

In accordance with an embodiment of the present invention an anode for a metal air battery comprises an electrode and a metal foil interconnected with the electrode. A barrier layer surrounds the metal foil and comprises a polymer blend that substantially reduces the passage of moisture therethrough while permitting the passage of ions therethrough.

In another embodiment of the present invention a method of making an anode comprises preparing a barrier layer comprising hydrolyzing polyvinylidene fluoride pVdF in an alkali hydroxide solution to form a mixture separating hydrolyzed pVdF from the pVdF and the alkali hydroxide solution dissolving hydrolyzed pVdF polyethylene oxide PEO and lithium hexafluorophosphate in a solvent and removing the solvent to thereby leave a polymer blend for use as a barrier layer thereafter providing a metal foil and surrounding the metal foil with the barrier layer.

One embodiment of the present invention concerns an anode for a metal air battery that is configured to reduce a reaction between the anode which comprises a lithium metal sheet and moisture in the air. In one particular embodiment of the invention a barrier layer is provided that surrounds the metal sheet and functions to substantially reduce passage of moisture while permitting the passage of oxygen and lithium ions therethrough. The barrier layer may comprise a modified polyvinylidene fluoride and a polyethylene oxide blend.

Referring now to the exploded view of the FIGURE an anode that is in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention is illustrated generally at . In this embodiment the anode comprises a terminal a wire mesh layer a metal foil and barrier layers . The terminal may comprise a conductive substance such as nickel and may be configured in any geometric shape that is suitable for mating with a device not shown to be energized. The wire mesh layer may also comprise nickel and is configured to provide enhanced electrical contact across a surface not numbered of the metal foil . The metal foil may comprise lithium and may be approximately 0.006 inch in thickness.

In accordance with a feature of the present invention the barrier layers are provided for substantially reducing contact between the metal foil and moisture in the air. The barrier layers may be joined together during fabrication of the anode to surround and cover the metal foil . It will be understood that while multiple barrier layers are shown these layers are referred to herein for illustrative purposes and instead of multiple barrier layers a coating or encapsulating material may be employed to cover the metal foil .

As exemplified below it has been found that the barrier layers may comprise a polymer blend of polyvinylidene fluoride and polyethylene oxide. Also an alkali hydroxide solution may be employed in order to modify the chemical and physical characteristics of polyvinylidene fluoride prior to blending with the polyethylene oxide. Further lithium hexafluorophosphate may be combined with the polymer blend of polyvinylidene fluoride and polyethylene oxide in order to conduct ions from the cathode and anode current collectors. Preferably each barrier layer comprises polyvinylidene fluoride that is greater than approximately 75 percent by weight and more preferably ranges between approximately 75 percent and 80 percent by weight. Polyethylene oxide preferably ranges between approximately 10 percent and 15 percent by weight and lithium hexafluorophosphate preferably ranges between approximately 10 percent and 15 percent by weight.

It is believed that during operation of the anode the barrier layers allow passage of lithium and oxygen ions in order to facilitate the oxidation and reduction reactions necessary for generation of electrical power. Lithium is oxidized to lithium carbonate and lithium oxide within the barrier.

In accordance with another feature of the present invention a method of making a barrier layer comprises reacting polyvinylidene fluoride pVdF in an excess lithium hydroxide solution. The reaction is continued until a dark brown paste settles to the bottom that may be 90 by weight efficient of initial pVdF. After centrifuging the brown paste may be removed rinsed with distilled water and then dried. The dried brown paste comprising lithiated or hydrolyzed pVdF may then be formed into a solid polymer blend film that may be used as a barrier layer.

In one particular embodiment the polymer blend or barrier layer may be prepared by dissolving hydrolyzed pVdF in 1 methyl 2 pyrrolidione nMP and then adding polyethylene oxide PEO and lithium hexafluorophosphate to form a polymer blend mixture. The polymer blend mixture may then be heated until all three components are dissolved. The mixture may then be allowed to cool to room temperature and formed into a thin layer by coating onto a flat sheet of Teflon or glass.

An anode may then be prepared by pressing together a metal foil e.g. comprising lithium with a wire mesh e.g. comprising nickel and then removing excess nickel. A pair of barrier layers previously prepared of hydrolyzed pVdF PEO as described above may then be located on opposing sides of the lithium foil and then pressed together under e.g. 5000 pounds per square inch of pressure.

A polyvinylidene fluoride pVdF was obtained from the Polyscience Corporation of Warrington Pa. and Lithium hydroxide a 98 solution was obtained from Alfa Aesar Corporation of Ward Hill Mass. Five grams of pVdF was placed into a 50 mL centrifuge tube. Thereafter a three molar solution of lithium hydroxide was poured into the centrifuge tube until it reached the 50 mL line. The mixture was shaken and left for at least 24 hours. After 24 hours the mixture turned from a white color to a pinkish color. More solid lithium hydroxide was put into the mixture to increase the degree of reaction. The mixture was shaken and left alone for another 24 hours. This process was repeated until a dark brown paste settled to the bottom of the centrifuge tube. At this point the mixture was placed in a centrifuge for 10 minutes at 8000 rpm to separate the brown paste from the pinkish pVdF that floated on the top of the mixture. The brown paste was then removed and placed into an extraction thimble used in a Soxhlet apparatus. Distilled water was used to wash the brown paste of any traces of lithium hydroxide thirty to forty washes . After the brown paste was removed it was put into a vacuum dryer for about 24 hours at 100 C. The brown paste now a powder lithiated pVdF was removed.

A polymer blend was prepared by dissolving 3.058 g of hydrolyzed pVdF in 1 methyl 2 pyrrolidione nMP . After the hydrolyzed pVdF dissolved 0.410 g of polyethylene oxide PEO with an average molecular weight of 100K obtained from the Aldrich Corporation of Milwaukee Wis. and 0.450 g lithium hexafluorophosphate was added to the dissolved hydrolyzed pVdF solution. Altogether the hydrolyzed pVdF comprised a weight percent of 78 PEO comprised a weight percent of 10.5 and lithium hexafluorophosphate comprised a weight percent of 11.5 . The mixture was then heated until all three components were dissolved in nMP. The mixture was then cooled to room temperature and then applied at a thickness of 0.002 inches to a clean glass plate using a coating bar to form a barrier layer. The barrier layer or film was dried at 50 C. until the liquid evaporated and then placed into a vacuum oven for 24 hours at 50 C.

Lithium foil was obtained from the Foote Corporation of Exton Pa. with a thickness of 0.006 inches for use as an anode. In a dry room a press available from the Carver Corporation of Wabash Ind. was employed to press under 12 tons of pressure the lithium foil onto a nickel wire mesh. Excess nickel was removed from the edges of the lithium foil. The polymer blend of hydrolyzed pVdF PEO or barrier layer was then disposed about the lithium foil and wire mesh and pressed under 12 tons of pressure. Excess polymer blend was then removed.

The anode was then brought out of the dry room to expose it to ambient humidity. After several weeks no deterioration of the quality of lithium metal was observed.

An anode was prepared according to Example I excepting that a barrier layer to protect a lithium foil instead comprised in weight percent 81 modified pVdF 9 PEO and 10 lithium hexafluorophosphate. The lithium foil had a weight of 0.0214 g an area of 3.27 cm.

An anode was prepared according to Example I excepting that a barrier layer to protect a lithium foil instead comprised in weight percent 78 modified pVdF 10 PEO and 12 lithium hexafluorophosphate. The lithium foil had a weight of 0.0227 g an area of 3.17 cm.

Each of the anodes from the above examples and others not described herein was observed for deterioration of the lithium metal foil after exposure to ambient humidity for several weeks. It was found that the polymer blends that were the most successful had a ratio of hydrolyzed pVdF of greater than 75 by weight. The polymer film was pliable and stable.

While the present invention has been described in connection with what are presently considered to be the most practical and preferred embodiments it is to be understood that the present invention is not limited to these herein disclosed embodiments. Rather the present invention is intended to cover all of the various modifications and equivalent arrangements included within the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

