---

title: Smart call delivery with GIS integration
abstract: A method of delivering a call to a called party's device. The method includes receiving a call directed to a wireline device and validating that a telephone number of the wireline device is associated with a telephone number of a wireless device. The method also includes transmitting a message to the wireless device, delivering the call to the wireline device when a return message is not received from the wireless device, and determining a location of the wireless device when a return message is received from the wireless device. The method further includes comparing the location of the wireless device with a location of the wireline device, delivering the call to the wireless device when the location of the wireless device is not within a predefined vicinity of the location of the wireline device, and delivering the call to the wireline device when the location of the wireless device is within a predefined vicinity of the location of the wireline device.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07668559&OS=07668559&RS=07668559
owner: AT&T Intellectual Property I, L.P.
number: 07668559
owner_city: Reno
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051207
---
The present application is a continuation of U.S. application Ser. No. 09 997 098 filed on Nov. 29 2001 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 099 677 and entitled SMART CALL DELIVERY WITH GIS INTEGRATION.

The present invention is directed generally to the field of telecommunications and more particularly to wireless telecommunications.

Smart Call Delivery SCD is a service offered by some telecommunications service providers. Using conventional SCD subscribers are able to re direct calls made to their wireline phone to an associated wireless device. If the wireless device is on the call is directed to the wireless phone. Although SCD is particularly useful to those who travel frequently subscribers oftentimes forget to turn off their wireless device when returning to the home or office where SCD is not needed. Consequently calls are re directed to the wireless device when it may have been more economical from the point of view of the subscriber to receive the call via a wireline phone. Because wireless airtime charges may be greater than those for standard wireline services a subscriber can incur additional expense if SCD is not limited to use only when the subscriber is away from the proximity of the subscriber s wireline phone.

A second though unrelated problem facing wireless subscribers is the inability of emergency care personnel to pinpoint a caller s location. Using geographic information system GIS applications calls from a wireline phone can be associated with an address and represented on a computer generated map. Calls from wireless devices on the other hand cannot be associated with a fixed address. This raises concerns about public safety because emergency services such as 911 frequently rely on GIS information when responding to calls. As a result the United States Federal Communications Commission FCC has introduced the Emergency 911 E 911 mandate requiring that wireless phone providers incorporate automatic location identification ALI features into their products by October of 2001. Using ALI technologies such as global positioning systems GPS and cellular triangulation E 911 callers can be pinpointed well within the requirement of the FCC mandate.

Although the number of wireless products and services incorporating ALI features has been rapidly increasing in response to E 911 requirements no system or method exists for utilizing these technologies to determine when wireless services such as SCD should be enabled or disabled.

Thus a need exists for a system that integrates the locational capabilities of wireless devices with GIS technology to improve the functionality and minimize the costs associated with existing services. In particular combining these technologies would allow subscribers to conserve wireless airtime when more economical wireline alternatives may be available.

According to one embodiment the present invention is directed to a method of delivering a call to a called party s device. The method includes receiving a call directed to a wireline device and validating that a telephone number of the wireline device is associated with a telephone number of a wireless device. The method also includes transmitting a message to the wireless device delivering the call to the wireline device when a return message is not received from the wireless device and determining a location of the wireless device when a return message is received from the wireless device. The method further includes comparing the location of the wireless device with a location of the wireline device delivering the call to the wireless device when the location of the wireless device is not within a predefined vicinity of the location of the wireline device and delivering the call to the wireline device when the location of the wireless device is within a predefined vicinity of the location of the wireline device.

The term calling party is used herein generally to refer to the person or unit that initiates a telecommunication. The calling party may also be referred to herein as caller. In some cases the calling party may not be a person but may be a device such as a facsimile machine an answering service a modem etc. The term called party or customer is used herein generally to refer to the person or unit that answers or responds to the call or communication. The term communication is used herein to include all messages or calls that may be exchanged between a calling party and a called party including voice data and video messages. The term communication is used synonymously herein with the term call unless a distinction is noted.

One embodiment of the present invention is directed to a system and method of re directing wireline telephone calls to an associated wireless device only when the wireless device is in a different location than the wireline telephone. Accordingly the SCD service with GIS integration described by the present invention prevents call re direction when the call can be answered using the wireline telephone.

According to one embodiment the present invention utilizes the intelligent functionality of an Advanced Intelligent Network AIN . The AIN is a network used in conjunction with a conventional telephone network such as the public switched telephone network PSTN to provide enhanced voice and data services and dynamic routing capabilities using two different networks. The actual voice call is transmitted over a circuit switched network but the signaling is done on a separate packet switched network. Before describing further details of the present invention a description of the AIN is provided.

A typical LEC includes a number of central office CO switches for interconnecting customer premises terminating equipment with the PSTN. For an LEC including the AIN as illustrated in the central office switches may be provided as Service Switching Points SSP switches . The dashed line between the SSP switches indicates that the number of SSP switches in the AIN may vary depending on the particular requirements of the AIN . The AIN may also include a non SSP switch . The difference between the SSP switches and the non SSP switch is that the SSP switches provide intelligent network functionality. Interconnecting the SSP switches and the non SSP switch are communication links which may be for example trunk circuits.

Each SSP switch and non SSP switch has a number of subscriber lines connected thereto. The subscriber lines may be for example conventional twisted pair loop circuits connected between the switches and the telephone drops for the customer premises or the subscriber lines may be trunk circuits such as T 1 trunk circuits. Typically the number of subscriber lines connected to each switch is on the order of ten thousand to one hundred thousand lines. Each of the subscriber lines is connected to a terminating piece of customer premises equipment represented in by the landline telephones . Alternatively the terminating equipment may be another type of telecommunications unit such as for example a telecopier a personal computer a modem or a private branch exchange PBX switching system.

For the AIN illustrated in each SSP switch and the non SSP switch are connected to a signal transfer point STP via a communication link . The communication link may employ for example the SS7 switching protocol. The STP may be a multi port high speed packet switch that is programmed to respond to the routing information in the appropriate layer of the switching protocol and route the data packets to their intended destination.

One of the intended destinations of the data packets from the STP is a service control point SCP . The STP is in communication with the SCP via a communication link which may also employ the SS7 switching protocol. The SCP may be an intelligent database server such as for example an Intelligent Network Service Control Point available from Lucent Technologies Inc. Murray Hill N.J. and may have associated with it a network database for storing network data. The intelligent functionality of the SCP may be realized by application programs such as programmable Service Program Applications SPA which are run by the SCP . The SCP is normally employed to implement high volume routing services such as call forwarding and number portability translation and routing. In addition another of the functions of the SCP is hosting of the network database which may store subscriber information such as subscriber call management profiles used in providing enhanced calling services such as the SCD service with GIS integration described by the present invention.

In order to implement the system described by the present invention a mobile positioning center MPC may reside on the SCP . The MPC is an SS7 based location management component that can interface with a variety of PDE s utilizing ALI technologies such as GPS A GPS AOA TOA and TDOA. Locational data can be transferred from the MPC to the SCP for further processing. An example of such processing is E 911 call routing which may include receiving locational data from the MPC comparing that information to a PSAP database accessible to the SCP and routing the call to an appropriately located emergency service. Data processing may be performed using a location management platform LMP such as MapInfo LMP an application programming interface available from MapInfo Corporation Troy N.Y. Residing on the SCP the LMP converts locational data into a format compatible with other SCP applications such as the GIS application of the present invention as described hereinbelow in conjunction with . Alternatively locational data may be transferred to non SCP applications for processing from the LMP or directly from the MPC .

The AIN illustrated in also includes an intelligent peripheral device IP . The IP may be a services node such as for example a Compact Services Node CSN available from Lucent Technologies Inc. Murray Hill N.J. although the IP may be any other type of available AIN compliant intelligent peripheral device. The IP may be connected to one or more of the SSP switches via a communications link which may be for example an Integrated Service Digital Network ISDN including BRI Basic Rate Interface or PRI Primary Rate Interface lines. According to other embodiments the communications link may be for example a T 1 trunk circuit.

The IP may be used primarily when some enhanced feature or service is needed that requires an audio connection to the call such as for example call return and calling name services. Similar to the SCP the intelligent functionality of the IP may be realized by programmable applications executable by the IP .

In order to keep the processing of data and calls as simple as possible at the switches such as at the SSP switches a set of triggers may be defined at the SSP switches for each call. A trigger in an AIN is an event associated with a particular subscriber line that generates a data packet to be sent from the SSP switch servicing the particular subscriber line to the SCP via the STP . The triggers may be originating triggers for calls originating from the subscriber premises or terminating triggers for calls terminating at the subscriber premises. A trigger causes a message in the form of a query to be sent from the SSP switch to the SCP .

The SCP in turn interrogates the network database to determine whether some customized call feature or enhanced service should be implemented for the particular call or whether conventional dial up telephone service should be provided. The results of the database inquiry are sent back from the SCP to the SSP switch via the STP . The return packet includes instructions to the SSP switch as to how to process the call. The instructions may be to take some special action as a result of a customized calling service or enhanced feature. For example for an enhanced calling feature requiring the capabilities of the IP the return message from the SCP may include instructions for the SSP switch to route the call to the IP . In addition the return message from the SCP may simply be an indication that there is no entry in the network database that indicates anything other than conventional telephone service should be provided for the call. The query and return messages may be formatted for example according to conventional SS7 TCAP Transaction Capabilities Application Part formats. U.S. Pat. No. 5 438 568 which is incorporated herein by reference discloses additional details regarding the functioning of an AIN.

The AIN illustrated in includes only one STP one SCP one network database and one IP although the AIN may further include an additional number of these components as well as other network components which are not included in for purposes of clarity. For example the AIN may additionally include redundant SCPs and STPs to take over if the STP or the SCP should fail. In addition the AIN may include an Automatic Electronic Switching System AESS Network Access Point NAP in communication with the STP which may be programmed to detect the trigger conditions. Further the AIN may include regional STPs and regional SCPs in communication with for example the local STP for routing and servicing calls between different LECs.

The system may also include position determining equipment PDE for providing the location of the wireless communication device. The PDE can be device based network based or a combination of both. An example of a device based PDE is a GPS receiver. Network based PDE s can include circuits performing Time of Arrival TOA positioning Angle of Arrival AOA positioning or Time Difference of Arrival TDOA positioning. An example of both a device based and network based PDE is an Assisted GPS A GPS system in which a device based GPS receiver is assisted by a network based GPS receiver to minimize the acquisition time of the device based GPS receiver .

The accuracy with which a caller s position is determined depends on the locational technology employed. Using GPS technology measurements accurate to within several meters are typical in open environments. GPS consists of a constellation of 24 earth orbiting satellites four of which are visible to an earth based GPS receiver at any given time. The receiver analyzes radio broadcasts from each of the satellites and using trilateration algorithms computes the longitude latitude and altitude of the receiver s location. A GPS relies on an earth based GPS reference network providing assistance to the GPS receiver reducing acquisition time from minutes to seconds in addition to improving accuracy.

Although GPS based PDE s provide the best accuracy most of the wireless devices in use today are not GPS capable. Radio based locational technologies on the other hand do not require device based PDE s relying instead on network based measurements of electromagnetic signals emitted by the wireless communication device during normal operation. AOA systems for example use triangulation to determine the location of a signal source and require a minimum of two receiving stations. These systems however require installation of directional antennas. TOA and TDOA systems identify position by measuring either time of arrival or time difference of arrival of electromagnetic signals. Radio based technologies may be combined into hybrid PDE s such as the Sigma 5000 TDOA AOA Location System designed by SigmaOne Communications Corporation Woodland Hills Calif. Typical accuracies of radio based PDE s are on the order of several hundred feet.

For purposes of describing features of the present invention the calling party is a user of a telephone . The called party is a user of a wireline telephone and an associated wireless communication device . One embodiment of the present invention is directed to a system and a method for delivering a wireline telephone call to an associated wireless device only when the wireless device is in a different location than the wireline telephone as illustrated in . According to this embodiment the calling party places a call to the wireline telephone of the called party at step who may be a subscriber to the SCD service with GIS integration described by the present invention or may use the service on a pay per usage basis. The SCP as described above may execute a SPA program to determine what customized call features or enhanced services should be implemented for a particular call. Accordingly the SCP interrogates its network database to determine if the SCD service with GIS integration described by the present invention is available to the called party at step . If the SCD service with GIS integration is not available the call is delivered to the wireline device at step .

After the SCP verifies that the called party is a subscriber to the SCD service with GIS integration the AIN may route the call to the MSC . The MSC validates the directory number of the wireless communication device associated with the called party s wireline telephone at step and then transmits a page message over the wireless network at step. . If on the wireless communication device may return a page response to the MSC via the wireless network at step . The page response from the wireless communication device can include an electronic serial number ESN and a mobile identification number MIN associated with the wireless communication device for call processing purposes. If no page response is received it is assumed that the wireless communication device is not on. In this case the system described by the present invention will deliver the call directly to the called party s wireline telephone at step .

In one embodiment the page response from the wireless communication device may further include locational information obtained from a device based PDE such as a GPS or A GPS. This information may include for example the longitude latitude and altitude of the wireless communication device .

In another embodiment the page response transmitted by the wireless communication device may contain no locational information. In this embodiment detection of the page response at the MSC and subsequent processing using network based PDE s can reveal the called party s location.

Following a determination of the called party s wireless device s position at step the results may be transferred from the PDE to the MPC via the MSC . The MPC may be a server retrieving and logging locational information from various PDE s for use by other applications. An example of an MPC is the Ericsson Mobile Positioning System MPS made by Ericsson. A GIS application providing locational services such as the SCD service with GIS integration described by the present invention may then access the locational information contained in the MPC via the LMP . The LMP converts the locational data into formats compatible with other applications. These applications may reside on the SCP or a non SS7 based network such as an IP network for example.

Next the GIS application may compare the location of the called party s wireline telephone to the location of the associated wireless communication device at step . In one embodiment the SCP and the GIS application executing therein acquires the wireline location by querying a database containing directory numbers and associated addresses such as a PSAP database . If the locations are determined to be identical or within a certain vicinity at step such a vicinity can be set to a default or may be user selectable or if the wireless communication device does not return a page response the GIS application will instruct the AIN to route the call directly to the called party s wireline telephone at step . Otherwise the call will be delivered to the associated wireless communication device at step .

It is to be understood that the present description illustrates those aspects of the invention relevant to a clear understanding of the invention. Certain aspects of the invention that would be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art and that therefore would not facilitate a better understanding of the invention have not been presented in order to simplify the present description. Although the present invention has been described in connection with certain embodiments those of ordinary skill in the art will upon considering the foregoing description recognize that many modifications and variations of the invention may be employed. It is intended that all such variations and modifications of the invention be covered by the foregoing description and following claims.

The present invention may also be embodied in the form of instructions stored on a computer readable medium. The instructions stored on a computer readable medium may be executed by a processor.

