---

title: Variable battery refresh charging cycles
abstract: A refresh control system that selectively initiates a refresh charge cycle includes an energy storage device and an electric machine that is operable to charge the energy storage device. A control module monitors a usage period of the energy storage device and determines a bias factor. The control module determines a modified usage period threshold based on a usage period threshold and the bias factor. The control module regulates the electric machine to initiate a refresh charge cycle of the energy storage device when the usage period exceeds the modified usage period threshold.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07570022&OS=07570022&RS=07570022
owner: GM Global Technology Operations, Inc.
number: 07570022
owner_city: Detroit
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050209
---
The present invention relates to energy storage devices and more particularly to on board battery refresh charging.

Energy storage devices ESDs such as batteries are commonly implemented in vehicles to provide electrical power to power various electrical loads. The ESD is discharged as it powers a load. In certain ESDs lead acid batteries in particular sulphates form on the internal components of the ESD. The sulphates decrease the surface area available to the electrolyte and increase internal resistance. More sulphates appear on the internal components with each subsequent discharge cycle.

To reduce the presence of sulphates in the ESD the sulphation process is reversed during a refresh recharge. For example lead sulphate PbSO on the ESD components can be removed through sustained charging of the ESD at a higher than normal voltage. In most battery chemistries the refresh recharge doubles as an equalization charge that corrects for voltage and individual energy variations of the modules in a string of batteries. In a hybrid vehicle that employs an engine ON OFF strategy refresh recharge can be difficult to implement. More specifically the refresh recharge may require the engine to run for an extended period. Regenerative braking may also need to be disabled.

Accordingly the present invention provides a refresh control system to selectively initiate a refresh charge cycle. The refresh control system includes an energy storage device and an electric machine that is operable to charge the energy storage device. A control module monitors a usage period of the energy storage device and determines a bias factor. The control module determines a modified usage period threshold based on a usage period threshold and the bias factor. The control module regulates the electric machine to initiate a refresh charge cycle of the energy storage device when the usage period exceeds the modified usage period threshold.

In other features the bias factor includes a temperature bias factor. The refresh control system further includes a temperature sensor that monitors a temperature of the energy storage device. The temperature bias factor is determined based on the temperature. Alternatively the temperature bias factor is determined from a look up table based on the temperature. The temperature can be an average temperature that is determined over the usage period.

In other features the bias factor includes a depth of discharge DOD bias factor. The refresh control system further includes a current sensor that monitors a current of the energy storage device. The DOD bias factor is determined based on the current. The refresh control system further includes a voltage sensor that monitors a voltage of the energy storage device. The DOD bias factor is determined based on the voltage.

In another feature the control module monitors a rest time of the energy storage device and regulates the electric machine to initiate a refresh charge cycle of the energy storage device when the rest time exceeds a threshold rest time.

In another feature the control module regulates the electric machine to initiate a refresh charge cycle of said energy storage device when the usage period exceeds the modified usage period threshold a state of charge SOC of the energy storage device is above an SOC threshold and a current of the energy storage device is below a current threshold.

In still another feature the refresh control system further includes an engine that selectively drives the electric machine. The control module regulates the electric machine to initiate a refresh charge cycle of the energy storage device when the usage period exceeds the modified usage period threshold and the engine is on.

In yet another feature the usage period includes an amp hour count and the modified usage period threshold includes a modified amp hour threshold.

Further areas of applicability of the present invention will become apparent from the detailed description provided hereinafter. It should be understood that the detailed description and specific examples while indicating the preferred embodiment of the invention are intended for purposes of illustration only and are not intended to limit the scope of the invention.

The following description of the preferred embodiment is merely exemplary in nature and is in no way intended to limit the invention its application or uses. For purposes of clarity the same reference numbers will be used in the drawings to identify similar elements. As used herein the term module refers to an application specific integrated circuit ASIC an electronic circuit a processor shared dedicated or group and memory that execute one or more software or firmware programs a combinational logic circuit and or other suitable components that provide the described functionality.

Referring now to an exemplary hybrid vehicle is schematically illustrated. The hybrid vehicle includes an engine and an electric machine which selectively drive a transmission . More specifically the electric machine supplements the engine to produce drive torque to drive the transmission . In this manner fuel efficiency is increased and emissions are reduced. In one mode the engine drives the electric machine to generate power used to recharge an energy storage device ESD such as a battery. In another mode the electric machine drives the transmission using energy from the ESD .

The engine and the electric machine can be coupled via a belt alternator starter BAS system not shown that includes a belt and pulleys. Alternatively the engine and the electric machine can be coupled via a flywheel alternator starter FAS system not shown wherein the electric machine is operably disposed between the engine and the transmission . It is anticipated that other systems can be implemented to couple the engine and the electric machine including but not limited to a chain or gear system that is implemented between the electric machine and a crankshaft.

The transmission can include but is not limited to a continuously variable transmission CVT a manual transmission an automatic transmission and an automated manual transmission AMT . Drive torque is transferred from the engine to the transmission through a coupling device . The coupling device can include but is not limited to a friction clutch or a torque converter depending upon the type of transmission implemented. In the case of a CVT the coupling device includes a torque converter and a torque converter clutch TCC . The transmission multiplies the drive torque through one of a plurality of gear ratios to drive a vehicle driveline not shown .

A control module regulates operation of the vehicle based on the refresh recharge control system of the present invention. A current sensor generates a current signal that is sent to the control module and a temperature sensor generates a temperature signal that is sent to the control module . A voltage sensor generates a battery voltage signal that is sent to the control module . Although single current temperature and voltage sensors are disclosed herein it is appreciated that multiple current multiple temperature and multiple voltage sensors can be implemented. The control module determines a state of charge SOC of the ESD based on the current and voltage signals. There are several methods that can be implemented to determine the SOC. An exemplary method is disclosed in commonly assigned U.S. Pat. No. 6 646 419 issued on Nov. 11 2003 and entitled State of Charge Algorithm for Lead Acid Battery in a Hybrid Electric Vehicle the disclosure of which is expressly incorporated herein by reference.

Referring now to a refresh recharge of the ESD is initiated based on a temperature bias factor B a depth of discharge DOD bias factor B and a rest time t . tis the length of time that the ESD sits idle e.g. the vehicle is parked for an extended period of time . In general DOD is provided as a percentage that relates to the quantity of charge removed with relative to the capacity of the ESD . In step control calculates a bias factor B based on Band B. In some implementations B is equal to the sum of Band B although it is anticipated that other functions can be used including but not limited to a weighted sum a non linear equation or other modifiers. In step control determines a modified amp hour threshold Ah based on a standard amp hour threshold Ah and B. In some implementations Ahis equal to the difference between Ahand B. Control determines tin step .

In step control determines whether a current amp hour count Ah is greater than Ah. If Ahis greater than Ah control continues in step . If Ahis not greater than Ahcontrol continues in step . In step control initiates the refresh recharge and control ends. In step control determines whether tis greater than a reset time t . If tis greater than t control continues in step . If tis not greater than t control ends.

Referring now to Bis determined based on a temperature of the ESD T . More specifically Bis determined based on a running average temperature of the ESD T . Tis used as an indication of the resting environment in which the ESD is stored. Because the ESD is left at a partial state of charge Bis increased at warmer temperatures such that the refresh charge frequency is increased. In colder environments Bis decreased such that the refresh recharge is executed less frequently. It is anticipated that a filter can be used to weight the temperature data such that more recent temperature has a greater influence on B.

In step control determines whether the ignition is ON. If the ignition is ON control continues in step . If the ignition is not ON control loops back. In step control determines T. Although the temperature sensor generates a signal that can be used to determine T it is anticipated that other methods of determining Tcan be implemented including but not limited to estimating Tbased on environmental conditions e.g. engine temperature . In step control updates T. Control determines Bbased on Tin step and control ends. More specifically Bis determined from a look up table based on T.

Referring now to Bis determined based an accumulated depth of discharge DOD . Bis used to estimate the state of health SOH of the ESD . An initial SOC of the ESD SOC is input and the maximum magnitude DOD is measured within a sample interval. The number of discharges i.e. life a particular ESD can sustain is known and can be plotted as a curve. The curve is used to take the percent depth of discharge DOD and determine the expected amount of life taken away due to the particular discharge. This effect is typically exponential in nature. Therefore the deeper the discharge the more profound the change in life. For example an exemplary ESD that undergoes a full 100 discharge cycle can most likely only sustain 400 cycles. If the exemplary ESD undergoes only a 5 discharge cycle the ESD can sustain 8000 cycles. In determining B the 100 discharge case is used as a limit i.e. 400 cycles . Each discharge cycle is monitored and the larger the discharge becomes the more frequent the refresh charge occurs. If an aggressive charge and discharge profile is placed on the ESD the refresh recharge occurs more frequently.

A DOD state module determines the DOD state. At start up the DOD state is set equal to 1. A comparator receives the output of the DOD state module and a constant State . If the output of the DOD state module and the constant are equal the comparator passes a signal to a starting SOC SOC module which calculates SOC. The SOCmodule also receives SOC as an input. SOC is determined based on an initial DOD DOD e.g. as discussed above. SOCis output to a State success module and a magnitude calculation module . The State success module relays a signal to the DOD state module indicating that SOChas been calculated. The DOD state moves to State upon successful calculation of SOC.

The magnitude calculation module continuously monitors SOC for a deviation from SOCover a period of time. More specifically the magnitude calculation module outputs a maximum deviation D in SOC. Dis determined as a change in SOC from SOCthat is maintained for a threshold period of time. DMAX is forwarded to a switch . When such a deviation occurs the DOD state module sets the DOD state equal to 3. A comparator receives the output of the DOD state module and a constant State . If the output of the DOD state module and the constant are equal i.e. the DOD state is equal to 3 the comparator passes a signal to the switch . The signal induces the switch to pass Das a maximum DOD DOD to a cycle look up module . If a signal is not sent from the comparator to the switch i.e. the DOD state is not equal to 3 the switch forwards a previous DOD cycle factor DOD from a buffer . The cycle look up module determines the expected number of cycles or life that is taken away as a result of the associated DOD. An inverter inverts the cycles to provide DOD which is the incremental reduction in life as a result of the DOD. DODis forwarded to the buffer and a summer discussed in further detail below.

Upon determining DOD the DOD state module sets the DOD state equal to 4. A comparator receives the output of the DOD state module and a constant State . If the output of the DOD state module and the constant are equal i.e. the DOD state is equal to 4 the comparator passes a signal to a switch . The signal induces the switch to pass an accumulated DOD DOD from the summer . If a signal is not sent from the comparator to the switch i.e. the DOD state is not equal to 4 the switch forwards a previous DODfrom a buffer . The summer updates DODby adding DODto the previous DODfrom the buffer . DODis stored in memory and is input to a switch discussed in further detail below.

Upon updating DOD the DOD state module sets the DOD state equal to 5. A comparator receives the output of the DOD state module and a constant State . If the output of the DOD state module and the constant are equal i.e. the DOD state is equal to 5 the comparator passes a signal to the switch . The signal induces the switch to pass the updated DODto a Blook up module . If a signal is not sent from the comparator to the switch i.e. the DOD state is not equal to 5 the switch forwards a previous Bfrom a buffer . The Blook up module determines Bfrom a look up table based on the updated DOD. Control determines AhMOD based on Bas discussed in detail herein.

Upon determining B the DOD state module sets the DOD state equal to 6. A comparator receives the output of the DOD state module and a constant State . If the output of the DOD state module and the constant are equal i.e. the DOD state is equal to 6 the comparator passes a reset signal to the SOCmodule. In this manner control restarts monitoring the SOC for a deviation and the DOD state is again set equal to 1. In general the DOD state is equal to 1 upon initialization or reset. The DOD state is set equal to 2 upon calculation of SOC. The DOD state is set equal to 3 when a deviation occurs in the SOC and remains for a threshold period of time. The DOD state is set equal to 4 upon determining DODbased on D. The DOD state is set equal to 5 once DODhas been updated based on DOD. The DOD state is set equal to 6 after Bis determined based on the updated DOD. Finally the DOD state is set back equal to 1 upon a reset.

Referring now to the steps executed by the refresh control system during the refresh charge will be described in detail. In step control determines whether the engine is ON. If the engine is ON control continues in step . If the engine is not ON control loops back. In step control determines whether the SOC is greater than an SOC threshold SOC . If the SOC is greater than SOC control continues in step . If the SOC is not greater than SOC control loops back. In step control determines whether a charging current I is less than a current threshold I . If Iis not less than Icontrol loops back. If Iis less than I control resets a refresh counter in step . In step control starts the refresh charge.

In step control determines whether Iis equal to zero. If Iis equal to zero control indicates that the refresh has been interrupted in step and loops back to step . In the event that the refresh is interrupted the refresh counter is stored in memory whereby when the refresh is re started the counter already accounts for the refresh time prior to interruption. If Iis not equal to zero control determines whether SOC is less than a low SOC limit SOC in step . If the SOC is less than SOC control indicates that the refresh failed in step and continues in step . If the SOC is not less than SOC control determines whether an SOC counter SOC is greater than an SOC counter threshold SOC in step . If SOCis greater than SOC control indicates that the refresh was successful in step and continues in step . In step control resets Ahand control ends. If SOCis not greater than SOC control continues in step .

In step control determines whether a low current counter I is greater than a low current counter threshold I . If Iis greater than I control continues in step . If Iis not greater than I control continues in step . In step control determines whether the SOC is greater than a high limit SOC . If SOC is greater than SOC control continues in step . If SOC is not greater than SOC control loops back to step .

Referring now to the battery control system can include a Bmodule a Bmodule a B module and a usage module . The Bmodule determines Bbased on the battery voltage V and the battery current I as explained in detail above. The Bmodule determines Bbased on the battery temperature T as explained in detail above. The B module calculates B based on Band B as explained in detail above. The usage module selectively generates a refresh charge command based on I and B. More specifically the usage module monitors Ahbased on I and determines Ahbased on B. The usage module generates the refresh charge command if Ahexceeds Ah.

Those skilled in the art can now appreciate from the foregoing description that the broad teachings of the present invention can be implemented in a variety of forms. Therefore while this invention has been described in connection with particular examples thereof the true scope of the invention should not be so limited since other modifications will become apparent to the skilled practitioner upon a study of the drawings the specification and the following claims.

