---

title: Change speed of voicemail playback depending on context
abstract: A messaging system is provided that includes:


url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07729478&OS=07729478&RS=07729478
owner: Avaya Inc.
number: 07729478
owner_city: Basking Ridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050412
---
Voice messaging systems are in widespread use in businesses of every size around the world. A typical voice messaging system includes a database or other data repository for voice mail messages and a voice messaging server such as Avaya Inc. s Aria Serenade and Intuity Audix products. The voice messaging server controls storage and retrieval of voice messages to from the data repository.

With the advent of text messaging traditional voice messaging systems are being replaced by unified messaging systems. Such systems have the ability to create and respond to multimedia messages with fidelity to the originator from either a telephone or Personal Computer PC laptop. Personal call control further permits realtime control of incoming calls and call rebound with message processing. Examples of unified messaging systems are Avaya Inc. s Unified Messenger and Modular Messaging products. Unified messaging systems commonly reside in a server that attaches to a Private Branch Exchange PBX and converses across a Local Area Network LAN with other messaging servers and clients.

A recurring problem in voice and unified messaging systems is having to play a voice message repeatedly to record important message information such as names street addresses telephone numbers email addresses and the like. Some messaging systems permit a user to manually slow or accelerate the replay speed of a voice message by pressing an actuator or manipulating an icon in a graphical user interface. Such systems however can be frustrating to use as a user may not be able to reduce the speed until a portion of the important message information is already played thereby requiring him or her to replay the message again and fast forward to the missed information.

These and other needs are addressed by the various embodiments and configurations of the present invention. The present invention is generally directed to a messaging system that provides selected information to a subscriber in a convenient format.

 c when the message comprises marked and unmarked information providing the marked information to the subscriber in a manner different from that used to provide the unmarked information. Examples of providing the marked and unmarked information differently include i displaying selectively the marked information to the subscriber in a manner different from that of unmarked information in the message ii altering an audio playback speed of the marked information to the subscriber the playback speed of the marked information being different from a playback speed of unmarked information and or iii audibly playing only one of the marked information and unmarked information to the subscriber.

Marking of the information of interest to the subscriber or important information in a message can be done through voice recognition software together with an expert system that detects and tags the important information. Important information can include a first and or last name a street address a telephone number an email addresses a Uniform Resource Locator URLs price order number article name and any other valuable information.

In example i above the marked information is preferably displayed either alone or together with unmarked information but in a different font or otherwise highlighted to the subscriber relative to the unmarked information. This may be done before during and or after message playback. The display can be made on the subscriber s telephone display a computer or laptop monitor and the like.

In example ii above the marked information is preferably played at a slower speed than the unmarked information to provide the subscriber with time to record the marked information. For example normal unmarked information e.g. hello this is John can be automatically played at normal speed while marked information can be played at slower than normal speed. In other words the speed of the playback depends on the context of the message being played. Because the voice message being played is typically different from the text equivalent of the message containing the marked and unmarked information synchronizing marker identification in the parsed text output with the adjustment of voice message playback speed can be important to assure that playback is slowed only for the correct information.

In example iii above the entire message is generally not played. For example during or after playback of the message the subscriber can press a key to cause the telephone number provided in the message to be selectively replayed to the subscriber.

The present invention can provide enhanced subscriber convenience and time savings because the subscriber no longer needs to replay the entire message to obtain selected or important information. The information is provided to the subscriber differently from less important information so that the subscriber may record the information easily. The subscriber is no longer frustrated by not being able to reduce manually the playback speed before a portion of the important message information is already played thereby requiring him or her to replay the message again and fast forward to the missed information.

As used herein at least one . . . and at least one . . . or one or more of . . . and one or more of . . . or and and or are open ended expressions that are both conjunctive and disjunctive in operation. For example each of the expressions at least one of A B and C at least one of A B or C one or more of A B and C one or more of A B or C and A B and or C means A alone B alone C alone A and B together A and C together B and C together and A B and C together.

The above described embodiments and configurations are neither complete nor exhaustive. As will be appreciated other embodiments of the invention are possible utilizing alone or in combination one or more of the features set forth above or described in detail below.

The invention will be illustrated below in conjunction with an exemplary communication system. Although well suited for use with e.g. a system having an ACD or other similar contact processing switch the invention is not limited to use with any particular type of communication system switch or configuration of system elements. Those skilled in the art will recognize that the disclosed techniques may be used in any communication application in which it is desirable to provide improved contact processing.

The server and switch can be any converged architecture for directing circuit switched and or packet switched customer contacts to one or more communication devices. In a preferred configuration the functionalities of the server and switch are integrated into a common hardware component. Typically the component is a stored program controlled system that conventionally includes interfaces to external communication links a communications switching fabric service circuits e.g. tone detectors and generators etc. memory for storing control programs and data and a processor i.e. a computer for executing the stored control programs to control the interfaces and the fabric and to provide automatic contact distribution functionality. Features provided by the component typically include not only telephony features and intelligent contact routing but also localization collaboration mobility messaging system management attendant features networking and application programming interfaces. The server typically includes a network interface card not shown to provide services to the serviced telecommunication devices.

Illustratively the component can be the subscriber premises equipment disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 192 122 6 173 053 6 163 607 5 982 873 5 905 793 5 828 747 and 5 206 903 all of which are incorporated herein by this reference Avaya Inc. s Definity Private Branch Exchange PBX based ACD system Avaya Inc. s IP600 LAN based ACD system or an S8100 S8300 S8500 S8700 or S8710 media server running Avaya Inc. s Communication Manager voice application software with call processing capabilities and contact center functions. Other types of known switches and servers are well known in the art and therefore not described in detail herein.

The gateway is an electronic signal repeater and protocol converter that provides a telephone exchange service supporting the connection of various types of telephones such as Digital Control Processor or DCP phones analog phones and IP telephones and outside packet switched and or circuit switched telephone lines such as analog trunks ISDN lines E1 T1 voice trunks and WAN routing IP trunks . Telephone lines are connected to the gateway via ports and media modules on the chassis with different media modules providing access ports for different types of telephones and lines. Voice and signaling data between packet switched and circuit switched protocols is effected by the media modules converting the voice path to a TDM bus inside the gateway. An engine such as a Voice Over IP or VoIP engine converts the voice path from the TDM bus to a compressed or uncompressed and packetized VoIP typically on an Ethernet connection. Each gateway commonly includes a number of port and trunk circuit packs for performing selected telecommunications functions such as DTMF tone detection tone generation playing audio music and or voice announcements traffic shaping and call admission control a media processor and one or more IP server interfaces. The gateway may perform policy based routing which uses a policy list structure to implement a routing scheme based on traffic source destination type and other characteristics. Common applications include separate routing for voice and data traffic routing traffic originating from different sets of users through different Internet connections or Internet Service Providers or ISP s and defining backup routes for defined classes of traffic. Examples of suitable gateways include Avaya Inc. s SCC1 MCC1 CMC G350 G600 G650 and G700 

The first telecommunication devices . . . N are packet switched and can include for example IP hardphones such as the Avaya Inc. s 4600 Series IP Phones IP softphones such as Avaya Inc. s IP Softphone Personal Digital Assistants or PDAs Personal Computers or PCs laptops packet based H.320 video phones and conferencing units packet based voice messaging and response units and packet based traditional computer telephony adjuncts.

The second telecommunication devices . . . M are circuit switched. Each of the telecommunication devices . . . M corresponds to one of a set of internal extensions Ext . . . ExtM respectively. These extensions are referred to herein as internal in that they are extensions within the premises that are directly serviced by the switch. More particularly these extensions correspond to conventional telecommunication device endpoints serviced by the switch server and the switch server can direct incoming contacts to and receive outgoing contacts from these extensions in a conventional manner. The second telecommunication devices can include for example wired and wireless telephones PDAs H.320 video phones and conferencing units voice messaging and response units and traditional computer telephony adjuncts.

It should be noted that the invention does not require any particular type of information transport medium between switch or server and first and second telecommunication devices i.e. the invention may be implemented with any desired type of transport medium as well as combinations of different types of transport medium.

The packet switched network can be any data and or distributed processing network such as the Internet. The network typically includes proxies not shown registrars not shown and routers not shown for managing packet flows.

The packet switched network is in communication with an external first telecommunication device via a gateway and the circuit switched network with an external second telecommunication device . These telecommunication devices are referred to as external in that they are not directly supported as telecommunication device endpoints by the switch or server. The telecommunication devices and are an example of devices more generally referred to herein as external endpoints. 

In a preferred configuration the server network and first telecommunication devices are Session Initiation Protocol or SIP compatible and can include interfaces for various other protocols such as the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol or LDAP H.248 H.323 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol or SMTP IMAP4 ISDN E1 T1 and analog line or trunk.

It should be emphasized that the configuration of the switch server user telecommunication devices and other elements as shown in is for purposes of illustration only and should not be construed as limiting the invention to any particular arrangement of elements.

Referring to one possible configuration of the messaging server is depicted. The server in this implementation includes a processor not shown a memory not shown one or more interfaces to other devices such as switch server and communication devices and an operating system and messaging server software modules to perform various messaging functions such as message storage and retrieval. The processor may be implemented as a central processing unit CPU microprocessor application specific integrated circuit ASIC or other type of digital data processor as well as various portions or combinations of such elements. The memory may be a random access memory RAM a read only memory ROM or combinations of these and other types of electronic memory devices.

Included within the memory are a number of software modules providing the functionality of the present invention. The modules include a speech to text engine for converting a voice message into a text equivalent a parsing engine for parsing and tagging text messages such as email messages instant messages chat messages SMS or MMS messages and the like and text equivalents into parsed and tagged flagged text output a message interface for communicating with other components to receive and provide voice and text messages and a message retrieval agent for configuring message retrieval activities based on the presence of tags flags and optionally the types of tags flags present in the parsed text output .

The parsing engine divides the message text into components for analysis according to a set of parsing or grammar rules. As will be appreciated parsing is divided into lexical analysis and semantic parsing. Lexical analysis divides strings into components called tokens based on punctuation and other keys. Semantic parsing uses grammar rules to define the meaning of the string once it s been broken down into individual components.

The grammar rules vary depending on the type of message information to be tagged and provided selectively to the subscriber. For example street addresses telephone numbers email addresses Uniform Resource Locators URLs price order number article name and other valuable information have specific unique patterns that may be described readily by grammar rules. Street addresses typically are a combination of numbers and letters and can include identifiable combinations of letters such as state and city names. Telephone numbers typically are a combination of seven 538 2222 ten 303 538 2222 and eleven 1 303 538 2222 digits for national calls and the sequence international code optional country code area code and local telephone number for international calls. UUCP or domain based email addresses typically are a combination of a handle the word at or symbol followed by the domain name e.g. HARRYSMITH MCIMAIL.COM . URLs is a string expression following the standard convention method host spec port path file misc. An example URL is http www.harrysmith.com . Names though not following specific patterns can include common first names e.g. Bill Mary etc. and or last names e.g. Jones Smith etc. that may be identified by the parser as name indicators.

The flags a specific bit pattern that indicates that a condition has been met or tags code that is inserted into a file string or data structure indicating how something is to be interpreted may indicate the mere presence of important information to the subscriber or the presence and type of important information in the parsed text output. For example a first type of flag or tag can indicate the presence of a name a second type of flag or tag the presence of an address a third type of flag or tag a telephone number or even different types of telephone numbers local or long distance national numbers or international number a fourth type of flag or tag an email address a fifth type of flag or tag a URL and the like. The different types of flag or tags are of course different sequences of bits. This configuration permits the server to request the subscriber during message retrieval whether or not a contact such as a call or set up by the server switch should be initiated with the flagged tagged electronic address. This would not require the subscriber to key in or otherwise input the electronic address.

During message retrieval the message retrieval agent identifies the flagged tagged information and alters message retrieval depending on subscriber preferences. For example the agent during audio playback can during playback of the entire message string play the information at a slower speed than other unflagged untagged information which is played at a normal or faster than normal speed playback only the flagged tagged information to the subscriber display the flagged tagged information on the subscriber s graphical user display GUI in a font that is different than the remaining text of the message display selectively the flagged tagged information on the subscriber s GUI without any of the unflagged untagged information being displayed to the subscriber or any combination of the foregoing options.

In step a subscriber records a voice message and the speech to text engine creates a text equivalent of the message. The text equivalent may be stored in lieu of or in addition to the voice message.

In step the parsing engine receives and parses the text equivalent to search for identify and flag tag collectively referred to as mark important information. During parsing the parsed engine determines in decision diamond whether markable information has been found. If so the information is marked in step . If not the engine proceeds to step . If information is located during parsing the parsed text output includes not only the text equivalent of the voiced words but also the marks identifying markable information. If no information is located during parsing the parsed text output includes only the text equivalent of the voiced words.

In step the parsed text output is stored and linked with the voice message recording. Alternatively the parsed text output is stored only when it contains marked information. If no marked information is present a flag may be stored instead at the linked location indicating the absence of marked information.

In step the agent in response to a subscriber command starts audio playback of a text message through a text to speech engine or voice message to the subscriber through the subscriber s communication device or .

In decision diamond the agent determines whether or not the parsed text output includes marked information. This decision diamond is performed synchronously with playback of the corresponding text or voice message. Alternatively the parsed text output itself may be used with a text to speech engine not shown for audio playback.

When the parsed text output corresponding to the message being played back to the subscriber does not include marked information the agent proceeds to step and plays the message back to the subscriber at normal speed.

When the parsed text output corresponding to the message being played back to the subscriber includes marked information the agent proceeds to step and slows down the playback speed and proceeds to decision diamond . In decision diamond the agent determines whether the end marker delineating the marked information has been reached. If so the agent proceeds to step . If not the agent proceeds to decision diamond in which the agent determines whether or not the subscriber clicked the replay button. When the replay button is clicked the agent in step rewinds to the beginning marker and returns to step . When the replay button is not clicked the agent returns to repeats decision diamond .

After step the agent proceeds to decision diamond . In this decision diamond the agent determines whether or not the end of the message being played back has been reached. If not the agent returns to and repeats decision diamond . If so the agent proceeds to decision diamond .

In decision diamond the agent determines whether or not the subscriber has clicked the button to replay only the marked information. If not the agent proceeds to step and terminates the playback operation. If so the agent proceeds to step and plays back and or displays only the marked information and not the unmarked information .

A number of variations and modifications of the invention can be used. It would be possible to provide for some features of the invention without providing others.

For example in one alternative embodiment the messaging server can be a software controlled system including a processing unit CPU microprocessor or other type of digital data processor executing software or an Application Specific Integrated

Circuit ASIC as well as various portions or combinations of such elements. The memory may be a random access memory RAM a read only memory ROM or combinations of these and other types of electronic memory devices.

In another alternative embodiment the parsing engine and or message retrieval agent can be placed in different components. For example either the engine or agent can be in a communication device or the switch or the server . Their functions may be distributed among at least one of a communication device or the switch the server and the messaging server .

In yet another embodiment the speech to text engine during word recognition marks first and or last names for use by the parsing engine. As will be appreciated most first names and many last names are in common use. This may be reflected in the word dictionary of the speech to text engine.

In yet another embodiment unimportant information can be marked while important information is unmarked. In other words unimportant information is delineated by beginning and end markers but important information is not. In this configuration the playback speed of the marked information can be accelerated relative to the playback speed of the unmarked information. Additionally the unmarked information is treated as the marked information and vice versa in the above embodiments.

The present invention in various embodiments includes components methods processes systems and or apparatus substantially as depicted and described herein including various embodiments subcombinations and subsets thereof. Those of skill in the art will understand how to make and use the present invention after understanding the present disclosure. The present invention in various embodiments includes providing devices and processes in the absence of items not depicted and or described herein or in various embodiments hereof including in the absence of such items as may have been used in previous devices or processes e.g. for improving performance achieving ease and or reducing cost of implementation.

The foregoing discussion of the invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. The foregoing is not intended to limit the invention to the form or forms disclosed herein. In the foregoing Detailed Description for example various features of the invention are grouped together in one or more embodiments for the purpose of streamlining the disclosure. This method of disclosure is not to be interpreted as reflecting an intention that the claimed invention requires more features than are expressly recited in each claim. Rather as the following claims reflect inventive aspects lie in less than all features of a single foregoing disclosed embodiment. Thus the following claims are hereby incorporated into this Detailed Description with each claim standing on its own as a separate preferred embodiment of the invention.

Moreover though the description of the invention has included description of one or more embodiments and certain variations and modifications other variations and modifications are within the scope of the invention e.g. as may be within the skill and knowledge of those in the art after understanding the present disclosure. It is intended to obtain rights which include alternative embodiments to the extent permitted including alternate interchangeable and or equivalent structures functions ranges or steps to those claimed whether or not such alternate interchangeable and or equivalent structures functions ranges or steps are disclosed herein and without intending to publicly dedicate any patentable subject matter.

