---

title: Voice-capable system and method for user-directed network interaction monitoring for authentication and confidentiality designation
abstract: A system and method for use with a voice-capable system, includes but is not limited to a method including receiving a request from a user computationally networked to the voice-capable system, the request to designate a network interaction as a monitored network interaction using the security interface, and receiving one or more user-defined designations during the monitored network interaction, the one or more user-defined designations to designate one or more data as requiring the voice-capable system to perform one or more operations with respect to the one or more data.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07937745&OS=07937745&RS=07937745
owner: The Invention Science Fund, I, LLC
number: 07937745
owner_city: Bellevue
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051031
---
In one aspect a method for use with a voice capable system the voice capable system including a security interface for authenticating a user to the voice capable system includes but is not limited to receiving a request from a user computationally networked to the voice capable system the request to designate a network interaction as a monitored network interaction using the security interface and receiving one or more user defined designations during the monitored network interaction the one or more user defined designations to designate one or more data as requiring the voice capable system to perform one or more operations with respect to the one or more data. In addition to the foregoing other method aspects are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present application.

In another aspect a computing system includes but is not limited to a secure user interface application and an operating system executing on the computing system including an application programming interface API to facilitate communication between the secure user interface application and a voice capable system wherein the API includes a data structure to pass logged data identified by a user in a user initiated monitored network interaction and an operational data structure to enable a user to store the logged data identified by the user designating data via a utility associated with the secure user interface application. In addition to the foregoing other computing system aspects are described in the claims drawing and text forming a part of the present application.

In another aspect a computer program product includes but is not limited to a signal bearing medium bearing at least one of one or more instructions for receiving a request from a user computationally networked to the voice capable system the request to designate a network interaction as a monitored network interaction using the security interface and one or more instructions for receiving one or more user defined designations during the monitored network interaction the one or more user defined designations to designate one or more data as requiring the voice capable system to perform one or more operations with respect to the one or more data. In addition to the foregoing other computer program product aspects are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present application.

In one or more various aspects related systems include but are not limited to circuitry and or programming for effecting the herein referenced method aspects the circuitry and or programming can be virtually any combination of hardware software and or firmware configured to affect the herein referenced method aspects depending upon the design choices of the system designer. In addition to the foregoing other system aspects are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present application.

In one aspect a voice capable system includes but is not limited to a processor an audio input and or output circuitry coupled to the processor a memory coupled to the processor and an access module for receiving a request from a user computationally networked to the voice capable system the request to designate a network interaction as a monitored network interaction using the security interface coupled to the memory a network interaction monitoring module for receiving one or more user defined designations during the monitored network interaction the one or more user defined designations to designate one or more data as requiring the voice capable system to perform one or more operations with respect to the one or more data coupled to the memory. In addition to the foregoing other voice capable system aspects are described in the claims drawings and text forming a part of the present application.

In addition to the foregoing various other method system and or computer program product aspects are set forth and described in the text e.g. claims and or detailed description and or drawings of the present application.

The foregoing is a summary and thus contains by necessity simplifications generalizations and omissions of detail consequently those skilled in the art will appreciate that the summary is illustrative only and is NOT intended to be in any way limiting. Other aspects features and advantages of the devices and or processes and or other subject described herein will become apparent in the text set forth herein.

In the description that follows the subject matter of the application will be described with reference to acts and symbolic representations of operations that are performed by one or more computers unless indicated otherwise. As such it will be understood that such acts and operations which are at times referred to as being computer executed include the manipulation by the processing unit of the computer of electrical signals representing data in a structured form. This manipulation transforms the data or maintains it at locations in the memory system of the computer which reconfigures or otherwise alters the operation of the computer in a manner well understood by those skilled in the art. The data structures where data is maintained are physical locations of the memory that have particular properties defined by the format of the data. However although the subject matter of the application is being described in the foregoing context it is not meant to be limiting as those of skill in the art will appreciate that some of the acts and operations described hereinafter can also be implemented in hardware software and or firmware and or some combination thereof.

According to William Crossman Founder Director of CompSpeak 2050 Institute for the Study of Talking Computers and Oral Cultures VIVOs e.g. voice in voice out computers that may operate using visual displays may make written language obsolete. VIVOs potentially can perform the functions of written language without requiring people to learn to read and write and therefore enable illiterate people using VIVOs to access the stored information.

Opening the doors for potentially billions of people to electronically stored data presents a host of issues related to security and or authentication. More particularly according to Crossman billions of illiterate people will be able to access data previously available only to the computer literate. The increase in the number of people with access to the Internet will increase the need for security systems that address the enhanced security risk. Moreover VIVO technology will increase the number of security systems reliant on voice commands and subject users to security risks present with voice related systems.

To combat the security risk inherent in a VIVO system embodiments herein present authentication and or security solutions practical for voice related security.

With reference to depicted is an exemplary computing system for implementing embodiments. includes a computer which could be a VIVO capable computer including a processor memory and one or more drives . The drives and their associated computer storage media provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . Drives can include an operating system application programs program modules such as security module and program data . Computer further includes user input devices through which a user may enter commands and data. Input devices can include an electronic digitizer a microphone a keyboard and pointing device commonly referred to as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices may include a joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. In one or more embodiments user input devices are VIVO enabling devices enabling a user to provide voice activated responses and or questions.

These and other input devices can be connected to processor through a user input interface that is coupled to a system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . Computers such as computer may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers which may be connected through an output peripheral interface or the like. More particularly output devices can include VIVO enabling devices capable of providing voice output in response to voice input.

Computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer. The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and can include many or all of the elements described above relative to computer . Networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet. For example in the subject matter of the present application computer may comprise the source machine from which data is being migrated and the remote computer may comprise the destination machine. Note however that source and destination machines need not be connected by a network or any other means but instead data may be migrated via any media capable of being written by the source platform and read by the destination platform or platforms. When used in a LAN or WLAN networking environment computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter. When used in a WAN networking environment computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN to environments such as the Internet. It will be appreciated that other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

According to one embodiment computer is connected in a networking environment such that the processor and or security module determine whether incoming data follows a secure protocol. The incoming data can be from a VIVO communication device or from another data source. The secure protocol can be code stored in memory . For example processor can determine whether an incoming call is from a VIVO determine that a secure protocol is necessary and apply an appropriate authentication.

Referring now to illustrated is an exemplary block diagram of a system capable of being operable with VIVO computer systems and interacting with a VIVO type computer system. System is shown including network controller a network and one or more communication devices and . Communication devices and may include telephones wireless telephones cellular telephones personal digital assistants computer terminals or any other devices that are capable of sending and receiving data. As described below network controller and security module can optionally be disposed within a communication device . For example the communication device could be a cellular or mobile telephone with capabilities to authenticate using a VIVO system.

Network controller is connected to network . Network controller may be located at a base station a service center or any other location on network . Network may include any type of network that is capable of sending and receiving communication signals including VIVO type signals. For example network may include a data network such as the Internet an intranet a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN a cable network and other like communication systems. Network may also include a telecommunications network such as a local telephone network long distance telephone network cellular telephone network satellite communications network cable television network and other like communications systems that interact with computer systems. Network may include more than one network and may include a plurality of different types of networks. Thus network may include a plurality of data networks a plurality of telecommunications networks and a combination of data and telecommunications networks and other like communication systems.

In operation one of the communication devices or may attempt a communication with a receiving communication device. The communication can be routed through network and network controller to the receiving communication device. For example a call originator communication device may attempt a call to a call recipient communication device . In an embodiment controller is a VIVO enabled controller such that an audible format may be a speech format. According to an embodiment controller can include a security module that can poll the caller and a call recipient communication device during call setup to pose authentication questions to secure a connection. For example a call could be to a bank or other recipient with sensitive data requiring security.

Controller can alter the format of the call by performing speech to text conversion on the call when controller determines the format of the call requires a format change. Controller can additionally alter the format of the call by performing text to speech conversion on the call when controller determines the format of the call requires a format change. Controller can then send the call in an appropriate format to the call recipient . In one embodiment controller is a VIVO enabled controller that alters speech to text or speech to computer code in accordance with the requirements of a VIVO.

Processor can be configured to control the functions of communication device . Communication device can send and receive signals across network using a transceiver coupled to antenna . Alternatively communication device can be a device relying on twisted pair technology and not utilize transceiver .

According to an embodiment a user can use either the user interface for input and output of information to and from communication device or use input and output using the audio input and output circuitry . Data received by communication device can be displayed on display and or provided audibly through audio input and output circuitry . Communication device can operate as a VIVO when operated in a fully audible format. For example VIVO applications can be stored on memory and processed by processor .

In one embodiment either or both computer and communication device operate as VIVOs that are capable of implementing a secure protocol for incoming and or outgoing audible data and or speech. According to one embodiment the processor and or data protection module can determine whether an incoming call follows a secure protocol. The secure protocol can be code stored in memory . For example processor can determine an incoming call is from a VIVO determine that a secure protocol is necessary and apply an appropriate authentication. Conversely processor and or data protection module can determine that an outgoing call should follow a secure protocol and implement the secure protocol.

The secure protocol in one embodiment implements an audible question and answer authentication for one or both of incoming and outgoing data when an auditory format is detected. For example if computer or communication device is used to communicate with a bank the bank could implement a secure protocol by operating a computer with a security module or a communication device with a security module. Likewise the bank could operate via a secure network such as a network described in and implement a secure protocol via network controller implementing a security protocol via data protection module .

In one embodiment the security module is configured to operate with a processor e.g. in either computer communication device or in a network controller to implement embodiments. According to an embodiment data protection module is configured with modules for implementing embodiments disclosed herein. More particularly data protection module can be configured with access module which can be configured for accessing by the voice capable system of one or more entities computationally networked to the voice capable system. The entities computationally networked to the voice capable system can be entities with different security requirements and required authentications. For example an entity computationally networked to the voice capable system can be within a same computational network such as a local area network LAN or the like. Conversely an entity computationally networked can be networked through an Internet connection but require firewall access or other security measures to connect.

Processor includes both data protection module and security interface module . According to an embodiment security interface module is configured to enable modules to interface with computationally networked entities and collect user directed network interactions.

More particularly the security module could include an access module configured for receiving a request from a user computationally networked to the voice capable system the request to designate a network interaction as a monitored network interaction using the security interface . The request could be received from a user using a cell phone that is VIVO enabled or from another source. For example a cellular or mobile phone can include or be included within a computing device with VIVO enabling software or the like.

Data protection module is illustrated further including a network interaction monitoring module for receiving one or more user defined designations during the monitored network interaction the one or more user defined designations to designate one or more data as requiring the voice capable system to perform one or more operations with respect to the one or more data. Thus for example after a user accesses the VIVO system the VIVO system can receive user defined designations that identify data during a monitored network interaction. The data identified can include monitored interactions between a user and an institution web site or other network capable entity from which the user can identify data for purposes of further operations to be performed with respect to the identified data. In one embodiment data protection module is located on the user s network. For example the data protection module can be located on the user s cellular telephone computer or the like such that all the data identified is saved on a data store secured by the user. In other embodiments data protection module is located on a VIVO system outside the user s control such as a VIVO enabled entity that can store the data identified by the user.

Referring now to B and C an exemplary flow diagram illustrates the operation of the processor and or data protection module and or network controller according to an embodiment. One of skill in the art with the benefit of the present disclosure will appreciate that act s can be taken by data protection module network controller processor and or security module . The acts are generally referred to as being taken by a security processor.

Block provides for receiving a request from a user computationally networked to the voice capable system the request to designate a network interaction as a monitored network interaction using the security interface.

Depicted within block is optional block which provides for receiving an identifier from the user the identifier identifying the user and enabling the security interface to log the monitored network interaction. More particularly the voice capable system can enable a user to log a monitored network interaction by linking a user with an identifier. The identifier can provide a link to monitored data for later operations to be performed.

Block provides for receiving one or more user defined designations during the monitored network interaction the one or more user defined designations to designate one or more data as requiring the voice capable system to perform one or more operations with respect to the one or more data. The received user defined designation can include highlighted or the like interactions that could be used in an authentication or for use in determining whether the data designated by the user requires more attention.

Depicted within block is optional block which provides for receiving the one or more user defined designations as one or more designations of facts uniquely associated with the user to develop one or more questions for authenticating the user in an authentication session. In one embodiment the system including data protection module operates to use the designation of facts uniquely associated with the user to create authentication questions that are likely to be known to the user since the user controlled the choice of questions.

Block further includes optional block which provides for receiving one or more designations of computationally networked sources of data concerning the user the designations identifying one or more user preferred sources of data for authentication by the voice capable system. In an embodiment rather than facts uniquely associated with the user the user can designate sources of data where information likely to be known to the user is present.

Block further includes optional block . Depicted within optional block are optional blocks and . Block provides for retrieving one or more logged data via the security interface the one or more logged data including facts uniquely associated with the user and identified by the user. Block provides for storing the one or more logged data in a database. For example the logged data can be retrieved via user interface shown in and passed to security interface module . The logged data can then be stored in memory .

Block depicts optional block which provides for retrieving the one or more logged data via an application programming interface including a data structure configured to hold the logged data the application programming interface operable on an application running the security interface. For example in an embodiment user interface or security interface module could include an application programming interface API . The API could be configured to include a data structure to hold the data identified by the user as requiring additional operations. In the embodiment the API could be operable on an interface application or the like. For example the user interface could be configured to include an application allowing for input output designations. An API storing logged data can be operable with such an application to hold logged data in a data structure.

Block further depicts optional block which provides for retrieving the logged data from a data store the data store coupled to receive the logged data from a utility of the security interface the utility including one or more of a drag and drop utility a designation utility and or a VIVO enabled application. For example in an embodiment the drag and drop utility can cause an application and or an API to activate upon receiving the data selected by the user. For purposes of embodiments disclosed herein a drag and drop utility includes any utility enabling a user to designate and or select data and signify that further operations should be performed on the data. A drag and drop utility can include an activation of an application API or other operation mode that connects the data to an outside source for further operations. A drag and drop utility can also include an application included with an interface by which a user views data selected or designated. For example in one embodiment a drag and drop utility can include an application that operates within a web browser. The method by which the drag and drop utility enables a user to designate data for further operations can include highlighting the data and clicking on an icon associated with the drag and drop utility highlighting the data and using a voice command in a VIVO enabled system such as stating a key combination or the like. The drag and drop utility can also be fully VIVO enabled by using specialized words to indicate data for further operations. For example the VIVO enabled system can incorporate a mode by which the drag and drop utility is operable such that data can be designated efficiently.

Block depicts optional blocks and which provide that the storing the one or more logged data in a database can further include designating the logged data as facts uniquely associated by the user in block . Block depicts that the storing the one or more logged data in a database can further include assigning a date to the logged data.

Block further depicts optional blocks and which provide that the retrieving one or more logged data via the security interface the one or more logged data including facts uniquely associated with the user and identified by the user can include in block receiving an indicator that the monitored network interaction has ended and block provides for determining whether the security interface received the one or more logged data. Thus for example a security interface could have a monitored interaction wherein a user could choose to identify facts but the user can also determine that no facts appropriate for further operations could be identified during the monitored interaction.

Block further depicts optional block which provides for receiving one or more user defined designations during the monitored network interaction the one or more user defined designations to enable the voice capable system to mark the one or more user defined designations as identifying data requiring that the one or more operations include confidential and or proprietary marking. In an embodiment an associated correct answer could be collected to be used in future authentication sessions with the user to provide an additional layer of security.

Depicted within optional block is optional block which provides for receiving the one or more user defined designations as one or more of a file an email a directory and or a selection of data.

Also depicted within optional block is optional block which provides for receiving the one or more user defined designations via a utility the utility including one or more of a drag and drop utility a designation utility and or a VIVO enabled application operating with the voice capable system to mark the one or more user defined designations and identify the data requiring that the one or more operations include confidential and or proprietary marking.

Block provides for performing the one or more operations with respect to the one or more data the one or more operations including scanning one or more of data identified via the user defined designations for confidential material content checking facts unique to the user for use in an authentication with the user for security purposes and or data identified via the user defined designations for purposes of cross correlating the one or more data with predetermined data. For example the one or more operations could be performed by a bank or other secure institution that would perform scanning of the data. Thus a user that designates data as requiring operations could be designating data as requiring scanning. For example if a user receives an email from a source unknown to the user the user could designate the data including the email as requiring scanning for viruses or other malicious content. Alternatively the user could identify data as requiring operations to include any data designated for use in developing an authentication question and answer session.

Referring now to computing system is illustrated to show that in an embodiment computing system can include a secure user interface application and operating system as an operating system executing on the computing system including an application programming interface API to facilitate communication between the secure user interface application and a voice capable system that is configured to implement embodiments.

According to an embodiment the operating system can include an application programming interface API with at least two data structures. One data structure is depicted as data structure and can be configured as a data structure to pass logged data identified by a user in a user initiated monitored network interaction. Another data structure is depicted as data structure and can be configured as an operational data structure to enable a user to store the logged data identified by the user designating data via a utility associated with the secure user interface application. For example the utility can include a drag and drop utility a designation utility and or a VIVO enabled application.

Data structure can be configured as data structure to pass logged data identified by a user in a user initiated monitored network interaction that further includes one or more logged data identifying one or more network sources of facts relevant to authentication of the user. Data structure can further include one or more logged data identified by the user as proprietary information.

The secure user interface application can be configured as a secure user interface application running as a web page. Thus for example a user can operate the application through a web page and implement the designations of data by dragging and dropping data onto a bucket or the like that is on the web page application. In another embodiment the secure user interface application can be configured as a secure user interface application for an entity requiring security the entity including one or more of a financial institution a military institution a government institution a proprietary information repository or a personal information repository. For example a personal information repository could include employer database configured to hold data of an employee the data of the employee for purposes of authentication.

Marking module can be configured as a marking module configured to mark the one or more logged data identified by the user as requiring additional operations. More particularly in one embodiment marking module includes a marking utility configured to designate the one or more logged data identified by the user as confidential with respect to firewall penetration.

Those with skill in the computing arts will recognize that the disclosed embodiments have relevance to a wide variety of applications and architectures in addition to those described above. In addition the functionality of the subject matter of the present application can be implemented in software hardware or a combination of software and hardware. The hardware portion can be implemented using specialized logic the software portion can be stored in a memory or recording medium and executed by a suitable instruction execution system such as a microprocessor.

While the subject matter of the application has been shown and described with reference to particular embodiments thereof it will be understood by those skilled in the art that the foregoing and other changes in form and detail may be made therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the subject matter of the application including but not limited to additional less or modified elements and or additional less or modified blocks performed in the same or a different order.

Those having skill in the art will recognize that the state of the art has progressed to the point where there is little distinction left between hardware and software implementations of aspects of systems the use of hardware or software is generally but not always in that in certain contexts the choice between hardware and software can become significant a design choice representing cost vs. efficiency tradeoffs. Those having skill in the art will appreciate that there are various vehicles by which processes and or systems and or other technologies described herein can be effected e.g. hardware software and or firmware and that the preferred vehicle will vary with the context in which the processes and or systems and or other technologies are deployed. For example if an implementer determines that speed and accuracy are paramount the implementer may opt for a mainly hardware and or firmware vehicle alternatively if flexibility is paramount the implementer may opt for a mainly software implementation or yet again alternatively the implementer may opt for some combination of hardware software and or firmware. Hence there are several possible vehicles by which the processes and or devices and or other technologies described herein may be effected none of which is inherently superior to the other in that any vehicle to be utilized is a choice dependent upon the context in which the vehicle will be deployed and the specific concerns e.g. speed flexibility or predictability of the implementer any of which may vary. Those skilled in the art will recognize that optical aspects of implementations will typically employ optically oriented hardware software and or firmware.

The foregoing detailed description has set forth various embodiments of the devices and or processes via the use of block diagrams flowcharts and or examples. Insofar as such block diagrams flowcharts and or examples contain one or more functions and or operations it will be understood by those within the art that each function and or operation within such block diagrams flowcharts or examples can be implemented individually and or collectively by a wide range of hardware software firmware or virtually any combination thereof. In one embodiment several portions of the subject matter described herein may be implemented via Application Specific Integrated Circuits ASICs Field Programmable Gate Arrays FPGAs digital signal processors DSPs or other integrated formats. However those skilled in the art will recognize that some aspects of the embodiments disclosed herein in whole or in part can be equivalently implemented in integrated circuits as one or more computer programs running on one or more computers e.g. as one or more programs running on one or more computer systems as one or more programs running on one or more processors e.g. as one or more programs running on one or more microprocessors as firmware or as virtually any combination thereof and that designing the circuitry and or writing the code for the software and or firmware would be well within the skill of one of skill in the art in light of this disclosure. In addition those skilled in the art will appreciate that the mechanisms of the subject matter described herein are capable of being distributed as a program product in a variety of forms and that an illustrative embodiment of the subject matter described herein applies regardless of the particular type of signal bearing medium used to actually carry out the distribution. Examples of a signal bearing medium include but are not limited to the following a recordable type medium such as a floppy disk a hard disk drive a Compact Disc CD a Digital Video Disk DVD a digital tape a computer memory etc. and a transmission type medium such as a digital and or an analog communication medium e.g. a fiber optic cable a waveguide a wired communications link a wireless communication link etc. 

The herein described subject matter sometimes illustrates different components contained within or connected with different other components. It is to be understood that such depicted architectures are merely exemplary and that in fact many other architectures can be implemented which achieve the same functionality. In a conceptual sense any arrangement of components to achieve the same functionality is effectively associated such that the desired functionality is achieved. Hence any two components herein combined to achieve a particular functionality can be seen as associated with each other such that the desired functionality is achieved irrespective of architectures or intermedial components. Likewise any two components so associated can also be viewed as being operably connected or operably coupled to each other to achieve the desired functionality and any two components capable of being so associated can also be viewed as being operably couplable to each other to achieve the desired functionality. Specific examples of operably couplable include but are not limited to physically mateable and or physically interacting components and or wirelessly interactable and or wirelessly interacting components and or logically interacting and or logically interactable components.

Those skilled in the art will recognize that it is common within the art to implement devices and or processes and or systems in the fashion s set forth herein and thereafter use engineering and or business practices to integrate such implemented devices and or processes and or systems into more comprehensive devices and or processes and or systems. That is at least a portion of the devices and or processes and or systems described herein can be integrated into comprehensive devices and or processes and or systems via a reasonable amount of experimentation. Those having skill in the art will recognize that examples of such comprehensive devices and or processes and or systems might include as appropriate to context and application all or part of devices and or processes and or systems of a an air conveyance e.g. an airplane rocket hovercraft helicopter etc. b a ground conveyance e.g. a car truck locomotive tank armored personnel carrier etc. c a building e.g. a home warehouse office etc. d an appliance e.g. a refrigerator a washing machine a dryer etc. e a communications system e.g. a networked system a telephone system a Voice over IP system etc. f a business entity e.g. an Internet Service Provider ISP entity such as Comcast Cable Quest Southwestern Bell etc. or g a wired wireless services entity such as Sprint Cingular Nextel etc. etc.

While particular aspects of the present subject matter described herein have been shown and described it will be apparent to those skilled in the art that based upon the teachings herein changes and modifications may be made without departing from the subject matter described herein and its broader aspects and therefore the appended claims are to encompass within their scope all such changes and modifications as are within the true spirit and scope of the subject matter described herein. Furthermore it is to be understood that the invention is defined by the appended claims. It will be understood by those within the art that in general terms used herein and especially in the appended claims e.g. bodies of the appended claims are generally intended as open terms e.g. the term including should be interpreted as including but not limited to the term having should be interpreted as having at least the term includes should be interpreted as includes but is not limited to etc. . It will be further understood by those within the art that if a specific number of an introduced claim recitation is intended such an intent will be explicitly recited in the claim and in the absence of such recitation no such intent is present. For example as an aid to understanding the following appended claims may contain usage of the introductory phrases at least one and one or more to introduce claim recitations. However the use of such phrases should not be construed to imply that the introduction of a claim recitation by the indefinite articles a or an limits any particular claim containing such introduced claim recitation to inventions containing only one such recitation even when the same claim includes the introductory phrases one or more or at least one and indefinite articles such as a or an e.g. a and or an should typically be interpreted to mean at least one or one or more the same holds true for the use of definite articles used to introduce claim recitations. In addition even if a specific number of an introduced claim recitation is explicitly recited those skilled in the art will recognize that such recitation should typically be interpreted to mean at least the recited number e.g. the bare recitation of two recitations without other modifiers typically means at least two recitations or two or more recitations . Furthermore in those instances where a convention analogous to at least one of A B and C etc. is used in general such a construction is intended in the sense one having skill in the art would understand the convention e.g. a system having at least one of A B and C would include but not be limited to systems that have A alone B alone C alone A and B together A and C together B and C together and or A B and C together etc. . In those instances where a convention analogous to at least one of A B or C etc. is used in general such a construction is intended in the sense one having skill in the art would understand the convention e.g. a system having at least one of A B or C would include but not be limited to systems that have A alone B alone C alone A and B together A and C together B and C together and or A B and C together etc. . It will be further understood by those within the art that virtually any disjunctive word and or phrase presenting two or more alternative terms whether in the description claims or drawings should be understood to contemplate the possibilities of including one of the terms either of the terms or both terms. For example the phrase A or B will be understood to include the possibilities of A or B or A and B. 

