---

title: Hydrate-based desalination/purification using permeable support member
abstract: Processes and apparatus are disclosed for separating and purifying aqueous solutions such as seawater by causing a substantially impermeable mat of gas hydrate to form on a porous restraint. Once the mat of gas hydrate has formed on the porous restraint, the portion of the mat of gas hydrate adjacent to the restraint is caused to dissociate and flow through the restraint, e.g., by lowering the pressure in a collection region on the opposite side of the restraint. The purified or desalinated water may then be recovered from the collection region. The process may be used for marine desalination as well as for drying wet gas and hydrocarbon solutions. If conditions in the solution are not conductive to forming hydrate, a heated or refrigerated porous restraint may be used to create hydrate-forming conditions near the restraint, thereby causing gas hydrates to form directly on the surface of the restraint.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07094341&OS=07094341&RS=07094341
owner: Marine Desalination Systems, L.L.C.
number: 07094341
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050325
---
This is a divisional of application Ser. No. 10 429 765 filed May 6 2003 the entire contents of which are incorporated by reference. This application claims the benefit of provisional U.S. patent application Ser. No. 60 378 368 filed May 8 2002 the contents of which are incorporated by reference.

This invention was made with Government support under Contract No. NBCHC 010003 dated Jan. 29 2001 and issued by the Department of the Interior National Business Center DARPA . The Government has certain rights in the invention.

In general the invention relates to gas hydrate based desalination and or water purification. In particular the invention significantly reduces the amount of residual brine that mixes with the product water thereby greatly enhancing the purity of the product water.

Purified water may be obtained from saline or polluted water by forming and then dissociating crystalline hydrate. Such a process for obtaining purified water from saline or polluted water is disclosed in for example U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 873 262 and 3 027 320. According to those patents a gas or mixture of gases is brought into contact with saline or polluted water under appropriate conditions of pressure and temperature and forms hydrate. The hydrate is then brought to a region of higher temperature and lower pressure where it dissociates to release fresh water and the hydrate forming gas or gases.

When the hydrate is formed in saltwater to desalinate it highly saline brines typically remain in the interstices of the hydrate as it forms a slurry. These brines may also contain dissolved or suspended solids.

One of the principal problems that has inhibited the successful development of hydrate based desalination on a commercial scale has been the difficulty of removing such residual interstitial brines from the hydrate slurry or a hydrate brine mixture. In particular it has proven difficult to develop a successful process for thoroughly washing an essentially static mixture of hydrate and interstitial brines in which process the saline interstitial fluid is removed and perhaps replaced by less saline interstitial water .

According to the two patents noted above the hydrate which is positively buoyant simply floats upward from where it forms a region of highly saline water into a region of less saline water. The hydrate dissociates in the region of less saline water while residual brine remains in or sinks toward the region of highly saline water. The region of less saline water may be maintained at the reduced salinity levels by introducing fresh water released upon dissociation of the hydrate. Such moving of hydrate or allowing of hydrate to move into a region of less saline water minimizes undesirable mixing of purified water with interstitial water and is particularly well suited to large scale production of fresh water. However variable amounts of highly saline residual fluid still enters the region of hydrate dissociation which increases the salinity in the dissociation region and thus reduces the purity of the product water.

In addition to research on using hydrates for desalination purification much of the hydrate research to date has been conducted by energy companies concerned with inhibiting hydrate formation and growth in hydrocarbon pipelines because hydrate caused flow constrictions in such pipelines can be extremely costly. Moreover even if hydrate does not cause a flow constriction small crystals of hydrate may form in petroleum which crystals act as abrasive crystals in the moving fluid. Therefore it is desirable to remove hydrate from pipelines and other hydrocarbon containing vessels even if the hydrate occurs only in small quantities.

Prior energy industry research efforts have yielded a number of methods for inhibiting hydrate growth or for removing unwanted hydrate from piping. However existing methods involve high capital costs high energy demands and in some cases the use of chemicals such as alcohols which absorb the water from petroleums but which create their own separation problems. If drying of petroleums is carried out on the seafloor in deep water costs are magnified.

The invention provides various methods and apparatuses for extracting fresh water from saline or otherwise polluted water with greatly increased purity of the final product water that is obtained. The invention entails forming a substantially solid compacted mat of gas hydrate or other clathrate if fluid other than water is used on or against a porous fluid permeable restraint. Residual saline interstitial fluid is expelled from the mat of hydrate by the forces governing hydrate crystallization. Hydrate within the portions of the mat that are closest to or adjacent to the restraint are caused or allowed to dissociate e.g. by lowering system pressure on the side of the restraint that is opposite to the mat of hydrate. That reduced pressure or suction acts on the hydrate through the pores in the restraint. Purified water or other fluid if the process is used to form clathrates of fluid other than water and the hydrate forming gas or clathrate forming gas pass through the restraint via the pores in the restraint and are collected from the side of the restraint opposite the mat of hydrate. Because the residual fluids remaining after the hydrate has been formed e.g. the highly saline residual brines have been expelled from the mat the product water or other product fluid passing through the restraint is substantially free of salts other dissolved materials or contaminants. Thus purity of the product water is significantly increased as compared to the prior art.

Under steady state conditions operation of the system is controlled such that hydrate forms and accumulates on one surface of the mat of hydrate at the same rate as it dissociates from the opposite surface of the mat adjacent to the restraint. Thus a substantially uniform mat of hydrate of essentially constant thickness can be maintained and the process of the invention can be run on a continuous basis.

The gas hydrate used in the process may be any gas hydrate formed under typical hydrate forming pressure and temperature conditions as known in the art. Moreover in the context of the invention fresh water is water that is substantially less saline and contains substantially fewer dissolved chemical species than the water from which the gas hydrate was formed for example water that contains less than 500 TDS total dissolved solids . Such fresh water may be either pure or potable.

The porous and permeable restraint can be made from for example a highly thermally conducting relatively stiff metal plastic ceramic or synthetic material. Examples of suitable materials from which the porous permeable restraint can be made include steel plate a supported metal or plastic screen or a composite material having hydrophobic and hydrophilic areas such that hydrate adheres to the material but water can readily pass through the material. The porous and permeable restraint also referred to herein as a hydrate asymmetric restraint or simply restraint is configured such that it allows fluid and gas to pass through it. The term asymmetric in hydrate asymmetric restraint refers to the different i.e. asymmetric pressure conditions that exist on either side of the restraint when a system according to the invention is operating at steady state. 

Additionally the restraint also may have a series of conduits e.g. internal extending between the pores of the restraint or cavities e.g. formed in its surface through which cooling and or heating fluids circulate or in which cooling or heating apparatus can be installed. Cooling and or heating facilitate hydrate formation e.g. during system startup or dissociation i.e. by providing sufficient heat required for the hydrate to dissociate by compensating for heat of exothermic formation of the hydrate that has been carried away from the system e.g. by residual brines.

The restraint can be formed in a number of different configurations depending for example on whether it is desired to operate using positively or negatively buoyant hydrate. Systems using a hydrate asymmetric restraint can be mechanically or artificially pressurized in order to generate pressures necessary for hydrate to form. Alternatively apparatus using an asymmetric restraint can be submerged e.g. at the bottom of a shaft of depth sufficient for the weight of the column of water above the restraint to generate appropriate operating pressures or in an open ocean marine environment.

As shown in general apparatus according to the invention and having a hydrate asymmetric restraint includes a vessel the walls of which contain the hydrate and the fluid from which it is formed. The vessel may be a conventional pressure vessel such as a steel or aluminum tank or any other vessel capable of withstanding typical hydrate forming temperatures and pressures.

Hydrate forming temperatures and pressures are known in the art and generally range from about 1 C. to about 30 C. with pressures ranging from ambient pressure about 0.1 MPa to about 10 MPa depending on the particular hydrate forming gas being used. Processes and apparatuses according to the invention may be adapted to use any available hydrate forming gas or mixture of hydrate forming gases. As is known in the art forming hydrate at higher temperatures generally requires the use of higher pressures. Many types of hydrate forming gases are known in the art including but not limited to low molecular weight hydrocarbon gases e.g. methane ethane and propane carbon dioxide sulfur trioxide nitrogen halogens noble gases and sulfur hexafluoride.

The vessel has appropriate inlet and outlet ports not shown for introducing and removing gas and water. Additionally the vessel may have suitably reinforced transparent observation ports also not shown by means of which operation of the vessel can be visually monitored. The size and relative dimensions of the vessel are determined largely by the physico chemical characteristics of the particular hydrate forming gas or gas mixture as well as the volume output of fresh water to be produced.

The hydrate asymmetric restraint illustrated in is a porous stainless steel plate or other suitably strong non corrosive material. The restraint has a porosity of about 80 with an average pore size of about 2.5 mm. In other embodiments the porosity of the restraint may be between about 75 and about 95 with a pore size between about 1 mm and about 5 mm. The pore size may be varied depending on the thickness of the hydrate layer that is to be formed in the restraint with smaller pores used when a thinner layer of hydrate is to be formed on the restraint and larger pores used when a thicker layer of hydrate is to be formed on the restraint.

The pores in the restraint may be cylindrical or they may have some other shape. For example as shown in the pores in the restraint may have a conical cross sectional shape with the pores decreasing in diameter from the high pressure hydrate formation side toward the low pressure exposed side . Such diminishing diameter configuration helps prevent solid fragments of hydrate from blowing through the restraint i.e. from moving from the high pressure or upstream side of the restraint to the low pressure or downstream side of the restraint .

The restraint is securely connected to the walls of the vessel by means of fasteners e.g. bolts screws or rivets a weldment or any other conventional connecting means. Alternatively depending on the size and characteristics of the vessel the restraint may be molded or cast as an integral part of the vessel . In other embodiments other materials may be used for the restraint and vessel such other materials including aluminum brass plastics and composites. The material of the restraint and vessel should be chosen such that the components do not corrode with extended exposure to a saline environment. The restraint is constructed with sufficient size and thickness to resist stresses of approximately 150 300 pounds per square inch without failure.

The restraint separates a relatively high salinity hydrate formation region from a fresh water collection region of lower salinity. Hydrate forming gas G is supplied to the hydrate formation region and because pressure and temperature conditions within the hydrate formation region are conducive to forming hydrate free hydrate generally indicated as when newly formed spontaneously forms.

Apparatus is configured for use with positively buoyant hydrate. Thus the newly formed hydrate may be either naturally positively buoyant per se or alternatively formed in a manner such that there is enough trapped hydrate forming gas so as to be positively buoyant in toto even though the hydrate per se is negatively buoyant. As illustrated by arrows H the newly formed hydrate floats upward toward the restraint where it accumulates and compacts.

The apparatus is illustrated in as operating under steady state conditions after a mat of hydrate has formed on the restraint . Under steady state conditions a substantially solid mat of hydrate will be clotted against the restraint . Just beneath the substantially solid mat of hydrate a generally granular zone or layer of hydrate the porosity of which decreases toward the solid mat of hydrate is formed. Together the substantially solid mat of hydrate and granular zone or layer of hydrate form a pressure sealing barrier layer that substantially seals the pores of the restraint . Newly formed hydrate rises into contact with and joins the granular layer of hydrate and the generally granular layer of hydrate slowly becomes compacted into the generally solid mat of hydrate . As the granular hydrate compacts into the generally solid mat residual highly saline interstitial brines will be expelled or displaced downward in the embodiment illustrated in thus producing a mat that is substantially pure hydrate i.e. free of brines or other contaminants.

Portions of the mat of hydrate that are adjacent to the restraint i.e. on the side of the mat opposite to that where hydrate accumulates will dissociate under the influence of lower pressure conditions established in the fresh water collection region . In particular those portions of the mat of hydrate will be subjected to the lower pressure of the fresh water collection region through the pores of the restraint and the lower pressure is such that the hydrate in those low pressure exposed portions of the mat no longer remain stable. Therefore it will dissociate.

As the hydrate in the portions of the mat adjacent the restraint dissociates the constituent fresh water F and hydrate forming gas G are released from the hydrate and flow through the pores of the restraint and into the fresh water collection region while the interstitial highly saline residual brines are substantially i.e. virtually entirely left behind in the hydrate formation region because they have been expelled by compaction of the granular layer into the mat . Thus far purer product water or other fluid from which clathrate can be formed can be produced by means of the present invention than has been produced by means of prior art methodologies.

Under steady state operating conditions new hydrate joins the granular layer at the same rate that hydrate dissociates from the opposite surface of the mat of hydrate thereby maintaining the existence and integrity of the sealing or barrier layer and thus the pressure seal created by it. Therefore hydrate formation region can be maintained at a higher pressure than the fresh water collection region alternatively stated the fresh water collection region can be maintained at a lower pressure than the hydrate formation region . The pressure differential between the hydrate formation region and the fresh water collection region is controlled so as to cause as much fresh water as possible to flow into the fresh water collection region under steady state conditions without causing the pressure sealing layer or the restraint to fracture or otherwise fail mechanically.

Although as a whole the mat of hydrate is substantially solid in the steady state the hydrate itself is usually initially deposited e.g. during system start up on the restraint in an incomplete manner such that the deposits of hydrate on the restraint are not completely solid hydrate rather they are able to change shape without recrystallizing. If all of the hydrate in the mat were solid and therefore unable to change shape without recrystallizing small holes might form in the hydrate mat through which residual saline water from the hydrate formation region could pass. However hydrate formation that prevents gas from coming into contact with water will generally yield substantially complete sealing of the restraint .

In particular hydrate shells commonly form around bubbles of hydrate forming gas which prevents all of the hydrate forming gas in the bubble from forming hydrate. Thus the bubbles tend to be soft in that they change shape and flatten somewhat when they come into contact with the restraint . When these hydrate shelled gas bubbles which often become encrusted with acicular and tabular crystals of hydrate that grow both outward from the shells into the surrounding water and into the gas bubbles are strained sufficiently they fracture thereby releasing gas into the surrounding water as well as allowing water to enter the existing hydrate shell. Both events cause more hydrate to form spontaneously which substantially reduces the remaining porosity of the hydrate mat and causes residual water to move away from such secondarily formed hydrate.

Thus the original soft bubbles carry hydrate forming gas and hydrate into the immediate vicinity of the restraint and interstitial residual water fluid is gradually displaced away from the restraint first by the hydrate shelled gas bubbles deforming as they press into the open pores of the restraint and then by the secondary formation of more hydrate as the shells fracture. As this process continues the pores of the restraint gradually will become blocked or clogged. While some of the pores in the restraint are still unblocked residual water will be expelled away from the restraint as the growing or thickening mat of hydrate which is growing towards the hydrate formation region pushes the residual water towards the hydrate formation region . Eventually all or almost all of the pores in the asymmetric restraint facing the hydrate formation region will become clogged or clotted with hydrate such that the mat of hydrate and the restraint form a pressure seal or pressure barrier between the hydrate formation region and the fresh water collection region .

Forming hydrate shells around gas bubbles also has the benefit of increasing the buoyancy of hydrate which per se is positively buoyant so that it will exert more force against the restraint when it comes into contact with the restraint thus increasing the tendency to squeeze out pore space. Similarly when gas bubbles are formed or trapped within hydrate which per se is negatively buoyant so as to form a soft hydrate bubble that will deform against an asymmetric restraint the hydrate mat in toto will be positively buoyant. Although the buoyancy of the resultant gas hydrate mixture in a bubble of hydrate which per se is negatively buoyant is not as great as that of a gas hydrate mixture formed from positively buoyant hydrate for similar volumes of included gas such bubbles will nonetheless join the solid mat of hydrate and be held there by intergrowth with other hydrate already present in the mat of hydrate . The mat of hydrate will be held against the restraint by virtue of the pressure differential across it as well as by virtue of the hydrate s buoyancy where the hydrate per se is positively buoyant .

In addition to the formation of hydrate within the hydrate formation region and secondarily at the face of the restraint more dynamic recrystallization will occur within the mat of hydrate as a result of forces created within the hydrate by the significant pressure differential across the mat of hydrate . For example when the pressure in the hydrate forming region is about 1.7 MPa about 17 bar with a water temperature of 8.5 C. and a mixed hydrate forming gas comprising methane with about 5 propane is used to form the hydrate the pressure in the fresh water collection region may be maintained at between about 1 MPa and about 1.2 MPa 10 to 12 bar . The actual pressures in the hydrate forming region and fresh water collection region will vary depending on the particular type of hydrate forming gas being used and the temperature of the input water and the pressure on the dissociation side will depend on the desired rate of dissociation for a particular apparatus and for particular operating conditions. Irrespective of the actual pressures employed however the strain induced in the mat of hydrate is likely to be strongly asymmetric.

In the forming mat of hydrate the axis of maximum strain typically will be approximately normal to the restraint because of the different pressures on either side of the restraint and the axes of minimum and intermediate strain will lie in a plane approximately parallel with the restraint . Therefore compressive strains will arise in a plane approximately normal to the plane of the restraint and extensive strains will arise in a plane approximately parallel to the restraint . Such a strain field will cause differential stresses on the individual grains of hydrate within the mat of hydrate and such differential stresses will cause the mat of hydrate to compress even further against the clotted restraint thereby displacing additional interstitial fluid away from the restraint . It is believed that this effect is attributable to annealing recrystallization and grain boundary minimalization that accompany recrystallization of polycrystalline accumulations under conditions of anisotropic strain. Typically the hydrate will tend to recrystallize in a lateral direction away from the axis of maximum strain and along the plane in which the axes of minimum and intermediate strain lie.

The strain couple within the hydrate immediately proximate to the surface of the restraint i.e. where the hydrate is dissociating will be different from that within the region of the mat of hydrate where hydrate is deforming and recrystallizing. Because the hydrate dissociates only at the surface of the mat of hydrate or in small fissures that extend from the surface into the interior of the mat it is believed that there will be little or no accompanying recrystallization of the hydrate under the new strain field. However even if there were some recrystallization within the new strain field the relative degree of salinity of the water produced from that recrystallized hydrate would likely be unaffected because porosity and permeability of the solid hydrate mat are essentially eliminated in the early stages of formation of the hydrate mat .

When gas inclusions remain within the mat of hydrate the gas typically will pass through the restraint when the hydrate around it dissociates along with fresh water produced when the hydrate dissociates . As individual grains or bubbles of hydrate are subjected to the low pressure proximate to the surface of the restraint as well as the high pressure in the hydrate formation region acting through the hydrate mat the grains of hydrate will tend to crush and gas will tend to escape through the restraint . This may have a slight effect on the overall efficiency of the process because additional gas may need to be delivered to the hydrate formation region to replace that which has escaped. The relative efficiency of the process however will have little if any effect on the salinity of water produced by the process.

As noted above under steady state operating conditions hydrate will accumulate on one surface of the mat of hydrate at the same rate as hydrate dissociates from the opposite surface of the mat i.e. from the surface adjacent the restraint and this rate balance maintains the integrity of the pressure sealing layer formed by the clotted restraint and the mat of hydrate . Once the pressure sealing layer has been formed completely i.e. at the end of the start up phase of operation the pressure in the fresh water collection region i.e. on the downstream side of the restraint can be lowered.

When the pressure initially is lowered on the downstream side of the restraint a thermodynamic hydrate stability boundary not illustrated will arise between the hydrate formation region and the fresh water collection region . Along this stability boundary the mat of hydrate will be exposed to pressure and temperature conditions that cause the hydrate in the mat closest to the stability boundary to dissociate. The thermodynamic stability boundary may be located somewhere within the mat of hydrate at the surface of the restraint against which the hydrate bears or somewhere within the restraint the latter situation occurring particularly in cases where hydrate has penetrated into the pores of the restraint during formation of the mat of hydrate . Under normal operating conditions the stability boundary will be located somewhere within the mat of hydrate near the restraint . In other words the vessel restraint and temperature and pressure conditions within the apparatus are configured and set such that the hydrate will be stable within the hydrate formation region and will become unstable and hence tend to dissociate at a location somewhere within the mat of hydrate . Hydrate that is not located at the stability boundary may also be unstable but it generally will dissociate only if it is located at the free edges of the pressure sealing layer . 

The formation side of the mat of hydrate will tend to be warm because hydrate formation is exothermic. Conversely the hydrate that is dissociating on the opposite side of the mat will consume heat because hydrate dissociation is endothermic. The amount of heat produced when the hydrate forms and the amount of heat required for the hydrate to dissociate are about equal but of opposite sign. Thus dissociation of the hydrate will absorb heat and cool the mat of hydrate and the warm hydrate produced in the hydrate formation region .

However because heat will be transported away from the system in the warmed residual brines left over from hydrate formation as they are removed from the system not illustrated as well as in the water and gas evolved during dissociation the overall vessel may act as a heat sink especially in the immediate vicinity of the gas hydrate. Therefore the demand for heat required to drive hydrate dissociation may exceed the rate at which heat can be provided by the exothermic formation of solid hydrate and the rate at which it will be available in the hydrate formation region . Thus it may be necessary to heat the restraint to a certain extent to ensure that water ice does not form and clog the restraint. This may be particularly true when dissociation rates i.e. heat consumption rates are fast. Conversely it may be necessary to cool the restraint to encourage hydrate growth especially for example during system start up .

Heating and or cooling may be provided by circulating a heating or cooling fluid in tubes integral with the restraint or in tubes not shown attached to the restraint or by any other conventional heating means such as resistance heating or heating cooling using Pelletier thermoelectric effect or magnetocaloric devices. As illustrated in tubes are provided in the restraint to provide passages for heating and or cooling fluids to flow through or for the installation of heating cooling devices. The tubes are disposed between the pores in the restraint . The tubes are arranged such that they cover a substantial portion of the surface area of the restraint . The tubes may be provided as a single closed loop circuit traversing substantially the entirety of the restraint or they may be provided as multiple sets of tubes arranged in a number of shorter heating cooling loops such that each of the shorter loops traverses only a portion of the restraint . If multiple shorter heating cooling loops are employed they may be selectively activated to cause portions of the restraint to be selectively heated or cooled depending on localized thermodynamic conditions of the restraint . If solid state Pelletier thermoelectric effect or magnetocaloric devices are used to heat and or cool the restraint the tubes may be formed as relatively shallow grooves or channels into which a number of the devices are installed. Alternatively depending on the material from which the restraint is made it may be desirable to print or microfabricate the heating cooling devices in a layer at or near either or both surfaces of the restraint . A plurality of Pelletier or magnetocaloric devices may be activated selectively so as to cause localized heating and or cooling of the restraint .

More specific apparatus for practicing the present invention is illustrated in . The apparatus is configured to produce fresh water on a large scale using positively buoyant hydrate to do so. The apparatus includes many components that are the same as or similar to those shown in apparatus including a vessel that is divided into a hydrate formation region and a fresh water collection region by means of a porous and permeable hydrate asymmetric restraint . The apparatus is shown in in steady state operation i.e. with a pressure sealing layer of hydrate completely formed on the restraint .

Gas G is injected into the vessel through gas supply pipeline . The pipeline may include a manual automatic or remotely controlled valve or valve assembly. Input water to be treated W i.e. purified is supplied to the vessel through input water pipeline and hydrate forms upon mixing of the gas G and the input water W. Residual water or brine is removed from the vessel through drain line . A separator e.g. a screen is connected to the drain line to prevent hydrate from being removed from the apparatus .

As described above in the context of hydrate will accumulate against the restraint and form a hydrate mat which upon reduction of pressure in the region will dissociate into fresh water and the hydrate forming gas both of which pass through the restraint into region . Fresh product water PW is withdrawn through fresh water drain line and gas G is removed through gas line . The recovered gas may be processed for example by drying and recompressing before it is used in another cycle of hydrate formation or before it is passed on to another user for other purposes.

The gas typically is dried before re use to prevent gas hydrates from forming in the gas lines. However if the gas is compressed and injected back into the apparatus immediately drying the gas may not be necessary because since the gas is heated during recompression hydrate will not likely form in the short period of time that it takes to re inject the gas into the vessel . If so desired the compression process may be specifically designed to heat the gas to a specific temperature at which hydrates will not form. Alternatively if the gas is not to be re injected into the vessel immediately the gas lines may be provided with any sort of conventional supplemental warming apparatus.

Another embodiment of an apparatus for practicing the invention is illustrated in . Apparatus is configured to produce fresh water on a large scale using negatively buoyant hydrate to do so. The apparatus includes many components that are the same as or similar to those shown in apparatus or including a vessel that is divided into a hydrate formation region and a fresh water collection region by means of a porous and permeable hydrate asymmetric restraint . The apparatus is shown in in steady state operation i.e. with a pressure sealing layer of hydrate completely formed on the restraint . In contrast to apparatus however in apparatus the hydrate formation region is located at the top of the vessel and negatively buoyant hydrate sinks downward onto the restraint . Thus the pressure sealing layer is formed on top of the restraint in this embodiment of the invention. Hydrate will dissociate from the bottom of the hydrate mat with fresh water and gas flowing or being drawn by reduced pressure down through the restraint consequently fresh water collection region is located at the bottom of the vessel . Fresh product water PW is removed via drain line and gas G is removed via gas line .

In apparatus gas G is injected into the vessel through gas pipeline . The gas pipeline may include a manual automatic or remotely controlled valve or valve assembly. Input water to be treated W i.e. purified is supplied to the vessel through input water pipeline and hydrate spontaneously forms upon mixing of the gas G and the input water W. Residual waters or brines are removed from the vessel through drain line . A separator e.g. a screen is connected to the drain line to prevent solid hydrate from being removed from the apparatus .

In the embodiments and illustrated in the freshwater collection regions and and hydrate formation regions and are depicted as being substantially the same size. However in other embodiments the fresh water collection regions and may be smaller than the hydrate formation regions and respectively.

A hydrate asymmetric restraint according to the invention may also be contoured and may be used without a vessel e.g. by being immersed in an aqueous saline environment as illustrated for example in . In particular the restraint in this embodiment is shaped for example U shaped in cross section so as to form an interior lumen or compartment in which low pressure hydrate dissociation conditions can be established. The restraint is constructed from any of the materials noted above and may have the internal pore and tube configuration shown in . Hydrate not shown is caused to form in the body of fluid in which the contoured restraint is immersed by injecting hydrate forming gas into the body of fluid under pressure and temperature conditions conductive to forming hydrate so as to cause hydrate to form generally in the vicinity of the contoured restraint. A pressure sealing mat of hydrate is induced to form on the exterior surface of the restraint pressure inside the compartment is lowered and hydrate adjacent to the exterior surface of the restraint dissociates thereby allowing gas and fresh water released by the dissociating hydrate to flow or be drawn by the reduced pressure into the compartment i.e. in the direction indicated by arrows F.

The open end of the compartment is sealed by a plate or other structure and fresh water and gas are drawn out through pipe connected to the plate . The extracted fresh water and gas are then transferred to a vessel downstream not shown where they are separated. As in the embodiments and described above the restraint may be heated or cooled to induce hydrate formation or to maintain the rates of hydrate formation and dissociation at desired levels.

Advantageously a contoured restraint such as restraint provides a larger surface area on which hydrate accumulates and dissociates than a substantially flat restraint of similar widthwise dimensions. Therefore using a contoured asymmetric restraint may increase the efficiency or throughput of a water purification or other liquid separation process. Additionally using a larger restraint facilitates heat transfer and may reduce the need to balance the heat demand of dissociation.

A more specific water purification system which uses a contoured hydrate asymmetric restraint and hydrate that is less dense than the saltwater from which it forms i.e. which is positively buoyant is illustrated in . The restraint is generally U shaped in cross section and is immersed in a vessel such that the restraint is positioned substantially in the center of the vessel . The restraint includes a non porous endcap portion which constitutes the portion of the restraint having the most significant curvature. The curvature of the endcap portion may affect the strain field in a mat of hydrate that forms on it and thus may change the manner in which that mat of hydrate forms and dissociates. However because endcap portion is non porous and therefore fresh water and gas do not pass through it any localized differences in hydrate formation and dissociation on the endcap portion will not affect the overall desalination or separation process. Therefore if hydrate forms on the endcap portion it may simply be allowed to accumulate.

A centrally located water injection pipe supplies water to be treated into the vessel which water to be treated exits the water injection pipe via injectors that are located away from the center of the vessel . As illustrated the water injection pipe extends through the interior compartment or lumen of the contoured restraint . The injectors may be nozzles designed to provide a specific water velocity and direction that will form a hydrocyclone i.e. a high speed rotating watermass that introduces centrifugal forces or they may simply be unmodified ends of the water injection pipe .

Gas supply apparatuses line the walls of the vessel . The gas supply apparatuses include panels which each have a plurality of nozzles or slots through which hydrate forming gas G is supplied to the interior of the vessel . The angles of the gas nozzles are set to optimize the amount of flow turbulence for hydrate formation. In apparatus formation of hydrate on the restraint is facilitated by rotating the water to be treated using a hydrocyclone or other conventional mechanical rotating means not shown . In this embodiment the water injectors are used to create a hydrocyclone but another set of jets not shown may also or alternatively be provided for this purpose. Rotating the water e.g. by creating a hydrocyclone creates centipetal acceleration which because the hydrate is less dense than the input saltwater causes formed hydrate to migrate radially inward toward the restraint i.e. away from the walls of the vessel where it might otherwise encrust the apparatus. Unwanted residual brines in the apparatus which brines remain after the hydrate forms and extracts fresh water from the saline water to be treated are removed from the apparatus at exit points and dissociated gas and fresh water are collected from the top of the interior compartment .

The design and placement of the water injection pipe provides certain thermodynamic advantages. As noted above with respect to other embodiments fresh water released as the hydrate dissociates which flows through the restraint and into the interior compartment will be cold because dissociation is an endothermic process. Because the water injection pipe passes through the interior compartment and is exposed to the cold fresh water the water injection pipe functions as a heat exchanger to cool the water to be treated as it flows through the water injection pipe and out through the injectors . That is advantageous because cooling the water to be treated facilitates hydrate formation and provides a natural density gradient. Conversely the cool fresh product water within the interior compartment will absorb heat from the warmer water flowing through the water injection pipe which in turn helps warm the restraint and encourages hydrate encrusted on the restraint to dissociate. Although illustrated as a substantially straight pipe in the water injection pipe may be coiled or contoured to increase its surface area and consequently its effectiveness as a heat exchanger.

Another embodiment of an apparatus for practicing the invention is illustrated in . In this apparatus which is configured for use with negatively buoyant hydrate i.e. hydrate that is more dense than the saline input water to be treated a substantially tubular hydrate asymmetric restraint is positioned within a vessel with the restraint being arranged generally concentrically with the vessel and sized such that it lies generally proximate to the walls of the vessel but with space therebetween as illustrated. Fresh water collection region is defined between the exterior surface of the restraint and the interior wall of the vessel . Hydrate forming gas and water to be treated are injected into the center of the vessel by means of central distribution piping which includes gas distribution piping and water distribution piping . Gas may also be delivered via gas nozzles not shown that extend from the walls of the vessel through the restraint . Water to be treated W and gas G enter the interior compartment bounded by the restraint and hydrate forms and accumulates on the interior surface of the restraint . Fresh water and gas released upon dissociation of the hydrate pass radially outward through the restraint and into the fresh water collection region . Gas removal piping and fresh water removal piping transport the dissociated gas and fresh water away from the water collection region and brine removal pipe transports unwanted residual brines from the vessel.

Similar to apparatus apparatus uses a hydrocyclone or other mechanical rotating means not shown to force the forming hydrate outward towards the interior surface of the restraint . In this embodiment however the hydrate migrates radially outward as the water rotates because it is more dense than the saline input water to be treated. Jets of water from the water distribution piping may drive the hydrocyclone or another set of jets not shown may do so. Because the embodiment is configured for use with negatively buoyant hydrate the gas distribution piping should be configured to inject the hydrate forming gas G in small bubbles such that there is little residual gas in the formed hydrates. That is because as explained above large amounts of residual gas in the hydrate could cause the overall hydrate masses to be positively buoyant instead of negatively buoyant. Gas should also be injected as close to the hydrate formation region as possible to prevent gas from pooling around the gas distribution piping .

In the embodiments described above the required hydrate forming water pressures are mechanically generated within the vessels e.g. by parametric pumping not shown or by any other form of mechanically generated compression not shown . However water purification apparatus utilizing a hydrate asymmetric restraint may be installed in an environment which provides a column of water either free or unbounded as in the open ocean or bounded or restrained as in a shaft extending down into the ground or in a free standing tower extending above the ground where the weight of the water column generates sufficient pressure for hydrate to form. An example of such an embodiment that is suitable for shaft installation and that is configured to be used with positively buoyant hydrate either per se or in toto is illustrated in .

The apparatus is constructed in a shaft extending down into the ground . The shaft is deep enough for the weight of a column of water of depth equal to the depth of the shaft to generate water pressure sufficient to cause hydrate to form spontaneously when hydrate forming gas is injected into the water to be treated assuming the water to be treated is at sufficiently low temperature .

The shaft has a generally conical solid partition extending across it and the solid partition divides the shaft into a lower shaft portion and an upper shaft portion . The lower shaft portion has a hydrate asymmetric restraint extending across it and the hydrate asymmetric restraint is constructed from any of the materials identified above in connection with the hydrate asymmetric restraint in . Preferably the hydrate asymmetric restraint has an internal pore and tube configuration like that shown in in connection with the hydrate asymmetric restraint shown in . The restraint divides the lower shaft portion into a hydrate formation region and a fresh water and gas collection region . A bypass pipe extends from the upper shaft portion to the lower shaft portion in particular the hydrate formation region and establishes open fluid communication between the upper shaft portion and the lower shaft portion hydrate formation region .

Water input pipe delivers input water to be treated to the installation from a source of water to be treated not shown . Preferably the apparatus is located relatively close to the body of water from which the water to be treated is extracted as that should reduce pumping costs for obtaining the water to be treated. It is also advantageous if the top of the apparatus e.g. ground level is at a level that is at or below the surface of the body of water from which the input water to be treated is obtained. That too can reduce pumping costs e.g. by effectively creating a siphon to help draw water from the body of water from which water to be treated is obtained and to deliver it to the installation .

The water input pipe fills the upper shaft portion with water to be treated which water to be treated flows through bypass pipe and into the hydrate formation region . Although the water input pipe could pass directly into the bypass pipe and the upper shaft portion could be left unfilled dry it is easier to control system operation e.g. water input and hydrate formation rates when a reservoir from which water to be treated can be drawn and passed to the hydrate formation region i.e. by filling the upper shaft portion . Because the bypass pipe establishes open fluid communication between the upper shaft portion and the hydrate formation region and because the upper shaft portion is not pressure sealed and therefore is in pressure balance with atmospheric pressure at its upper end water pressure within the hydrate formation region will be equal to that generated by the weight of a column of water of depth equal to that of the hydrate formation region assuming the upper shaft portion is completely filled to ground level with water to be treated .

In operation input water to be treated W is supplied to the apparatus via input water pipe as noted above fills the upper shaft portion flows through bypass pipe and fills the hydrate formation region . Hydrate forming gas is supplied to the apparatus via gas input pipe . Gas pump directional control unit directs incoming hydrate forming gas G received from gas input pipe downward to be injected into the hydrate formation region . There it mixes with the water to be treated under temperature and pressure conditions established by the weight of the water column above the hydrate formation region appropriate for hydrate H to form spontaneously as indicated in .

Because the hydrate is positively buoyant either because the hydrate per se is positively buoyant or because the hydrate per se is negatively buoyant but is formed in an incomplete manner such that gas bubbles trapped within hydrate shells are in toto positively buoyant it will rise within the hydrate formation region and accumulate along the undersurface of the hydrate asymmetric restraint in the same manner as described above with respect to the embodiments shown in . Highly saline residual brines remaining after the hydrate forms are removed from the apparatus via brine removal pipe also removing a portion of heat generated during the exothermic formation of the hydrate with it.

As is understood in the art for a given temperature hydrate will remain stable over a range of pressures or in the context of water weight induced pressures over a range of depths. Preferably in a shaft based embodiment such as that illustrated in the hydrate asymmetric restraint is positioned well below the shallowest depth at which hydrate will remain stable for any given hydrate forming gas expected to be used in the apparatus i.e. significantly deeper than the hydrate stability pressure boundary . If desired however the lower shaft portion and the restraint may be configured so that the depth of the restraint can be adjusted either up or down e.g. by sliding or by removal and repositioning. That allows the depth of the restraint to be changed as necessary to keep hydrate at a pressure depth at which gas hydrate will form and remain stable for any given hydrate forming gas or gas mixture that is used with the apparatus. Preferably the restraint is located sufficiently below the hydrate stability boundary for hydrate to form relatively rapidly. As is known in the art for a given temperature the rate at which hydrate forms tends to decrease as the pressure depth of the region where hydrate is formed approaches the pressure depth of the hydrate stability pressure boundary . 

The embodiment is illustrated in under steady state operating conditions. Therefore it is illustrated with a solid mat of hydrate having accumulated over the lower surface of the restraint to form a pressure seal or barrier extending across the entire cross sectional area of the lower shaft portion . Under steady state operating conditions hydrate will dissociate from the portions of the mat of hydrate adjacent to the restraint . Purified water and gas released upon dissociation of the hydrate pass through the porous permeable restraint and into the fresh water collection region located above the hydrate asymmetric restraint and fresh water is removed from the fresh water collection region via fresh water extraction pipe .

Because the solid mat of hydrate and the hydrate asymmetric restraint together effectively form a pressure seal or barrier across the cross sectional area of the lower shaft portion and because the restraint is a flow restrictor and as such causes a pressure drop as water and gas flow through it the fresh water in the fresh water collection region will be at a pressure that is lower than the pressure of the input water to be treated at the same level within the bypass pipe . Accordingly the level of fresh water in the fresh water extraction pipe will not automatically equilibrate with the level of water in the upper shaft portion . Therefore pumps are provided along the length of fresh water extraction pipe in order to help remove fresh water from the fresh water collection region .

Hydrate forming gas which has been released upon dissociation of the hydrate on the other hand will bubble up to the vertex of the conical solid partition and rise through gas removal pipe . Gas pump directional control assembly controls the flow of gas that has been released from the hydrate and that has risen through gas pipe . In particular control assembly directs some or all of the gas to a downstream application e.g. to a gas fired power station or fuel cell assembly via gas line and or some or all of the gas to gas recycling unit which reprocesses the gas by drying and or repressurizing it for reuse in further hydrate formation cycles.

As indicated above the hydrate asymmetric restraint and therefore the solid mat of hydrate is located significantly below the hydrate stability pressure boundary . Therefore it is necessary to reduce pressure in the fresh water collection region depending on the vertical distance between the level of the restraint and the hydrate stability pressure boundary the amount by which the pressure in the fresh water collection region needs to be reduced can be substantial. The pumps in the fresh water extraction line can create suction for pressure reduction within the fresh water collection region and one or more pumps located in line in the gas recovery pipe will also help lower pressure within the fresh water collection region .

Finally with respect to the embodiment illustrated in while the conical configuration of the solid partition with the vertex located at the top of the partition helps direct the released gas into the gas pipe to be removed from the apparatus that configuration also helps support the weight of the input water in the upper shaft portion . As explained above the pressure within the fresh water collection region will be lower than that within the bypass pipe at the same depth level which is generally the same as the pressure at the bottom of the upper shaft portion . Therefore there will be a pressure differential across the solid partition acting in the downward direction and the upwardly oriented conical shape of the solid partition helps the solid partition withstand that pressure differential. Conversely the weight of the water in the upper shaft portion counteracts pressure forces that the fresh water in fresh water collection region exerts on the partition that pressure counteraction is another benefit of filling the upper shaft portion instead of leaving it dry. 

As noted above apparatus is specifically configured to utilize positively buoyant hydrates. However a shaft based apparatus may be configured with a centrifugal force type device as shown and described with respect to such that either positively buoyant or negatively buoyant hydrates may be used and formed on a contoured restraint. In that case the contoured restraint would likely have significantly more surface area than the restraint shown in . Such a configuration would also allow for a smaller hydrate formation region . In either case i.e. apparatus configured for use with either positively buoyant or negatively buoyant hydrate the restraint would be heated or cooled to facilitate hydrate formation and may have the heat exchanging tube configuration shown in restraint in .

Another embodiment of the invention is illustrated in . Apparatus is submerged in a marine environment at a pressure depth at which gas hydrates form spontaneously. Preferably a number of apparatuses are suspended from a frame that is attached to a ship or a semi submersible platform. That way the depth of each apparatus may be individual set to provide for optimum hydrate forming conditions.

The apparatus is formed of a rigid material such as heavy plastic that has an anti fouling coating. A restraint is secured to the interior walls of apparatus and apparatus is illustrated as operating under steady state conditions i.e. with a pressure sealing layer of hydrate formed on the underside of the restraint .

The restraint and pressure sealing layer of hydrate divide the apparatus into a hydrate formation region and a fresh water and gas collection region . The hydrate formation region is open to the surrounding sea at its lower end. Therefore opening allows seawater or other input water to be treated in which the apparatus is submerged to enter the hydrate formation region . Hydrate formation region may be laterally extended to allow residual brines remaining after hydrate forms to equilibrate in temperature with respect to the surrounding seawater which will increase the density of the residual brines and cause them to sink out through opening and into the sea.

A piping system not shown in detail similar to that used in apparatus may be used to supply hydrate forming gas to the apparatus and to remove dissociated gas and product water from apparatus . Piping to remove dissociated gas and product water again not shown will be connected to port and the water removal pipe will extend further into the fresh water and gas collection region than the gas collection pipe. Fresh water and gas collection region may be extended laterally to allow the collected fresh product water and gas to equilibrate in temperature with the surrounding seawater. Collected fresh product water and gas may be pumped directly to the surface or if a number of apparatuses are used simultaneously the fresh water and gas may be collected in a number of smaller riser pipes before passing to the surface.

Another embodiment of the invention for marine applications is illustrated in . The embodiment combines features of embodiment with the open ended features of embodiment . Like embodiment embodiment uses a hydrocyclone or other form of rotational water movement to facilitate hydrate formation and accumulation on the restraint . Unlike the free standing embodiment however embodiment is submerged at a pressure depth at which hydrate forms spontaneously. The components of embodiment that are used to supply hydrate forming gas are essentially the same as those shown in . For clarity the top of apparatus is not shown in . 

Input water to be treated enters the hydrate forming region of the apparatus from the surrounding environment through aperture and is caused to rotate to generate a hydrocyclone. Hydrate that is less dense than the seawater i.e. that is positively buoyant forms and accumulates on the restraint and residual brines move centrifugally toward the walls of apparatus . In contrast to embodiment in embodiment the residual brines are expelled back into the marine environment through vents . The vents are relatively small in size and allow the residual brines to leave the apparatus at a relatively slow rate. This relatively slow rate of residual brine expulsion allows a stable hydrocyclone to be maintained. Once the brines are expelled the natural difference in the buoyancy of the residual brines which is greater after temperature equilibration and the temperature of the residual brines which is initially higher than that of the surrounding water will cause the residual brines to flow away from the apparatus even in very low current conditions.

It should be noted that the residual brines created as a result of the processes described above need not be highly concentrated. In fact the processes described above are capable of recovering significant amounts of fresh water from seawater while producing a brine that without mixing has a salinity and suspended solids content that is within or very close to the ranges acceptable to marine life. Because of the relatively low cost and high efficiency of processes according to the invention as compared to conventional desalination processes there is no need to extract all of the available fresh water from a given volume of seawater. Therefore an apparatus according to the invention may be employed even in areas where marine parks and other protected marine wildlife areas exist.

Embodiments of the invention may be used in non marine environments e.g. to separate water from other dissolved or suspended materials in environments that would not usually provide a favorable environment for hydrate formation. More specifically a thermally assisted or refrigerated restraint may be configured and adapted to create conditions suitable for hydrate formation and can be used to perform desalination or separation processes. Hydrate formation using a thermally assisted asymmetric restraint differs slightly from the method of hydrate formation using the previously described non assisted restraints. In particular whereas with the hydrate asymmetric restraints described above hydrate is formed in the aqueous environment surrounding the restraint and subsequently is deposited on or accumulates on the restraint with a thermally assisted restraint hydrate is induced to form directly on the restraint from an aqueous non aqueous or gaseous environment such as wet gas.

Thermally assisted restraint includes a formation portion which is a contoured porous restraint and the general configuration of formation portion is similar to that of restraint of embodiment . Formation portion has an interior structure similar to that illustrated in and in particular includes internal tubes which are used to cool the formation portion to an appropriate hydrate forming temperature. Depending on whether a conventional refrigeration system thermoelectric or magnetocaloric cooling system is used the tubes may be filled with a circulating coolant fluid or they may serve as cavities into which thermoelectric or magnetocaloric devices may be installed. A connecting pipe assembly is connected to the interior compartment of the formation portion and the connecting pipe assembly is coupled to a port in the walls of the containing vessel such that in operation fresh water and dissociated gas may be removed from the compartment in the formation portion .

When a thermally assisted restraint is used to extract water from an aqueous environment hydrate forming gas is dissolved in the aqueous medium in which the restraint is immersed to saturated or super saturated conditions and hydrate is induced to form directly on the thermally assisted restraint by refrigerating the restraint . A shroud or simple water duct may be used to control the flow of water across the restraint or the restraint may be specifically contoured to optimize water flow across its surface in a particular environment or vessel.

The presence of large amounts of hydrate forming gas in the region where hydrate formation is induced promotes the growth of solid gas hydrate on the surface of the hydrate forming portion with few inclusions and solubility gradients will cause the dissolved hydrate forming gas to migrate toward the region in which hydrate is forming. Further hydrate forming gas is added into the aqueous medium at a location where temperatures are too high or pressures are too low for the formation of hydrate and the dissolved to saturated or supersaturated levels hydrate forming gas migrates toward the thermally assisted restraint where it crystallizes. Additional hydrate forming gas may be added as necessary.

The thermally assisted restraint may be combined with a localized heating apparatus in an environment where plugs of hydrate or water ice form at unwanted locations. If a localized heating apparatus is used in combination with a thermally assisted restraint the heating apparatus is used to melt the plugs of hydrate or water ice so that hydrate formation can be limited or restricted to the formation portion of the restraint .

Once hydrate has formed on the surface of the formation portion pressure in the interior of the formation portion is lowered by an appropriate pump not shown that is coupled to the connecting pipe assembly . Hydrate that is closest to the surface of the formation portion is thus caused to dissociate and the resultant fresh water and gas are drawn through the restraint and into the interior of it. They are then withdrawn from the formation portion through the connecting pipe assembly . The fresh water should be withdrawn at a moderate rate such that brines of extremely high salinity or mineral content do not form around the restraint .

Advantageously with a thermally assisted restraint there is no need to cool an entire volume of water when the thermally assisted restraint is used in an aqueous environment in order to form hydrate. Instead it is only necessary to cool the volume of water that is to form hydrate i.e. the volume of water immediately near the surface of the formation portion . This may result in significant cost savings. Additionally hydrate is induced to crystallize on the formation portion of the restraint such that it contains essentially no included saline water and this results in product water with very low salinity.

The thermally assisted restraint may also be used for other applications in which it is desired to remove water or moisture from the environment in which the restraint is immersed besides other than desalination. For example a thermally assisted restraint may be used to concentrate and remove dissolved or suspended solids such as metals from an aqueous solution e.g. a metaliferous brine if the water in the solution is used to form hydrate on the restraint and is subsequently caused to dissociate through the restraint . In other words the restraint is used to draw moisture out of the solution by using hydrate to sequester it. Additionally a thermally assisted restraint may be used for processes such as sewage treatment in which removing excess water is a typical or desired first treatment step.

When the aqueous solution to be treated is a relatively dense slurry the slurry should be agitated thereby causing it to pass over the restraint in bulk so as to prevent the slurry from dewatering near the restraint and creating a barrier to further water movement. Moreover if a gas containing material such as sewage is used with the thermally assisted restraint the gas contained in the material itself may be used at least in part as the hydrate forming gas either with or without the use of additional gas.

Alternatively a thermally assisted restraint may be used in a primarily gaseous or non aqueous environment in which water is to be extracted from the non aqueous or gaseous medium. One example of such a gaseous or non aqueous environment where water often needs to be removed is in a hydrocarbon well. As is known extracts from hydrocarbon wells may be warm or hot before or immediately following extraction and in many cases may have a temperature in excess of 100 C. After the extracted hydrocarbons are cooled by heat exchange with the surrounding environment e.g. seawater in the case of subsea wells the resultant wet hydrocarbons which may still be at a relatively warm temperature and in either a liquid non aqueous or gaseous state depending on pressure and temperature conditions can be dewatered by exposing them to a thermally assisted restraint . As will be appreciated by those having skill in the art the water to be removed will be in either a liquid or gaseous state depending on pressure and temperature conditions. In this regard dewater is a term that will be understood by those having skill in the art as referring generically to removing HO from a medium regardless of whether the HO is in a liquid or gaseous state. Localized cooling at the surface of restraint will cause hydrate to form on the formation portion of the restraint . This restraint based dewatering process substantially prevents hydrate formation and provides flow assurance in high pressure pipelines and other hydrocarbon apparatus.

In certain applications where a thermally assisted restraint is used it may be desirable for hydrate formed on the restraint actually not to dissociate. For example in a hydrocarbon dewatering process like the process described above simply forming hydrate on the restraint may be sufficient to remove water from the surrounding medium i.e. there may be no need to cause the hydrate to dissociate. In other separation or dewatering applications in which the water content in the solution or suspension is relatively low the dissociation process may be initiated at intervals e.g. every few minutes or hours in order to allow enough time for a sufficiently thick mat of hydrate to accumulate on the restraint before initiating dissociation.

Another example of a situation where either no dissociation or delayed dissociation is preferable is when it is desired to fill a vessel as completely as possible with hydrate in a relatively short period of time. In this situation heat may be removed from the vessel as a whole most effectively by installing within the vessel a number of thermally assisted surfaces upon which the hydrate is crystallized. This will allow the water or air courses between the thermally assisted surfaces to remain open until the vessel is nearly full of hydrate and will provide optimal circulation within the vessel as a whole during the hydrate forming event. Yet another example is a situation where a sample of solid hydrate that forms naturally upon a refrigerated surface is required to be obtained. For example samples of hydrate may be used for carrying out thermodynamic chemical and or crystallographic analyses among other uses which are not possible to conduct within the vessel which may be a pipeline or other apparatus in which hydrate naturally forms .

Where dissociation is later desired or required it may be accomplished in the manner previously described using apparatus such as that described above e.g. a contoured thermally assisted restraint as described above or within the vessel as a whole in which case separation of the hydrate forming material and the water will take place immiscibly allowing each to be removed into separate containers. Where on the other hand dissociation is not desired e.g. where it is necessary or desirable to collect the hydrate as such simplified apparatus can be used. In particular pooling plates or panels that have a refrigeration system to cool the plates and remove heat for example but not limited to a series of internal tubes or conduits as illustrated in and described above in connection with FIG. can be provided for the hydrate to form on. Such cooling plates or panels may be configured to look generally like the thermally assisted restraint shown in but they need not be and preferably are not porous and they preferably are not contoured i.e. they preferably do not have an interior lumen chamber or cavity .

Further embodiments of a thermally assisted restraint may be contoured and adapted for installation in specific locations. For example a contoured thermally assisted restraint assembly which is installed within a pipe is illustrated in . The assembly includes a substantially cylindrical thermally assisted restraint mounted concentrically within the pipe . The diameter of the restraint relative to that of the pipe may vary with the particular installation although for purposes of illustration the diameter of the restraint is shown as relatively large with respect to that of the pipe .

The restraint divides the pipe into a radially outer compartment defined between the outer surface of the restraint and the inner surface of the pipe and a radially inner compartment which is located in the interior of the restraint .

With the apparatus either the outer compartment or the inner compartment can function as the hydrate formation region. However it is advantageous for hydrate to be formed on the outer surface of the restraint i.e. the surface bounding the outer compartment because with such arrangement the pressure sealing layer of hydrate not shown naturally crushes inward toward the inner compartment which helps to maintain the pressure seal.

In operation relatively high temperature water is pumped through the outer compartment . Hydrate forming gas is injected into the apparatus by gas injection assembly which is mounted on an exterior surface of the pipe and the thermally assisted restraint is cooled thereby causing hydrate to form and accumulate on the restraint in the outer compartment. Pressure in the inner compartment is subsequently lowered thereby causing inner portions of the hydrate on the restraint to dissociate and the resulting water and gas to enter the inner compartment . The dissociated water and gas flow within the inner compartment and may be removed at appropriate collection points along the pipe not shown in .

In addition to desalination or other water purification applications embodiments of the invention may also be used to remove hydrate from pipelines. For example hydrate removal apparatus shown in consists of a series of segments of flexible piping with a thermally assisted restraint assembly positioned on one end or as shown with other restraint assembly segments along its length. The apparatus may also include a number of high frequency acoustic sources of the same or different frequencies. Once the apparatus has been inserted into a hydrocarbon pipeline not shown the acoustic sources allow the apparatus to be located within the pipeline using known hydrophone or microphone triangulation techniques.

One end of the apparatus is shown in greater detail in . A restraint assembly is mounted on the outer surface of a segment of flexible pipe . The restraint assembly is constructed such that hydrate can form on an end face of the restraint and can then dissociate into an interior cavity of the restraint not illustrated . The interior cavity of the restraint communicates with the flexible piping such that dissociated water can be removed through the flexible piping .

When hydrate has formed in a pipeline or other vessel from which it is desired to be removed the apparatus is inserted into the pipeline or other vessel. In order to remove a hydrate plug from a pipeline or other vessel it is usually necessary to melt the hydrate in situ. Therefore apparatus includes at least one heater element to melt such unwanted hydrate plugs. The heater may be any type of conventional heater such as a resistance element heater thermoelectric heater or convection type heating element. However it is preferable that the heater be activated in a controlled or directional manner so as to conserve energy and to avoid heating the medium unnecessarily. Accordingly one particularly advantageous type of heater is a focused microwave heater tuned specifically to provide power output at a frequency suitable for heating water molecules.

Apparatus may be used in combination with a remotely operated vehicle ROV which is either tethered or autonomous. The ROV would include at least one apparatus as well as pumps for maintaining the pressure in the dissociation regions of the restraints power supplies for the heater and tanks to store dissociated water. The ROV would also include an appropriate propulsion system and preferably a sensing and visualization system. The sensing and visualization system of the ROV may be visual acoustic or infrared depending on the medium and the particular ROV that is used. An ROV equipped with an apparatus could be inserted into a vessel or a pipeline to autonomously or semi autonomously remove hydrate deposits within the pipeline or vessel and could be removed from the pipeline or vessel from time to time to allow its tanks to be drained and other systems to be maintained.

Finally asymmetric restraint based separation and purification processes and apparatuses may also be used with other clathrates many types of which are known. Gas hydrates are simply a particular class or species of clathrate in which water acts as the host molecule and the hydrate forming gas acts as the guest molecule. For example phenol will form clathrates with many types of guest molecules including hydrogen sulfide sulfur dioxide carbon dioxide carbon disulfide hydrogen chloride hydrogen bromide methylene chloride vinyl chloride and xenon. Urea will form clathrates with a variety of linear organic compounds. Thiourea will form clathrates with linear and branched organic compounds.

If other clathrates are used with asymmetric restraints the process temperatures may be higher than the process temperatures for gas hydrates. For example phenol urea and thiourea are solids at ambient temperature with melting points of 40 C. 133 C. and 182 C. respectively. Therefore using one of these compounds as the clathrate host molecule the process temperature would bee maintained at a temperature higher than the melting point of the host molecule such that the host molecule dissociates from the guest molecule and flows through the restraint. A thermally assisted restraint such as restraint may be used to heat or cool the host guest mixture to induce a clathrate to form on its surface alternatively the clathrate could be formed away from the restraint and subsequently caused to be deposited on one of its surfaces.

In a non aqueous clathrate process the clathrate may be formed in one of several ways. If the host molecule is in solid solution or solid form and is soluble in a solution of the guest molecule the host molecule or a solid solution containing the host molecule may be dissolved in the guest molecule solution thereby causing clathrate to form. In other cases the mixture of host and guest molecules may be heated while the host molecule is dissolving in the guest molecule solution. Alternatively a solid host may be dissolved in a solvent and mixed with the guest molecule.

While the invention has been described with respect to certain embodiments modifications and variations may be made by one of ordinary skill in the art. All such modifications to and departures from the disclosed embodiments are deemed to be within the scope of the following claims.

