---

title: Semiconductor crystal high resolution imager
abstract: A radiation imaging device (). The radiation image device () comprises a subject radiation station () producing photon emissions (), and at least one semiconductor crystal detector () arranged in an edge-on orientation with respect to the emitted photons () to directly receive the emitted photons () and produce a signal. The semiconductor crystal detector () comprises at least one anode and at least one cathode that produces the signal in response to the emitted photons ().
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08063380&OS=08063380&RS=08063380
owner: The Regents of the University of California
number: 08063380
owner_city: Oakland
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050930
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 614 799 filed Sep. 30 2004 under 35 U.S.C. 119.

This invention was made with government support under Grant No. NASA NAG5 5349 awarded by The National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA . The government has certain rights in the invention.

A field of the invention is high resolution radiation imaging. An exemplary application of the invention is a positron emission tomography PET device.

Scintillation crystals have conventionally been used in non invasive medical diagnostic techniques that utilize radiation emitting materials. One such technique is positron emission tomography PET which provides in vivo functional information about the molecular biochemistry of a given radio labeled compound tracer introduced into a live subject. The radio label is a positron emitter which results in high energy photon emissions when positrons annihilate with electrons in body tissue. The tomographic imaging is possible through detection and localization of the many associated highly energetic photons emitted.

In conventional PET the photons are absorbed in a scintillation crystal which gives off a flash of light. The light is collected by a photodetector which detects and converts the light into electric charge that is amplified. The result is a robust electric signal with an amplitude that represents the energy of the incoming photon a location that indicates where the energetic photon came from within the imaging subject and a time stamp that signifies when the event occurred. For high spatial resolution imaging which will allow one to see very minute structures conventional PET relies on very accurate localization of the energetic photon emissions. This means that the scintillation detector must have very fine position resolution of the entering photons. However to efficiently absorb the incoming photons the crystal must also be relatively thick. Efficient absorption of incoming photons is important to allow for high count sensitivity which translates into good image quality. Further the signals that are created should be as robust as possible.

The state of the art was advanced by the invention described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 114 703 to Levin et al. The 703 patent provided an efficient method and devices for collection and made the large surfaces of long and narrow scintillation crystals available for detection. The 703 patent disclosed methods and devices that replaced the bulky and expensive photomultipliers PMTs by utilizing semiconductor photodetectors applying such semiconductor photodiodes directly to surfaces of the scintillation crystals including at least one large surface of the scintillation crystal. The device of the 703 patent improved the amount of light measured from a scintillation event while maintaining high spatial resolution offered by long and narrow scintillation crystals. The 703 patent also improved upon the single sheet style conventional devices that receive radiation in the large face of the crystal sheet by eliminating the coupling losses associated with the optical interfaces between the crystal and PMT and replacing the PMT of the conventional devices with directly deposited semiconductor photodiodes.

An overriding goal in radiation imaging is to obtain reconstructed images of very high spatial resolution. Spatial resolution improvements in reconstructed images have come most often from reductions in the size and increases in the number of scintillation crystals. Detection sensitivity though is another limiting factor. The 703 patent was directed to improvements in the detection sensitivity. To maintain high detection sensitivity and good image quality the challenges were to develop a finely pixellated scintillation crystal array with both high detection efficiency and high light collection. High detection efficiency means the crystals must be relatively long tightly packed and cover a relatively large axial field of view FOV . High spatial resolution means that the crystals are very narrow.

A difficulty with designs having small scintillation crystals for high resolution is that manufacturing is a significant challenge. It is costly and complex to handle many minute crystal elements and align them with corresponding photodetector elements. Slight misalignments might reduce light collection efficiency. A shortcoming with conventional crystal sheet devices for PET is that the sheet must be thin so that it produces a relatively narrow beam of light onto the photodetector plane. Thus crystal sheet detectors e.g. coincidence gamma ray cameras that have been used in PET suffer from low efficiency for stopping the high energy photons.

A prior application Ser. No. 10 664 768 now published as US 2004 0124360 A1 filed Sep. 17 2003 the 768 application provides additional background for the present invention. The 768 application discloses among other things scintillation crystal sheets arranged in stacks parallel to each other. Semiconductor photodetector positional detectors read light from large faces of the scintillation crystal sheets to detect interactions in the scintillation crystal sheets and independently provide positional information concerning the interactions relative to two axes.

A preferred embodiment in the 768 application includes an array of scintillation crystal sheets arranged in a device such that radiation is incident upon small end faces of the sheets end face geometry or edge on geometry and is fully described in the 768 application. Semiconductor photodiodes read light from large faces of the crystal sheets. The semiconductor photodiodes in the 768 application may be pixellated meaning that the semiconductor diodes provide both detection of photons generated in the scintillation crystals and positional information about a detection or may be one large pixel with positioning capability within that pixel. In another preferred embodiment of the 768 application radiation is incident on a large face of scintillation crystals large face geometry or face on geometry .

Preferred embodiments of the present invention provide a radiation imaging device. The radiation image device comprises a subject radiation station producing photon emissions and at least one semiconductor crystal detector arranged in an edge on orientation with respect to the emitted photons to directly receive the emitted photons and produce a signal. The semiconductor crystal detector comprises at least one anode and at least one cathode that produces the signal in response to the emitted photons.

A preferred method for radiation imaging is also provided. A plurality of semiconductor crystal detectors are provided which are oriented edge on with respect to a subject radiation station. Each of the semiconductor crystal detectors comprises a semiconductor crystal at least one anode disposed on a large face of the crystal and at least one cathode disposed on an opposing large face of the crystal. Emitted photons are directly received from the subject radiation station by the semiconductor crystal detectors so that the semiconductor crystal directly absorbs the emitted photons. The at least one anode and cathode produce electric pulses sufficient to determine a position of the emitted photons.

Preferred embodiments of the present invention provide among other things a radiation imaging device that includes a subject radiation station producing photon emissions and a semiconductor crystal detector that is arranged to directly detect the emitted photo ns from the radiation station and produce electric pulses. As opposed to conventional radiation imaging such as used in conventional PET a scintillation crystal is not necessary. This allows direct and more efficient conversion of the emitted photons into an electrical signal as compared to scintillation based detectors.

The crystal detectors are made from a high density high atomic number z semiconductor. Such semiconductors are selected from materials that are able to provide the necessary absorption of 511 keV photons for high quality imaging. In a preferred embodiment the semiconductor Cadmium Zinc Telluride CZT is used though other high z semiconductors may be used including but not limited to mercuric iodide high purity germanium etc. These and other preferred semiconductor materials allow absorption of the incoming photons and create signals that are sufficiently robust for quality imaging.

Though a high z semiconductor material is used the z and density may be lower than say a conventional organic scintillation crystal. Thus a single wafer may be insufficiently thick for necessary absorption of high energy photons. Due to the energy of the incoming photons it is important that the thickness of the crystal that is encountered by the photons be as great as possible. As a non limiting example it is desired that 90 95 or higher of the incoming photons be absorbed by the crystal. Based on the energy of the photons and the linear attenuation coefficient of the particular semiconductor material a particular needed thickness can be determined.

For CZT for example it is desired that the semiconductor crystal be at least 4 cm thick to efficiently absorb 511 keV photons. However it is impractical to form CZT crystals having such a thickness it would be difficult to create a high electric field across such devices and such crystals could produce undesirable charge loss or leakage current effects. Impurities and defects are present in semiconductor crystals and the longer electrons and holes have to drift before collection the more likely they will become attached to the impurities and defects.

To address the thickness concern and allow optimal use of semiconductors such as CZT the semiconductor crystals preferably are arranged or oriented to be edge on with respect to incoming photons. By edge on it is intended that the semiconductor crystals are arranged such that the incoming photons first encounter the edge of a given crystal plate as opposed to first encountering the face of the crystal plate face on . Incoming photons impinging edge on on a stack of these crystal plates will on average encounter a minimum thickness equal to the plate width of the crystal. This edge on arrangement allows the incoming photons to encounter as much of the semiconductor material as physically possible by making the crystal dimension traversed by the photons as great as possible.

A semiconductor crystal such as a CZT crystal arranged edge on with respect to incoming 511 keV photons can achieve superior 511 keV photon detection efficiency which leads to significantly increased image counts. The direct conversion of the 511 keV photon energy into charge allows CZT to achieve excellent energy resolutions 2 3 for 511 keV photons which helps to significantly reduce random and scatter coincidence background compared to scintillation crystal based systems for enhanced image data quantification and image contrast resolution. The semiconductor material and edge on arrangement may also for example allow for correction for impurities in the material so that less expensive materials may be used. The use of a relatively new cost effective CZT detector array material limited electronic complexity and commercially available readout electronics limits the development costs of a traditionally expensive detector technology.

Semiconductor crystal detectors may include an electrode configuration that is either pixellated or a cross strip arrangement. The pixellated or cross strip arrangement for example facilitates 3 D event localization. Spatial resolution can be determined by the electrode strip configuration deposited onto the semiconductor surfaces which for CZT can be 

Individual crystals in the preferred crystal array are preferably stacked and arranged with respect to the subject radiation station with very small gaps and 99 crystal packing fraction. For example the semiconductor crystal array may be arranged in a ring shape a plate shape or box shape about the subject radiation station. Particular preferred arrangements promote an order of magnitude higher 511 keV photon detection efficiency compared to scintillation based cylindrical designs which have a relatively large diameter short crystals and larger and varying gaps that lower crystal packing fraction. Combined improvements in detection efficiency and spatial and energy resolutions translate directly into a log order increase in molecular probe sensitivity compared to scintillation crystal systems that are available.

In preferred embodiments new methods may be provided to accurately position photons that have scattered in the detector gantry. This is not possible with scintillation crystal systems because the detectors have multiple array crystals multiplexed to one PMT.

Additionally preferred methods use CZT signals to correct the CZT time stamp to improve coincident time resolution using the known dependence of signal rise with interaction location within a detector. This is not possible with light signals generated in scintillation crystal since light signal propagation within the crystal is so rapid.

Referring now to the drawings a preferred embodiment PET device is shown . A subject radiation station of the device is conventional and is not illustrated in detail. The subject radiation station for example may be similar to commercial PET devices such as those manufactured by GE and Siemens. The subject radiation station produces photon emissions that are detected by a semiconductor crystal detection array . The detection array includes a plurality of semiconductor crystal detectors having crystal wafers or plates and a plurality of leads extending from a bottom edge of the plates. As shown the plates are stacked to form layers and the array is arranged with respect to the incoming photons in an edge on orientation such that the photons encounter a top edge of the plates .

The semiconductor crystal plates are made from semiconductor material such as Cadmium Zinc Telluride CZT in which the emitted photons interact with to create electrons and holes. For the crystal plates a very high resistivity material is preferred so that a large electric field may be applied without excess leakage current. The crystal preferably is high resistance yet as uniform as possible in that it should be as free as possible from defects and impurities.

Generally an electric field is created that is perpendicular to the large face of the plates. The created holes drift parallel to the field as does the resulting current. A resulting current spike is induced in anode and cathode electrodes disposed on the plates . Thus due to the edge on arrangement of the plates the incoming photons enter the edge that is parallel to the direction of the current created as opposed to a typical detection crystal arrangement in which the photons enter a face that is perpendicular to the current direction. The current spikes pulses provide signals which preferably are amplified digitized and stored and or analyzed. The particular plates that are hit by the photons as well as the particular electrodes hit provide X Y and Z position coordinates for the incoming photons . A ratio between the anode and cathode electrodes signals or measuring the time difference between arriving anode and cathode signals TAC provides a Z position coordinate in the direction going from anode to cathode .

The crystal plates provide position sensitive detectors for the PET device that absorb the emitted photons directly rather than through the extra energy conversion step involving scintillation crystals. The position sensitive semiconductor crystal detectors plates are preferably placed in the edge on configuration to facilitate high photon absorption efficiency. An important advantage of direct detection semiconductor detectors is that all of the incoming photon energy is converted directly into an electric signal in the semiconductors themselves rather than relying on the scintillation light conversion step which is relatively inefficient. This allows a larger basic electronic signal and better energy resolution in principle. Also very fine spatial resolution can be realized using standard techniques for fabricating the relevant electrodes for the semiconductor detector arrays. This could help to further push the resolution limits of PET or other radiation imaging techniques.

The edge on configuration allows the photons to traverse a relatively large length of the semiconductor. This is crucial for high absorption efficiency since typically a direct absorption semiconductor would have a lower atomic number and density than organic scintillation crystals and thus have less absorptive power for the incoming photons . 4 cm wide CZT arranged edge on with respect to incoming photons for example would provide adequate absorption efficiency for 511 keV photons in PET. If oriented in the conventional face on configuration many position sensitive semiconductor arrays would have to be stacked together to provide adequate detection efficiency since the devices are relatively thin in the face on direction. This would be inefficient and may also have complex manufacturing and electrical readout issues.

The electronic leads extending from electrodes on the position sensitive semiconductor crystal provide bias and readout for each crystal. As shown in the leads extend from the bottom edge rather than the backside which is the standard technique. With this configuration the leads do not get in the way and do not require significant gaps between semiconductors that would reduce photon absorption efficiency.

It is preferred that the position sensitive semiconductor plates are placed in very close proximity to each other within the stack . In this way a barrier separating each plate needs to be minimal or preferably non existent in order for there not to be significant gaps between detection planes for high crystal packing fraction optimal photon absorption efficiency and high sampling of the radiation distribution. If a barrier is used however an exemplary barrier is an electrically insulating layer with or without embedded electrical traces. To read out the signals from each electrode in this densely packed arrangement preferably the leads are coupled to an ASIC pre amp amplifier and trigger chip and then to a digitizer and controller. The position of the leads extending from the bottom edge allows the plates to be stacked closely and arranged edge on with respect to incoming photons which permits readout of signals from the electrodes.

In the plate shown anode side up in there are 64 anode 64 cathode strips 128 electronic channels per array . The electrodes are placed on the exemplary CZT wafer with a 0.5 mm pitch and the crossed strip configuration yields 0.5 0.5 0.25 mmpixels. In an alternative embodiment a larger strip pitch can be implemented to significantly reduce the number of electronic readout channels and therefore complexity and cost required. In other alternative embodiments to reduce the number of strips a fine anode and cathode strip pitch may be used but adjacent strips may be connected together to effectively obtain the desired larger strip pitch via the resulting subgroups of strips.

There is roughly a 1 mm dead area surrounding the perimeter of each array. One of the advantages of an edge on orientation is that this dead area will not affect inter module packing fraction. Additional steering electrodes at a 500 m pitch are placed in between the anode strips to shape the local electric field between anodes favorably for best charge collection by steering the charge toward the anodes. The components above below and to the right of the array are zebra strips that are used to connect both anode and cathode to readout circuitry. A guard ring disposed about the edge of the crystal makes the field uniform about the edge.

The anodes collect the charge for pulse height analysis and X position while the cathodes provide the Y position and timing signal for the event. The event position can be assigned to the anode with the largest signal or a weighted mean or other analysis of individual anode strip signals can be performed to obtain an intrinsic spatial resolution higher than the strip pitch. Anode sensitivity to hole signals is minimized by exploiting the small pixel effect in a strip electrode configuration by using narrow anodes. Thus the detector plate can provide a selectable spatial resolution based on the pattern of the electrodes and the distance between traces. This resolution in preferred embodiments can be made much higher than available to conventional scintillation crystals.

An exemplary method for providing time position and energy using the exemplary semiconductor crystal detectors is shown generally in . A high energy photon enters a detector gantry holding the detectors step and the photons interacts in at least one of the detectors creating electrons and holes step . The holes drift toward the plane on which the cathodes are deposited step and the electrons drift toward the plane on which the anodes are deposited.

To determine a time of photon interaction an event time stamp is measured from a rise of the cathode signal step . The event time stamp is corrected using a known dependence of the signal rise time or other time dependent signal properties with Z interaction depth coordinates step . To determine the Z coordinate the induced signals on the anode and cathode are digitized step . Interaction coordinates X and Y are determined from the anode and cathode signals and the Z coordinates are determined either by the cathode to anode pulse height ratio or the time difference between the arrival of the cathode and anode pulses step .

Event energy is determined from anode pulse height step . The event energy is corrected using a known dependence e.g. via system calibration of pulse height and the determined Z coordinate step .

The cathodes are indicated as horizontal bands and in the exemplary detector shown are 400 m wide and separated by 100 m. In one preferred design the cathode strips will be 4.95 mm wide on a 5 mm pitch. Because of the relative size of the cathodes and anodes the cathode signals are induced as soon as the charge is created. Thus the cathode signals are used for event timing. The cathode side is maintained n ear ground potential.

With the cross strip electrode configuration such as that shown in the cross strip plate the depth of interaction Z between the anode and cathode is strongly correlated to the ratio of the cathode to anode pulse height and also on the time difference between the arrival of the anode and cathode signals. This relationship is important since it gives the Z position for the event. For photon interactions that occur closer to the top cathode side of the detector more electron trapping can occur. This causes the anode charge collection and therefore the energy signal to be depth dependent. Intrinsic variations in electron transport throughout a detector can be calibrated in every pixel versus depth. Thus differences in detector quality e.g. impurity levels can be tolerated in the small pixel or cross strip detectors compared to other more common detector designs. For PET when the arrays are oriented edge on with respect to incoming photons the depth coordinate Z between the cathode and anode can represent either the axial or the tangential transaxial coordinate in the corresponding system design depending on the orientation of the detector plates with respect to the system axis.

Signal propagation characteristics in the cross strip detector have been studied. Signals induced on the cathodes typically fall off approximately linearly with interaction depth from the cathode and for interactions not immediately below a cathode strip are sensed by two or more cathodes. The anodes on the other hand because of their narrow width and the presence of the broader steering electrode do not sense the electron cloud until it is relatively close. Thus since the weighting potential is localized in the immediate vicinity of each anode the anode signals are not significantly affected by hole trapping. The effect of this is that the anodes are sensitive mostly to the electron signal equivalent to the small pixel effect often exploited in the design of pixellated CZT detectors. The electron signal however is still subject to trapping at roughly the 10 level for shallow interactions occurring near the cathode plane due to relatively long drift times to the anode. Given the large dependence of the cathode signal on depth the anode signal can be corrected for its depth dependence by analyzing and calibrating the cathode anode signal ratio to substantially mitigate photopeak tailing and achieve energy resolutions of 2 FWHM at 511 keV.

Since the electron charge cloud produced by a high energy photon interaction may be as large as a few hundred microns at the anodes for strip detectors with 500 m pitch a significant fraction of interactions will produce charge clouds that are sensed or shared by two adjacent anodes. Charge sharing effects have been studied extensively. Additional improvement in the photopeak response is possible through the use of neighbor strip summing to correct for charge sharing. To recover the full signal for such events the preferred data processing system includes the contributions from neighbor strips in the event energy measurement. That is the pulse heights from all involved anodes are summed for each event to form the total pulse height from which the energy response is determined. In addition the transverse position can be accurately determined from the ratio of the individual anode signals involved. This information allows a correction for signal loss to the steering electrodes and gaps.

Instead of the cross strip CZT detector plate alternative embodiments include a fully pixellated matrix of tiny square pixels electrodes CZT array examples of which are shown in . This array type preferably includes one common plane cathode and a pixellated anode plane. Two devices tested had 5 mm thickness and 64 8 8 and 256 16 16 pixels respectively. The 64 pixel device had 2.4 mm pixels platinum on a 2.5 mm pitch eV Products Saxonburg Pa. . The 256 pixel device had 2.25 mm pixels indium on a 2.5 mm pitch Imarad Rehovot Israel . Due to the relatively large anode pixel sizes and fully pixellated nature these devices will not yield as good energy and spatial resolution results as preferred cross strip arrays and may require over five times as many readout channels per area. However for photon detection methods other than PET it may be desired to use the pixellated arrangement.

The resistivity and leakage current in both pixellated detectors were measured by measuring the I R drop across the G load resistor on each detector. The measured resistivity and leakage current for the eV Products and Imarad CZT material are respectively 1.5 10and 3.0 10 cm and 0.4 and 2.0 nA at 200V across the detectors. These parameters reassure us that the Imarad material which is a possible material for a preferred cross strip detector because it is less costly is of high quality.

To connect the electrodes of the detectors tested to the readout electronics zebra strips z strips by Fujipolly were utilized in an exemplary embodiment which allow easy assembly and disassembly for testing. The z strips are pieces of silicon rubber with silver particle loaded planes of strips with 125 m pitch. For the cross strip array the strips preferably are placed on the pads at the end of each electrode plane on either side of the detector and pads on the bias board are aligned with the other side of the z strip. The bias board provides the bias R C network to each individual anode and the steering electrodes and runs their signals to a set of microconnectors. By applying pressure on the z strips the electrical contact between the pads and electrodes are made. In the case shown in shaped z strips were used to channel the signals from the top of the detector to the circuit board directly underneath the array not shown .

In CZT the interaction depth for each event can be accurately determined from the ratio of cathode to anode signals and with proper calibration of correction factors this charge attenuation affect can be corrected for each event. That is using the cathode to anode ratio correction factors are determined and the pulse height for each event is multiplied by the appropriate correction factor. Each event can be thus be corrected for depth dependent charge attenuation effects such as hole trapping and high quality corrected spectra such as shown in may be always achieved with an effective increase in photopeak efficiency as compared to the before correction case. The measured energy resolution at 511 keV is 5 and 2 FWHM respectively before and after pulse height correction for both the flood and collimated cases. In the plots is shown the case where those events with cathode anode ratios that are too high 1 or too low 

To assess coincidence time resolution measurements in CZT we arranged two 2 mm thick CZT detectors with planar cathodes were arranged edge on with respect to each other Na point source were placed between the two detectors and the time to amplitude converter TAC response was recorded as a function of bias voltage and energy threshold leading edge discrimination was used . The start and stop signals for the TAC unit were provided by the two detector cathode signals. shows the resulting TAC spectrum using a 400 V bias and a 450 keV energy threshold. A coincidence time resolution of 8.4 ns FWHM was achieved.

The system coincidence time resolution is determined by the fluctuation of the slope of the voltage signal per time dV dt induced on the cathode by a moving charge carrier. This slope fluctuates when there are a range of energies absorbed significant leakage current and varying interaction depths. With a narrow window around the photopeak and a relatively low bias voltage the rise time fluctuations are dominated by the interaction depth dependent charge collection. Interaction depth information provided by CZT detectors may be used to improve coincidence time resolution by correcting event time stamps similar to the method used to correct pulse height variations for better energy resolution.

Next the spatial response of the cross strip CZT detector was tested. The 32 32 2 mmcross strip array has anode and cathode strip pitches of 0.5 mm. By grouping sets of two adjacent anodes and 10 adjacent cathodes one can simulate a preferred anode and cathode strip configuration respectively which have 1.0 mm and 5 mm pitch. shows the resulting anode response for three such groupings of adjacent anodes. A collimated beam 0.8 mm width of 511 keV photons was stepped across the three effective strips in 0.2 mm steps. The plot shows the effective 1 mm anode pitch response and how the charge is shared between adjacent anodes as the beam translates over the region between them.

Next the spatial response of pixellated Imarad and eV products detectors was assessed when oriented edge on with respect to incoming 511 keV photons. In one preferred system configuration shown in pixellated CZT detector arrays are arranged in a ring edge on with respect to incoming photons . This means the tangential coordinate of an interaction in the scanner would be determined by where in between the cathode an anode energy was deposited. Thus a key ingredient is to demonstrate accurate capabilities to determine the interaction depth between cathode and anode.

The edge of the eV Products and Imarad pixellated arrays were irradiated with a 0.8 mm wide beam of 511 keV photons and the beam position was stepped in several spots between the cathode and anode. To analyze the signal formation properties as a function of depth a TAC analysis was used this time with the start signal provided by the cathode and the stop by the delayed anode signal of the same detector. The TAC signal is an indication of interaction depth between the anode and cathode and so is directly related to the ratio of cathode to anode signals. A small TAC signal represents a deep interaction relatively far from the cathode with shorter charge drift times to the anode and more complete charge collection by the anode. A large TAC value corresponds to relatively shallow events close to the cathode with longer electron drift times to the anode.

Next characterization of 511 keV Interactions in exemplary CZT arrays cross strip arrays was determined. Monte Carlo simulations of 511 keV photon interactions were performed in both CZT and common scintillation crystals used in high resolution PET systems. In the simulations for all materials a sharp beam of 511 keV photons was directed onto the center of an 8 cm wide by 4 cm high area of detector material. This simulated area corresponds to sixteen of the preferred 40 40 5 mmthick detectors stacked together and arranged edge on with respect to the incoming photon beam. For the CZT simulations 4 cm thickness was assumed in the direction parallel to the beam as preferred see .

The box configuration shown in provides certain benefits for photon detection. Tests performed have shown that the box configuration provides substantially improved coincident detection efficiency e.g. a factor of seven also referred to as instrument sensitivity and spatial resolution 3 D interaction localization and lower random and scatter background contamination for enhanced image quality and quantitative accuracy compared to conventional high resolution animal PET systems. This is due to for example the small possible system detector aperture so that detectors are closer to photon emissions from the subject the detectors can be made thicker the detectors can be packed more closely together and the detectors can have higher photon energy resolution e.g. 3 vs. 18 . Higher energy resolution improves instrument sensitivity because it allows one to use a narrower electronic pulse height window setting for rejecting more random and scatter background events while maintaining a large fraction of good events.

The improved coincident detection efficiency may allow in turn improved detection visualization and quantification of subtle molecular signals emanating from molecular processes that are interrogated using a PET molecular probe. Counting more annihilation photons in a given time means less smoothing required during the tomographic image reconstruction process which helps to achieve the desired spatial resolution for better visualization of molecular signals. Alternatively such efficiency requires less imaging time to obtain a given image quality level.

For scintillation crystal simulations assumed 1.0 1.5 and 2.0 cm thickness were assumed. 1.0 cm thickness detectors are used in existing Concorde Microsystems LSO and Philips Medical Systems GSO high resolution small animal PET systems. The results for the types of interactions a 511 keV encounters are given in Table 1 below 106 events simulated . The 1.5 and 2.0 cm thick scintillation crystal data is present for comparison.

In the simulated detector the events are considered fully absorbed if a photoelectric absorption results somewhere within the region irradiated and the total energy deposited is above a given threshold. For the preferred CZT detector arrays tested the energy resolution at 511 keV is 5 and 2 FWHM respectively before and after depth dependent pulse height corrections. This high energy resolution allows one to use a much narrower energy window while still maintaining a high sensitivity. Note that even without depth dependent corrections 5 FWHM energy resolution at 511 keV is outstanding compared to the best number of 12 14 from relatively large LSO crystals that do not have interaction depth resolution. If the system lower energy threshold can be set even lower e.g. at 470 keV this would significantly reduce random and scatter coincidences as well as limit system dead time.

Due to the difficulties in simulating accurate energy resolutions for all scintillation crystal dimensions for a fair comparison with CZT perfect energy resolution for all materials was assumed With energy resolution effects incorporated the significantly higher energy resolution of CZT would modify the values in Table 1 in a direction even more in favor of CZT. Thus for the simulations it is assumed if the sum of all interaction energies per event is not exactly 511 keV it was placed under the Only Compton category. A small fraction of the Only Compton events would be moved into and increase the Fully Absorbed values provided the event energy sum was above a defined threshold. Note also that a fraction of 1 Compton PE events that occur within a highly localized volume cannot be distinguished from a single photoabsorption which would effectively increase the Photoelectric Only column value. For example in the preferred CZT detectors such highly confined events would add 6.6 to the current effective Photoelectric Only value of 15.4 for a total of 22.0 effective Photoelectric Only . If the photon traversed the material without any interactions it was put in the No Interaction column. Note the sum of Fully Absorbed Only Compton No Interaction values is always 100 . From the simulations one can make the following conclusions 

Total absorption probabilities are higher in the preferred CZT detector. From Table 1 it is seen that although CZT in principle has a smaller linear attenuation coefficient at 511 keV in the preferred edge on orientation of the CZT detectors the photons will see a much greater thickness of material 4 cm . Thus compared to 

Multiple Interactions are not a problem for the preferred CZT detectors. In scintillation or CZT detector systems due to scatter the events may be absorbed in multiple detector modules. From Table 1 it is seen that that the number of fully absorbed two interaction events 1 Compton PE occur more commonly for 2 cm thick LSO and BGO than it does for GSO or 4 cm thick CZT. The fact that there is a higher probability of 2 interactions in 4 cm thick CZT compared to LSO and GSO is not a problem. In the preferred CZT detector configuration the following are true 

 a The interaction sites may be distinguished in most cases due to the detector segmentation. For example of the 24.5 value for 1 Compton PE events in CZT 17.7 will have both interactions within the same 5 mm thick detector slab preferred and of those 16.5 93 are resolved by the cathode and anode segmentation. The 1.2 7 non resolved two interaction events would have two spatial separated interaction sites that occur within the same pixel defined by 1 mm anode and 5 mm cathode strips.

 b The location of the first interaction can be accurately determined using the kinematics of Compton scatter. For example of the 16.5 resolved 1 Compton PE events 4.0 will have one energy deposition of 20 165 keV and due to kinematics the lower energy deposition will be the first Compton interaction site. The other 16.5 4.0 12.5 resolved two interaction events have the lower energy deposition between 165 and 255 keV. In that case selecting the first interaction location to be where the lower energy deposition interaction occurs will on average result in 

 c The sum of the energy deposited in adjacent detectors may be determined. For example of the 24.5 1 Compton PE value 24.5 17.7 6.9 see a will have interactions in two adjacent 5 mm slabs. The total energy for the event would be the sum of the energies recorded in the two detectors above a selected threshold. Again using Compton kinematics selecting the first interaction to be the one with least energy deposition on average results in 

Looking at photon count efficiency sensitivity estimates for a preferred device one can estimate the 511 keV point source sensitivity at the center of an example 8 cm diameter 4 and 8 cm long 4 cm thick cylindrical shell made of CZT. Exemplary CZT cross strip detector designs and arrangements are depicted in and A D. From detector simulation results Table 1 it is expected that 70 of events directed at a detector will be fully absorbed with energy greater than 470 keV an example preferred energy threshold. Thus the coincidence detection efficiency at 511 keV is 0.7 0.7 0.49. One can assemble e.g. stack the detectors edge on to form a ring with 40 m spacing or 99 packing fraction. The 5 mm detector thickness in this case corresponds to the tangential transaxial dimensions of each detector. The geometric efficiency of the preferred cylindrical shell 8 cm diameter is roughly 50 and 67 respectively for 4 and 8 cm long cylinders. Thus total coincident count sensitivity would be approximately 0.49 0.99 0.5 or 0.67 24 or 33 respectively for the 4 or 8 cm diameter long system. The 8 cm long system provides 38 more sensitivity compared to the 4 cm long system. These sensitivity values are an order of magnitude higher than in existing systems which are 

To assess a system count rate and dead time assuming a 100 Ci point source in air that translates to 3.7 M dis sec or a detected photon singles rate of see above 2 photons 0.7 0.99 0.5 3.7 M sec 2.6 Mcps for the 4 cm long cylinder. The 4 cm long detector ring preferred comprises 50 CZT detector arrays. Thus the singles count rate per array is approximately 50 kHz for a 100 Ci point source in air. The preferred CZT arrays and data acquisition system will be able to handle this singles event rate. If one assumes the system dead time is determined by the degree of pulse pileup and a maximum detector shaping time of 2 s in the RENA 2 system each array will independently have a singles rate count capability of 500 kHz before pulse pileup occurs. Thus for most source configurations dead time is expected to be very low. In fact one could use up to a 1 mCi point source in air before pulse pileup and dead time occurs. The RENA 2 data acquisition system can handle event rates up to 1 MHz per 36 channel chip. An example design goal of 

In additional experiments performed for additional embodiments the detector array electrode planes were oriented both face on perpendicular to and edge on parallel to with respect to the incoming photon direction. For each event the anode and cathode signals involved in the interactions were read out and digitized in list mode. Both 22Na 511 keV and 137Cs 662 keV photon sources were used for these additional experiments.

The cross strip CZT array irradiated face on was analyzed as shown in the arrangement of . In order to mimic the proposed cross strip electrode design for cross strip array experiments adjacent anode and cathode strips of the original cross strip array were grouped to produce effective 1 mm anode and 5 mm cathode strip pitches. Unlike the square pixel arrays studied due to the small pixel effect and the anode weighting potential effect of the cross strip array design the anode pulse heights from the cross strip detector are much less dependent upon the interaction location depth between the cathode and anode. Thus pulse height corrections do not affect the spectra as drastically as for the large pixel arrays. With correction the cross strip prototype achieves 2.5 full width half maximum FWHM at 511 keV as observed in . The corrected data shown also has a selected cathode anode signal ratio.

To demonstrate an embodiment in which pixellated detectors are irradiated edge on show the measured raw uncorrected energy spectra results from irradiating the edge of the 5 mm thick eV Products array with a collimated beam 0.8 mm beam width of 511 keV photons at different depths between the cathode and anode of each detector. show similar results for the Imarad arrays. shows the configuration used. Since the pixels are relatively large there is a significant charge deficit induced on the anode by hole trapping for each event which produces a low energy tailing on the photopeak in the raw uncorrected spectra.

In another preferred embodiment cross strip CZT detector arrays are oriented edge on with respect to incoming photons and configured tangentially to form a tomography ring as shown in FIGS. and A D . In this arrangement the axial coordinate of a photon interaction would be determined by the anode strip with the largest signal the radial coordinate by the corresponding hit cathode strip and the tangential or transaxial coordinate by the interaction depth between the cathode and anode. The plots in demonstrate that positioning interactions in the direction between the cathode and anode may also be accomplished using simply the measured cathode anode pulse height ratios for each event to achieve tangential spatial resolutions on the order of 1 mm with a high degree of spatial linearity. This edge on data is shown for the eV Products and Imarad detector arrays.

The spatial temporal and spectral information required for preferred detectors will rely upon good quality signals from both the anode and cathode. One can estimate the contribution of leakage current to anode and cathode energy resolution in the proposed cross strip Imarad detector through measurements on the pixellated Imarad detector. The measured leakage current for the Imarad CZT material per anode is 1.6 nA at 172 V across the pixellated detector we that was tested resistivity of 1.3 1010 W cm .

The effective Imarad array pixel size is 2.5 mm 2.5 mm 6.25 mm. The proposed Imarad material cross strip array will have a 1 mm 40 mm 40 mmanode and a 5 mm 40 mm 200 mm2 cathode. Since the leakage current scales as the strip readout area the leakage currents for the proposed cross strip array for the same detector bias would be roughly 40 6.25 1.6 10 nA per anode strip and 200 6.25 1.6 50 nA per cathode strip. At a preferred 500V bias these leakage current values would be roughly 500 172 higher or 29 and 145 nA respectively per anode and cathode strip. The contribution of these estimated leakage currents in the proposed cross strip Imarad detector to the energy resolution was estimated by adjusting the bias on the pixellated Imarad array until the measured leakage current at the anode or cathode corresponded to these leakage current values and the noise pulse height resolution was measured for both electrodes. The results of these measurements indicate that the leakage current in the proposed detectors will contribute roughly 2.3 FWHM per anode and 6.0 per cathode strip at 511 keV. Using the measured anode strip resolution of 2.5 FWHM at 511 keV one expects to achieve an overall 511 keV energy resolution of 3.3 and 6.5 FWHM respectively for the anode and cathode energy resolutions. The cathode to anode pulse height ratio is used to determine the pulse height and temporal correction factors as well as the interaction depth. These anode and cathode pulse height resolutions propagate to roughly a depth position between cathode and anode resolution of 0.6 mm FWHM assuming a point size beam.

While specific embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described it should be understood that other modifications substitutions and alternatives are apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. Such modifications substitutions and alternatives can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention which should be determined from the appended claims.

