---

title: Tracking and blocking of spam directed to clipping services
abstract: A method and apparatus tracks and blocks content requested by a first remote device for forwarding over a network to a second remote device. For a given content item, one or more usage identities are tracked. Usage identities may include any combination of one or more of a source identity, a content identity, and/or a destination identity. One or more thresholds associated with the tracked usage identities are applied to determine whether a request to forward content should be blocked; a threshold is a limit on the number of times a content item having a particular usage identity may be forwarded within a time period. Misuse of content-forwarding messaging services by spammers and the like may thereby be discouraged. In one embodiment, the invention may be employed as part of a content clipping service for forwarding content to mobile devices by way of SMS or another mobile messaging technology.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07706263&OS=07706263&RS=07706263
owner: Yahoo! Inc.
number: 07706263
owner_city: Sunnyvale
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051215
---
The present invention relates generally to managing communication of content over a network and more particularly but not exclusively to an apparatus and method for tracking and blocking content sent by way of a clipping service to remote devices such as mobile devices to prevent and discourage spam.

The problem of spam in established communication technologies such as electronic mail is well recognized. Spam may include unsolicited messages sent by a computer user over a network to a large number of recipients sometimes including attached files or hyperlinks. Spam includes unsolicited commercial messages but spam has come to be understood more broadly to additionally include unsolicited messages sent to a large number of recipients and or to a targeted user or targeted domain for malicious disruptive or abusive purposes regardless of commercial content. For example a spammer might send messages in bulk to a particular domain to exhaust its resources.

Spam has more recently emerged as a problem afflicting other means of communicating over networks such as messaging technologies for mobile devices and instant messaging IM systems. Spam may be especially harmful to providers and users of these messaging technologies which are often characterized by immediacy and or reduced bandwidth. Moreover with respect to mobile messaging spam may impose a direct cost on users who are often charged for each message such as a Short Message Service SMS text message received by a mobile telephone or other mobile device.

Clipping services provide a mechanism by which a messaging technology such as SMS IM or the like may be employed to enable a user at one remote device to provide a selected clip of content to another remote device. If the clipping service is made generally available to network users however it is at risk of being exploited by spammers. Thus it is with respect to these considerations and others that the present invention has been made.

The present invention will now be described more fully hereinafter with reference to the accompanying drawings which form a part hereof and which show by way of illustration specific exemplary embodiments by which the invention may be practiced. The invention may however be embodied in many different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth herein rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the scope of the invention to those skilled in the art. The following detailed description is therefore not to be taken in a limiting sense.

Throughout the specification and claims the following terms take the meanings explicitly associated herein unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. The phrase in one embodiment as used herein does not necessarily refer to the same embodiment though it may. The phrase in another embodiment as used herein does not necessarily refer to a different embodiment although it may. The term or is used herein in its inclusive sense and is equivalent to the term and or unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. The term based on is not exclusive and allows for being based on additional factors not described unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. In addition throughout the specification the meanings of a an and the include plural references. Plural nouns include both the singular and the plural unless the context indicates otherwise. The meaning of in includes in and on. The terms comprising including containing having and characterized by are open ended or inclusive and do not exclude additional unrecited elements or steps.

The present invention is directed towards a method and apparatus for tracking and blocking content selected by a first remote device for forwarding over a network to a second remote device which may be for example a mobile device or a nonmobile computing device. The invention may be practiced as part of or in association with a content clipping service a messaging service that enables forwarding of selected content and the like including services that employ SMS or other messaging technologies for mobile devices IM services for mobile and or nonmobile devices and the like. One example of a content clipping service is described in the co pending and commonly owned patent application Method for Providing a Clip for Viewing at a Remote Device U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 951 982 which incorporated herein by reference.

In accordance with the invention a request to forward a selected content item to an identified remote recipient device is received over a network from a remote requesting device. The content item may include selected content of any kind such as content selected from a browsed web page and or content stored at the remote requesting device and may include for example images photos documents news articles audio data video data sports scores weather information driving directions business or personal contact information and so forth. Each of the remote requesting device and the remote recipient device may be for example a personal computer a mobile device such as a mobile telephone a handheld computer a pager a personal digital assistant PDA or another kind of device equipped for communication of data over wired and or wireless networks.

A received request to have a selected content item provided to a remote device is associated with one or more usage identities and one or more usage identity thresholds. The usage identities may include any combination of one or more of a source identity a content identity and a destination identity. A source identity identifies the user or device that is requesting the forwarding of content. A content identity identifies the content itself. A destination identity identifies the recipient specified in the request.

For a given content item a particular set of usage identities may be tracked and a particular set of thresholds may be applied to determine whether a content forwarding request is to be blocked or allowed. In general a threshold is a limit on the number of times a content item having a particular usage identity may be forwarded within a certain time period. In one embodiment the requesting device selects a clip of content browsed on a web page and the web server providing the web page and enabling the content clipping may specify the particular usage identities that are to be determined and or the particular thresholds that are to be applied to the clipping request. In another embodiment usage identities and or thresholds are determined based on default settings or default values defined by the clipping service. Other embodiments are contemplated. Depending on the policies applicable to a given content item if one or more thresholds are exceeded the request to forward the content to the remote recipient is blocked. An error notification may be sent to the requesting device. If the one or more applicable thresholds are not exceeded the content may be forwarded as requested.

The invention may be employed to identify prevent and or discourage usage of messaging services by spammers and other requesters who abuse these services additionally the invention may be employed for other purposes for which application of usage identity thresholds is useful. Spam generally takes the form of a large number of messages sent by a particular source device within a given period of time a large number of messages having a particular content sent within a given period of time and or a large number of messages sent to a particular destination device within a given period of time. By applying thresholds associated with tracked usage identities content forwarding requests that are more likely to be spam may be identified and blocked. Moreover those who might attempt to use a content clipping service or another kind of content forwarding message service for spamming or other abusive purposes may decide not to engage in such behavior if it is likely that their efforts would be obstructed.

By applying different thresholds to different kinds of content items web content providers and clipping services may differentiate among content items based on various factors. For example a set of relatively low thresholds for blocking content forwarding requests may be useful for example for content items that raise sensitivity or security concerns. On the other hand higher thresholds might be specified for content items that are expected to be relatively popular such as a recent news item or sports score and thus be associated with a large number of legitimate content forwarding requests.

Generally remote devices may include virtually any computing device capable of connecting to another computing device and receiving information. Such devices include portable devices such as cellular telephones smart phones display pagers radio frequency RF devices infrared IR devices personal digital assistants PDAs handheld computers wearable computers tablet computers integrated devices combining one or more of the preceding devices and the like. Remote devices may also include other computing devices such as personal computers microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics workstations and the like. As such remote devices typically range widely in their capabilities and features. For example a cell phone may have a numeric keypad and a few lines of monochrome LCD display for displaying text. As another example a web enabled remote device may have a touch sensitive screen a stylus and several lines of color LCD display in which both text and graphics may be displayed. The web enabled remote device may include a browser application enabled to receive and to send messages in accordance with a protocol such as Wireless Application Protocol WAP iMode Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP and the like. In one embodiment the browser application is enabled to employ a markup language such as Wireless Markup Language WML or WMLScript and the like to display a received message and to send a message to a remote device.

Each of remote devices also may include at least one client application that is configured to receive content of various kinds from another computing device. The client application may include the capability to provide and receive textual content graphical content audio content and the like. The client application may further provide identifying information that indicates a content format that the remote device is enabled to employ. Such information may be provided in a message or the like sent to clipping server . Although remote devices are illustrated as devices that communicate with other devices by way of wireless network and network it will be appreciated that in other embodiments of the invention devices functioning similarly to remote devices may be wired computing devices linked to network rather than or in addition to devices that communicate wirelessly.

Each of remote devices may be configured to receive display and or send a message such as through Short Message Service SMS Multimedia Message Service MMS instant messaging IM Internet Relay Chat IRC Jabber Enhanced Messaging Service EMS text messaging Smart Messaging Over the Air OTA messaging and the like with another computing device such as clipping server . The message may itself include an item of content such as a text message a bitmap image a photo an audio file movie graphic or the like. The message may also include a URL a script that provides or includes a URL and the like. Each of remote devices may be configured to employ the URL or the like to request access to another message or content item from clipping server or another remote computing device. The other message or content item may include for example an email message a document an audio file a video file a compressed file movie graphic or the like.

Client device may include virtually any computing device capable of sending and receiving a message over a network such as network and the like to and from another computing device such as clipping server web server and the like. The set of such devices may include devices that connect using a wired and or wireless communications medium such as personal computers workstations mobile devices PDAs and the like. Client device may include a browser application that is configured to receive and render web pages and the like. The browser application may be configured to receive and display graphics text multimedia and the like employing a markup language such as Hypertext Markup Language HTML and so forth. Client device may further include a messaging client application such as an IM client an IRC client a clipping service client and the like for sending and receiving messages to and from another device. The browser application messaging client application or another application running on client device may enable client device to select content such as content received from web server to be clipped reformatted and delivered to a remote device such as remote devices by way of clipping server .

Wireless network is configured to couple remote devices and their components with network . Wireless network may include any of a variety of wireless sub networks that may further overlay standalone ad hoc networks and the like to provide an infrastructure oriented connection for remote devices . Such sub networks may include mesh networks wireless local area networks WLANs cellular networks and the like. Wireless network may further include an autonomous system of terminals gateways routers and the like connected by wireless radio links and the like. In some embodiments these connectors may be configured to move freely and randomly and organize themselves arbitrarily such that the topology of wireless network may change rapidly.

Wireless network may further employ a plurality of access technologies including second 2G third 3G or fourth 4G generation radio access for cellular systems WLAN Wireless Router WR mesh and the like. Such access technologies may enable wide area coverage for mobile devices such as remote devices with varying degrees of mobility. For example wireless network may enable a radio connection through a radio network access such as Global System for Mobile communication GSM General Packet Radio Services GPRS Enhanced Data GSM Environment EDGE Wideband Code Division Multiple Access WCDMA and the like. In essence wireless network may include virtually any wireless communication mechanism by which information may travel between remote devices and another computing device a network.

Network is configured to couple various computing devices to one another including client device web server clipping server and through wireless network remote devices to enable such devices to engage in data communication. Network is enabled to employ any form of medium for communicating information from one electronic device to another. Network may include interconnected networks such as the Internet wireless access networks such as a cellular network and or wired networks and may include local area networks LANs wide area networks WANs direct connections such as through a universal serial bus USB port other kinds of network connections or any combination thereof. On an interconnected set of LANs including those based on differing architectures and protocols a router typically acts as a link between LANs enabling messages to be sent from one to another. Communication links within LANs typically include twisted wire pair or coaxial cable while communication links between networks may utilize analog telephone lines full or fractional dedicated digital lines including T1 T2 T3 and T4 Integrated Services Digital Networks ISDNs Digital Subscriber Lines DSLs wireless links including satellite links or other communications links known to those skilled in the art. Furthermore remote computers and other related electronic devices may be remotely connected to either LANs or WANs by way of a modem and temporary telephone link. In essence network includes any communication method by which information may travel between computing devices. Network is constructed for use with various wired and wireless communication protocols such as TCP IP UDP SIP SMS RTP WAP CDMA TDMA WCDMA CDMA 2000 EDGE UMTS GSM GPRS UWB WiMax IEEE 802.11x and the like.

Each of web server and clipping server may include any computing device capable of connecting to network . Web server may generally include any computing device capable to connecting to network to enable a user of client device to browse content provided as web pages or the like. Clipping server may include any computing device capable of connecting to network to enable clipping service user to clip content for delivery to a remote device. Devices that may operate as web server or as clipping server include server computers personal computers desktop computers multiprocessor systems and the like. Those skilled in the art will appreciate that other embodiments of the invention may include mechanisms other than a clipping server to forward content to mobile and or non mobile recipient devices such as an IM server in which content may be sent to IM users as instant messages or attachments to instant messages.

As shown clipping service architecture includes interacting components including clipping service clipping service Application Programming Interface API usage tracking database SMS gateway and web content service provider . Web content service provider may be situated at web server . Web content provider clipping service clipping service API usage tracking database and SMS gateway may be included as part of one device or a plurality of interconnected devices.

Web content service provider is configured to provide a request to forward clipped content to clipping service . Web content service provider may also specify one or more usage identities associated with the request for clipping service to determine and store in usage tracking database . Web content service provider may also specify one or more thresholds to apply based on the specified usage identities.

Clipping server API is one embodiment of a mechanism for enabling communication between clipping service and web content service provider . However the invention is not limited to APIs and virtually any other communication mechanism may be employed without departing from the scope or spirit of the invention. For example an messaging protocol may be employed or a secure transfer communications link may be established or the like.

In one embodiment however access to clipping service API may be provided by way of web content service provider . For example a web page provided over a network by web content service provider to a client browser application may include components that enable content in the page to be selected for clipping and forwarding to a remote device by way of calls to functions exposed by clipping service API . Alternatively the browser application or another application may provide a facility whereby a user may select content for clipping and forwarding to a remote device in which access to clipping service API may be provided directly to the user.

Clipping service enables a remote clipping service user such as clipping service user to request a selected content item to be forwarded to an identified remote device. The remote recipient device may be identified for example by providing the cell phone number of the device or another identifier.

In addition clipping server may be configured to also perform usage tracking. Clipping service applies the specified thresholds retrieving usage tracking information from usage tracking database to determine whether the request to forward content is to be blocked as is explained further above and below.

If clipping service determines that a request to forward a clipped content item to a remote device will be allowed the content item is formatted so that it may be viewed at the remote device and an SMS message including the formatted content item or a link to a network location at which the formatted item may be retrieved is sent to the remote device by way of SMS gateway . However the invention is not constrained to the use of SMS and another messaging protocol may also be used including instant messaging MMS or the like.

Network device includes central processing unit input output interface video display adapter main memory removable secondary storage nonremovable secondary storage and network interface unit all in communication with one another by way of bus . Main memory generally includes RAM and ROM and may include other storage means such as one or more levels of cache not shown . Nonremovable storage may include one or more nonvolatile mass storage devices such as a hard disk a tape drive an optical drive. A hard disk is used by device for storage of programs and data. Removable storage may include a storage device such as a floppy disk drive. Main memory stores operating system for controlling the operation of device . A general purpose or special purpose operating system may be employed. Within ROM may be stored firmware for bootloading and controlling the low level operation of device . Firmware may include for example a Basic Input Output System BIOS . As illustrated in device can communicate with a network such as network or wireless network of by way of network interface unit which is configured for use with various communication protocols such as TCP IP UDP IP and the like. Network interface unit may include a transceiver transceiving device network interface card NIC and the like. Input output interface enables communication with external or peripheral input output devices such as a keyboard and a mouse.

Main memory removable storage and nonremovable storage illustrate one type of processor readable media namely computer storage media. Computer storage media may include volatile nonvolatile removable and nonremovable media implemented by means of any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Examples of computer storage media include RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium that can be used to store information and that can be accessed by a computing device.

Main memory also stores program code and data. In addition to operating system one or more applications are loaded into RAM and run by way of operating system . Examples of applications include web services clip manager clip store and clipping service usage tracker .

Web services are configured to manage requests from a browser application running on a client device and to deliver web based content in response. In one embodiment web services interact with clip manager to enable clipping of content that is provided to the client s browser for delivery to another computing device. In one embodiment web services may enable a clip icon drop down menu pop up menu or similar clipping interface mechanism to allow a user to select content for delivery. Web services may receive the clipping mechanism from clip manager . The clipping mechanism may further enable the user to provide an identifier that specifies a remote device to which the clipped content is to be delivered. For example if the remote device is a cellular telephone the identifier may include the cell phone number.

Clip manager is configured to receive the clipped content from web services along with the identifier of the destination remote device. Clip manager may employ the identifier to determine a format that is compatible with the identified remote device and if necessary clip manager may reformat the clipped content into a compatible format. Clip manager may further employ the identifier of the remote device to deliver the reformatted clipped content to the remote device. In one embodiment clip manager may send the reformatted clipped content to the remote device using any of a variety of message protocols including SMS. In another embodiment clip manager may send a message to the remote device for example by way of SMS wherein the message includes or enables access to a URL that indicates a network location at which the clipped content may be obtained and displayed or rendered by way of a browser application running on the remote device or by way of another appropriate application.

Clipping service usage tracker determines stores and retrieves for example by way of a database one or more usage identities of a clipped content item and or associated thresholds. Usage identities may include one or more of a source identity a content identity and a destination identity as explained further above and below. Clip manager determines whether a request to forward a content item will be allowed by applying one or more thresholds. Each applied threshold is a limit on a number of clipped content items associated with a particular usage identity that may be delivered to remote devices within a time period. For a given kind of content item the applicable threshold or thresholds may be specified by the web server or other provider of the content or they may be in accordance with default policies and the like.

Clip store makes use of a storage mechanism including a file database or the like to store and manage clipped content. The clipped content may be organized by clip store using one or more of the source content and destination identities determined and stored by clipping service usage tracker .

Although illustrated in as distinct components web services clip manager clip store and clipping service usage tracker may be arranged combined and the like in any of a variety of ways without departing from the scope of the present invention. Moreover web services clip manager clip store and clipping service usage tracker may reside in one or more separate computing devices substantially similar to device .

The operation of certain aspects of the present invention will now be described with respect to . illustrates a logical flow diagram generally showing one embodiment of a process for tracking and blocking clipped content requested for forwarding to a remote device. Process of may for example be performed by a device such as clipping server .

Process begins after a start block at block where an item of clipped content is received with a request to forward the content item to a remote destination device. The request is made by another remote device either directly or by way of a content provider such as web server that enables clipping of content for example through a web based interface.

Processing then flows to block at which usage identities associated with the clip are determined. Depending for example on the configuration of clipping server one or more of a source identity a content identity and a destination identity may be determined. The particular usage identities to determine may be specified by the web content service provider. In one embodiment default usage identity categories may be determined.

Process continues to block where blocking criteria including one or more applicable thresholds associated with the usage identities may be determined for the clipped content. In one embodiment the content provider such as web server may also specify one or more blocking criteria. In one embodiment default thresholds may be applied.

Processing next flows to decision block where a determination is made regarding whether the applicable usage thresholds have been exceeded. If more than one threshold is applicable depending on the blocking criteria a clipped content item may be determined to be blocked from delivery if one or more of the thresholds is exceeded. Thus at decision block a determination may be based on a destination threshold a source threshold a content threshold or any combination of two or more of the destination threshold source threshold or content threshold.

Thus if at decision block a specified minimum number of applicable thresholds are determined not to be exceeded process branches to block where a message that includes the clipped content or a message containing a link to the clipped content is delivered to the remote destination device as requested. In addition at block tracking records of the different identities may also be updated. Processing then returns to a calling process to perform other actions.

If the requisite number of usage thresholds is determined to be exceeded however at decision block processing flows to block where the clipped content is blocked from forwarding. In one embodiment an error message may also be sent to the end user of the clipping service. Process then returns to a calling process to perform other actions.

However to further illustrate the invention provide possible variations on . For example illustrates monitoring destination identities while illustrates monitoring source identities and illustrates monitoring content identities.

Processing continues at decision block where it is determined whether an applicable destination identity threshold has been exceeded with respect to the determined destination identity. For example for content items of a given type a policy may be in place to limit the number of clipped content items forwarded to a particular cell phone number within a 24 hour period. If the destination identity threshold is exceeded processing flows to block where the clipping forwarding request is blocked and an error message is sent to the requesting device. Process then returns to a calling process to perform other actions.

If the destination identity threshold is not exceeded however process flows to decision block at which it is determined whether other applicable usage thresholds have been exceeded. If so processing branches to block where the clipping forwarding request is blocked and an error message is sent to the requesting device. Process then returns to a calling process to perform other actions. If however no other applicable thresholds are exceeded process flows to block at which the clipped content or a message containing a link to the clipped content is delivered to the destination device. In addition at block tracking records of the destination identity may also be updated. Process then returns to a calling process to perform other actions.

Examples of source identities that may be employed include an anonymous user cookie a logged in or authenticated user cookie another kind of cookie mechanism a determined Internet Protocol IP address of the remote requesting device a staged cookie or an issued certificate identifying the user making the forwarding request. A staged cookie is a mechanism for tracking user navigations and may indicate a level of trust associated with the user. For example in one embodiment staged cookies may be employed to indicated that a provider of the staged cookie is trustable as a person end user or the like rather than being an automated process such as might be employed to provide spam messages or the like. A combination of two or more kinds of source identities may also be determined for the content forwarding request. The choice of the kind or kinds of source identities to track for a given kind of content item may reflect for example concerns regarding security or the degree to which the requesting user may easily be identified. For example an available logged in user cookie may be sufficient as a source identity for a clipping of a webmail content item. By contrast in the case of an application that permits clipping of content of any type and modification of the content by the user and for which no associated cookie is available a certificate that identifies the application user may be desirable. For other kinds of content items or clipping applications a combination of source identities such as a combination of an anonymous user cookie a source IP address and a staged cookie may be appropriate.

Process continues at decision block where a determination is made whether a source identity threshold is exceeded with respect to a particular source identity or combination of source identities that have been determined for the clipping request. If the source identity threshold is exceeded processing flows to block where the clipping forwarding request is blocked and an error message is sent to the requesting device. Process then returns to a calling process to perform other actions.

If the tested source identity threshold is not exceeded however process flows to decision block at which it is determined whether other applicable usage thresholds have been exceeded. If so processing branches to block where the clipping forwarding request is blocked and an error message is sent to the requesting device. Process then returns to a calling process to perform other actions. If however no other applicable thresholds are exceeded process flows to block at which the clipped content or a message containing a link to the clipped content is delivered to the destination device. In addition at block tracking records of the source identity may also be updated. Process then returns to a calling process to perform other actions.

The content identity is based on the content of the clipped item itself. For example the clipped item may be textual information clipped from a website such as a business address or a news article. In one embodiment the clipped content is obtained from the web content service provider. The text is hashed into a key. The applicable content threshold is a limit on the number of messages sent out for which the clipped content is associated with that hash key. In one embodiment determination of the content identity may be performed by the web content service provider. Where the content may be generated by the end user a content identity may be more strict including information associated with the end user for example as well as other information about the content or the like.

Process continues at decision block where a determination is made whether a content identity threshold is exceeded with respect to the determined content identity. If the content identity threshold is exceeded processing flows to block where the clipping forwarding request is blocked and an error message is sent to the requesting device. Process then returns to a calling process to perform other actions.

If the content identity threshold is not exceeded however process flows to decision block at which it is determined whether other applicable usage thresholds have been exceeded. If so processing branches to block where the clipping forwarding request is blocked and an error message is sent to the requesting device. Process then returns to a calling process to perform other actions. If however no other applicable thresholds are exceeded process flows to block at which the clipped content or a message containing a link to the clipped content is delivered to the destination device. In addition at block tracking records of the content identity may also be updated. Process then returns to a calling process to perform other actions.

It will be appreciated that the second decision block shown in each of the flow diagrams of is not necessary if the only applicable threshold is the usage identity threshold tested at the first decision block. It will also be appreciated that an applicable threshold may be based on more than one determined source identities.

It will be understood that each block of the flow diagrams discussed above and combinations of blocks in the flow diagrams can be implemented by computer program instructions. These program instructions may be provided to a processor to produce a machine such that the instructions executing on the processor create means for implementing the actions specified in the flow diagram block or blocks. Accordingly blocks of the flow diagrams support combinations of means for performing the specified actions including program instruction means. It will also be understood that each block of the flow diagram illustrations and combinations of blocks in the flow diagrams can be implemented by special purpose hardware based systems that perform the specified actions or by combinations of special purpose hardware and computer instructions.

The above specification examples and data provide a complete description of the manufacture and use of the composition of the invention. Since many embodiments of the invention can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention the invention resides in the claims hereinafter appended.

