---

title: Non-destructive testing and imaging
abstract: A method of non-destructive testing includes non-destructively testing an object over a range of test levels, directing coherent light onto the object, directly receiving the coherent light substantially as reflected straight from the object, and capturing the reflected coherent light over the range of test levels as a plurality of digital images of the object. The method also includes calculating differences between pixel values of a plurality of pairs of digital images of the plurality of digital images, and adding the pixel value differences of the plurality of pairs of digital images to yield at least one cumulative differential image.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07436504&OS=07436504&RS=07436504
owner: Shear Graphics, LLC
number: 07436504
owner_city: Lake Orion
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050225
---
This application is a continuation in part of and claims priority to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 659 466 filed Sep. 10 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 934 018 which is hereby incorporated by reference.

The present invention pertains to the field of Non Destructive Testing NDT and its application to a variety of substrates and the ability to illuminate and capture reflected light efficiently from these substrates. In particular the invention pertains to such testing of tires and utilizes a computer to display image test data.

For many years the standard practice for calibrating shearographic holographic tire testing machines has been ASTM F1364 92. This test method describes the construction and use of a calibration device for demonstrating the anomaly detection capability of an interferometric laser imaging non destructive tire inspection system. A typical shearographic fringe pattern resulting from such testing technique is shown in .

As has been described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 433 874 the technique of shearing interferometry or shearography involves the interference of two laterally displaced images of the same object to form an interference image. Conventional shearographic methods require that a first interference image or baseline image be taken while the object is in an unstressed or first stressed condition and another interference image be taken while the object is in a second stressed condition. Comparison of those two interference images preferably by methods of image subtraction reveals information about the strain concentrations and hence the integrity of the object in a single image called a shearogram. shows an image which is the direct result of two laterally displaced images being obtained by an interference technique. The images that are obtained are not to the scale of the anomaly in the tire. In addition very minute anomalies those in the order of 1.7 mm are not readily ascertainable from a shearogram such as that shown in .

While some systems for shearography have an output such as the display of computerized systems of the 874 patent many of the systems utilized are such that they have an output of highly sensitive film which is extremely costly and requires a special viewing device. Further film based shearographic tire testing machines and individual tire tests are typically very expensive therefore a limited number are utilized in the industry within individual plants.

The electronic shearography of the 874 patent is based upon the shearography described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 887 899 which describes an apparatus which produces an interference image by passing light reflected from the test object through birefringent material and a polarizer. The birefringent material splits a light ray into two rays and polarizing it makes it possible for light rays reflected from a pair of points to interfere with each other. Thus each point on the object generates two rays and the result is an interference image formed by the optical interference of two laterally displaced images of the same object.

There is a need for a tire testing technique that facilitates direct measurement of anomalies in order for the anomalies to be quantified.

There is a need to obtain an output from tire testing equipment which does not rely upon an interferogram or proprietary optics thereby making the output of such testing technique accurately describe and identify the anomaly.

There is a need for a tire testing technique and apparatus which permits the utilization of coherent light and the reflection of such light to be captured by inexpensive equipment and displayed using commonly available computerized systems.

It is accordingly an object of the invention to provide a new tire testing technique and apparatus which facilitates direct measurements and a quantitative analysis or scalability of the anomaly in the tire.

It is an object of the present invention to provide a new tire testing technique and apparatus which does not rely upon an interferogram to accurately describe and identify the anomaly.

It is an object of the present invention to provide a new tire testing technique and apparatus which permits the utilization of coherent light and reflection of such light to be captured by inexpensive equipment and displayed using commonly available computerized systems which does not utilize laterally displaced images but a single image of the anomaly as output.

An exemplary method of non destructive testing includes non destructively testing an object over a range of test levels directing coherent light onto the object directly receiving the coherent light substantially as reflected straight from the object and capturing the reflected coherent light over the range of test levels as a plurality of digital images of the object. The exemplary method also includes calculating differences between pixel values of a plurality of pairs of digital images of the plurality of digital images and adding the pixel value differences of the plurality of pairs of digital images to yield at least one cumulative differential image.

An exemplary computer readable medium carries instructions to enable a processor to perform method steps of non destructive testing. The method includes calculating differences between pixel values of a plurality of pairs of digital images captured as coherent light directly received substantially as reflected straight from an object undergoing non destructive testing over a range of test levels and adding the pixel value differences of the plurality of pairs of digital images to yield at least one cumulative differential image.

An exemplary method of creating a database of information from a non destructive testing process of a plurality of objects is provided. The method includes creating a database record for each of the plurality of objects wherein the database record includes the following information at least one object identifier at least one reference to at least one digital image and at least one anomaly characteristic including at least one of anomaly quantity and anomaly size. The method also includes storing the database record for subsequent access.

An exemplary method of detecting an anomaly in a tire includes providing a source of coherent light shining the light directly onto the tire surface thereby generating a reflected light from the tire and stressing the tire over a range of test levels. The method also includes providing a reflected light receiving apparatus for receiving the light reflected directly from the tire when the tire is in a stressed and unstressed condition and capturing the reflected light over the range of test levels as a plurality of digital images of the tire. The method additionally includes calculating differences between pixel values of a plurality of pairs of digital images of the plurality of digital images and adding the pixel value differences of the plurality of pairs of digital images to yield at least one cumulative differential image. The method further includes providing a processor which views and compares images of reflected light from the reflected light receiving apparatus when the tire is stressed and unstressed thereby ascertaining an anomaly in the tire and generates an output from the comparison and displaying the output from the processor using apparatus electronically connected to the processor.

An exemplary anomaly detector apparatus is provided for detecting an anomaly in a tire. The apparatus includes a source of coherent light to shine the light directly onto the tire surface with the light being reflected from the tire a stressing apparatus to stress the tire over a range of test levels a reflected light receiving apparatus for receiving the light reflected directly from the tire when the tire is in a stressed and unstressed condition. The apparatus also includes a processor which compares images of reflected light from the reflected light receiving apparatus when the tire is stressed and unstressed thereby ascertaining an anomaly in the tire and which generates an output from the comparison. The processor is adapted to capture the reflected light over the range of test levels as a plurality of digital images of the tire calculate differences between pixel values of a plurality of pairs of digital images of the plurality of digital images and add the pixel value differences of the plurality of pairs of digital images to yield at least one cumulative differential image. The apparatus further includes a display apparatus electronically connected to the processor for displaying the output from the processor.

An exemplary non destructive testing system includes a non destructive testing apparatus to test an object over a range of test levels a light source to direct coherent light onto the object an imaging device to directly receive light substantially as reflected straight from the object and thereby capture a plurality of digital images of the object over the range of test levels and a memory for storing the plurality of digital images and for storing a computer executable program. The system also includes an input device for receiving input from an operator an output device for transmitting output to the operator and a processor in communication with the imaging device the memory and the input and output devices. The processor is adapted to execute the computer executable program to store the plurality of images in the memory calculate differences between pixel values of a plurality of pairs of digital images of the plurality of digital images and add the pixel value differences of the plurality of pairs of digital images to yield at least one cumulative differential image.

Anomaly is defined as a defect in a tire which can generally be characterized as air trapped in a cured tire as a result of variations in the thickness of the tire components porosity and voids in the tire a separation an undercure of the tire trapped air and bubbles low interply adhesion poor cord adhesion bare wires broken cords and machine building errors.

Bitmap is a data file or structure which corresponds bit for bit with an image displayed on a screen preferably in the same format as it would be stored in the display s video memory or alternatively as a device independent bitmap. A bitmap is characterized by the width and height of the image in pixels and the number of bits per pixel which determines the number of shades of grey or colors it can represent.

Coherent light is a light having a single wavelength frequency and phase. It is also radiant electromagnetic energy of the same or almost the same wavelength and with definite phase relationships between different points in the field.

Differenced or also known as delta frame means an animation frame that contains only the pixels different from the preceding key frame.

Diffuser is an apparatus which transmits light through a translucent material which permits the distribution of incident light onto the tire to be tested.

Interferometer is an instrument in which light from a source is split into two or more beams which are subsequently reunited after traveling over different paths and display interferences.

Laser is a device that produces a beam of coherent or monochromatic light as a result of photon stimulated emission. Such beams have a single wavelength and frequency. Materials capable of producing this effect are certain high period crystals such as ruby yttrium garnet metallic tungstates or molybdates doped with rare earth ions semi conductors such as gallium arsenide neodymium doped glass various gasses including carbon dioxide helium argon neon and plasmas and the like.

Laterally displaced is a term that means what appears to be a double or side by side image but is actually a positive and negative optical interference of a single anomaly. Further laterally means side by side but depending on the orientation of the optical element in the device could be any angle.

In this form of Non Destructive Testing NDT non destructive means a testing technique where the object to be tested is subjected to a stressing element and at the end of the testing the object is reverted to substantially its original condition.

The processor is a device or software usually a central processing unit CPU it can also be a program that transforms some input into some output such as a computer or linkage editor it facilitates the comparisons of images it may be a hardwired device using embedded instructions to perform the comparisons.

Stressing element means an element that is used to apply stress or strain to an object to cause a change from its original condition. Such stressing can take the form of the application of a vacuum the application of light the application of a gas the application of a mechanical force to permit flexing the application of acoustical sound thereby vibrating the tire or some other vibrating technique or application of heat or the like.

Reference is made to co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 067 256 entitled A PLURALITY OF LIGHT SOURCES FOR INSPECTION APPARATUS AND METHOD filed Feb. 25 2005 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 187 437 which is hereby incorporated by reference herein.

The inside surface of the tire is a diffuse reflective surface compared to a mirror which is a specular reflective surface. A speckle pattern is visible on diffuse rather than specular reflective surfaces that is illuminated with laser light. These reflections from the anomalous regions change during the stressing cycle as the surface deforms. With multiple images captured by the camera during this cycle the computer can process the image information using a software algorithm such as that described in and . In the present invention light does not pass through a birefringent material or a shearing optic material.

A typical test setup for the present invention is described as follows The tire to be inspected is placed horizontally on a plate within a vacuum chamber. A commonly available industrial digital camera sits in the center of the tire so as to view a region of the inside surface of the tire such as camera model LU 205C available from Lumenera Corporation of Ottawa Ontario Canada Lumenera.com which is a color 2.0 megapixel having SVGA 800 600 sub sampling which provides 40 frames sec. The digital camera uses a commonly available lens to set the focus of the reflected speckle pattern image of the tire region on the digital image sensor. Preferably the lens is adjusted so that the image is out of focus. The lens is preferably turned as far as possible towards a near setting of the lens e.g. counter clockwise when looking at the camera and lens .

A cable connects the camera to a computer. Image information is sent through this cable to the computer memory. Images from memory can be viewed on the computer display in near real time i.e. as the images are captured and processed by the equipment.

Generally each image will be stored in memory as a black white bitmap file whereby 8 bits are used to store the gray scale levels of each image sensor picture element or pixel value. Likewise the images viewed on the computer display will be of the form of 8 bit gray scale bitmap display images corresponding to the bitmap images as the images are stored in memory. There are 2 256 from 0 to 255 decimal possible gray scale 8 bit values associated with each pixel of the displayed images. The decimal value 0 as it directly represents the gray scale level of individual display image pixels corresponds to a black pixel the darkest gray scale pixel. Similarly the decimal value 255 represents the lightest gray scale pixel which is white. The remaining numeric values between 0 and 255 represent a progression of gray levels from dark to light.

Note that two digital images that are exactly equivalent will have the same numeric values from 0 to 255 for every image pixel.

Conversely two digital images that are not equivalent will not have the same numeric values for every image pixel. The arithmetic difference between every corresponding image pixel of two exactly equivalent digital images will be 0. This means that the difference image obtained from differencing two equivalent digital images will be displayed as a totally black image. The difference image obtained from differencing two dissimilar digital images will not be a totally black image. The image differencing function provides a tool for observing slight changes between two digital images.

In one embodiment the stressing element is the use of vacuum. The speckle pattern associated with a given region of a tire will change with very small deformations of the tire surface. Such surface deformation occurs when the pressure drops in the vacuum test chamber and the air inside of a ply separation expands creating a deformation on the interior tire surface.

Practically speaking the two speckle pattern images of a tire surface region where there exists an underlying localized ply separation will be different if the two images are taken at different vacuum levels. Also the images will only or at least ideally be numerically different in the deformation region associated with the ply separation. The difference image of the two images will be black everywhere except the area where the deformation occurs. In the deformation region of the image there will be grey pixels of various shades. The deformation region is visible in the differenced image.

In one embodiment of the test method six digital images of a laser illuminated interior surface region of a tire are taken with each image taken at one of six vacuum levels. The laser is a gallium arsenide laser having a wavelength of 808 nm nanometer model UH5 200 808 supplied by World Star Tech. of Toronto Ontario Canada worldstartech.com . The first image will be taken at 0.0 Hg atmospheric pressure . This first image will be called the base image. The five remaining images will be taken respectively at 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 and finally 2.5 Hg. The six images will be stored in computer memory. Next five differenced images will be obtained using the base image always as one of the two images to be differenced. The other images used to make the five differenced images will be the five non base images. Each of the five differenced images will be processed to filter out noise and increase contrast brightness. Other processing may also be used. Any combination of available or custom image processing software including auto anomaly detection special effects filtering noise reduction sharpening dilation colorization positive or negative or the like. The five processed images will be added together in an accumulative fashion. After each addition of two images the new image formed by the addition will be processed. The final image will be used for evaluation for the given tire region. There will be a plurality of inspection regions inspected using the preferred test method in order to evaluate the complete tire.

It is to be appreciated that a display is meant to cover varied electronic output of the images whether visible to the naked eye or not and includes a screen display hard copy or an electronic image. The electronic image may be used by a computer to determine whether the test object passes or fails testing criteria without actually displaying the image to the naked eye or optionally without operator intervention.

The diffuser is a holographic diffuser of 25 mm diameter with relatively high diffuser transmission efficiency. Alternatively the diffuser may be opal diffusing glass having a diameter of 25 millimeter both available from Edmund Industrial Optics of Barrington N.J.

The camera and the computer are electrically connected through wire . It is to be appreciated that while electrical current may be necessary for the operation of the laser and the camera the output from the camera could likewise be supplied to the computer by well known wireless communication techniques represented by parallel lines . The computer hard drive with a video card is attached to a monitor for display of the speckled output .

It is to be appreciated that the coherent laser light that is diffused onto the substrate is reflected off of the substrate and the capturing is a direct capture of the reflections by the CCD . This is unlike that which is utilized in prior art shearograms or interferometry which use an optical shearing device. The direct output of the device shown in A and B is that shown in . It is to be appreciated that the output of can be either black on white or white on black depending on how one wishes to view the desired output. Because the image is captured by an image sensor each pixel of the image can be identified or stored in digital form as such one can assign colors to different portions of the image besides a white or black color thereby enhancing the image.

In a similar fashion the operation of the equipment is shown in where there are larger number of diffused rays at different points . The light from the diffusing element is dispersed as is shown in A and B.

After the tire is subjected to a stressing element such as application of a vacuum the application of light the application of gas the application of a mechanical force to permit flexing the application of acoustical sound thereby vibrating the tire or some other vibrating or heat application technique the result is the movement of the tire substrate which in turn causes a reflection of the laser light from points . shows in an exaggerated fashion the variation from the smooth surface of the tire to an expanded version or deformation that is depicted. The laser light therefore is deflected at a different angle and therefore is shown as reflected speckled light which creates images that are captured by the CCD camera .

The electrical cable is shown as having parallel marks to indicate that there may not necessarily be a direct wire for passing the images from the camera to the computer monitor but may be done by a wireless technique. The capturing of images on a camera is well known in the art. It can take the form of animation of images which techniques are well known.

To graphically explain how the animation occurs reference can be made to . shows a legend whereby images that are captured at various vacuum levels are given names for reference purposes. shows the sequence of steps used for evaluating one region of the inside surface of a tire. The test sequence begins at the box designated as and ends at step . At the base image of the tire region is captured while the tire is unstressed and subjected to 0.0 Hg atmospheric pressure . From the legend shown in this image is designated 00. This base image referenced as 00 is stored as image A during step . For consistency at box the base image is differenced with itself to provide a black image that is displayed as the first image of the animation. This image is stored at as AA . It can be appreciated that a black image could have been produced in software without actually imaging the tire region however the base image A is captured since it is used in subsequent steps of the test sequence. After image AA is displayed at the next image is captured at step while the tire is subjected to 0.5 Hg vacuum. This image 05 is stored as B in step . At the image B is differenced with the base image A producing image AB which is stored in step . AB is then displayed at and AB serves as the 2image in the animation sequence. At step as well as subsequent steps the previously displayed image is added to the image formed in the immediately preceding steps. For example at step the previously displayed image is AB and the image added to this image is the just formed image AC stored at step . The newly formed image is stored as A C at step . A C is then displayed at step . During the course of the test images are captured at 0.5 Hg increments with the final image 25 being captured with the tire subjected to 2.5 Hg vacuum step . At the final image in the animation sequence is displayed. The Images obtained during the tire test can be the subject of a printed output as shown in . A representative of such a technique is shown at where the procedure as followed in the ASTM testing technique described above was utilized except the apparatus of were used in place of an interferometer technique.

It is also to be understood that even though . show the vacuum cycle from 0.0 Hg. to 2.5 Hg any combination of vacuum levels or set points increasing or decreasing may be used. As an example from 5.5 Hg. to 1.0 Hg.

In another embodiment of the invention an assembly including a plurality of reflected light receiving apparatus for receiving the light reflected is utilized such as that shown in . In this embodiment the anomaly detector apparatus is modified by redesigning the assembly of the source of coherent light to better facilitate the light distribution on the inside of the outside of a hollow toroidal surface i.e. the inside of a tire and the light receiving apparatus to receive the light from the inside of the outside of a hollow toroidal surface.

In there are multiple lasers which are located substantially adjacent to the light receiving apparatus preferably a camera. The camera or cameras as shown in are four in number circumferentially evenly located about a circle sitting atop a mounting plate which moves up and down whenever a horizontally placed tire is inserted into the testing apparatus . In one embodiment a CCD camera employed is LUMENERA camera LU105M supplied by Lumenera Corporation because of it s thin cross section and the need to have several components back to back in a small space inside the test object tire .

It is to be appreciated that the number of receiving apparatus and the number of lasers and the number and style of light shaping diffusers can vary depending upon the size of the substrate to be studied such as 2 to 8 cameras preferably 4 6. As can be seen from the lasers point in a direction both upwards downwards and outwards or could be any combination of angles to suit the shape of the test object through a light shaping elliptical diffuser not shown fitting within retaining member . As can be seen from the sources of coherent light are placed on each side of the light receiving apparatus . Preferably the angle of the source of the lasers to the axis of the light receiving apparatus can vary from 10 to 45 degrees preferably 20 to 45 degrees as best seen from top view of .

It is likewise to be appreciated that to improve the light distribution to be received by the light receiving apparatus the number of coherent light sources can be increased from 2 to 8 per light receiving apparatus and that the light source can have an elliptical pattern. For example illustrates an imaging arrangement including the camera and a plurality of the elliptical diffusers . Coherent light passes through each diffuser and creates a composite illuminated area composed of smaller overlapping elliptical shaped areas. In turn the camera captures light reflected from the viewed area of the object that is completely illuminated. illustrates an alternative imaging arrangement including the camera and the elliptical diffuser . Coherent light passes through the diffuser and creates an elliptical shaped illuminated area on an object. In turn the camera views or captures light reflected from a viewed area .

The elliptical pattern whether it is one or multiples are more conducive to illuminating a rectangular shape which is the output of a camera and the shape of a computer display monitor. The rectangular shape commonly represents an aspect ratio of width to height that in this case is preferably five to four. Additionally another unique feature of this invention is to use the raw rectangular output of the laser to the advantage for an elliptical output. Most laser diodes produce as output a rectangular shaped form of light and then the light is collimated with a lens to form a gaussian mode TEM or round beam. Because a tire quadrant in this case typical is 90 deg the sectional view is wider than tall and because a camera has an output that is wider than tall and a computer monitor has a display that is wider than tall and a raw laser output is rectangular the laser is positioned so that the output is wider than tall utilizing the available light energy efficiently. The collimating lens is removed from the laser and replaced with an elliptical light shaping diffuser from Physical Optics Corporation of Torrance Calif. For this case the output angle of the diffuser is 95 deg. wide and 35 deg. tall but could be any angle angles that efficiently illuminates the surface area to be tested. indicate that there are four light sources per light receiving apparatus .

As can be seen from the anomaly detector apparatus or assembly is comprised of a movable support structure which moves up and down with a pair of plates and . Between the plates and are the light generating and the light receiving apparatus including a plurality of clusters of light sources and light receiving apparatus such as a digital camera. The top plate has four clusters between the top and the bottom plate wherein the clusters are secured in place by bolts . The diffuser retainer is held in place by a plurality of screws .

As shown in it can also be appreciated that any of the components i.e. light generating and the light receiving apparatus can be moveable in and out or tip as a group or independently for a better view of the substrate to be tested. Alternatively the components may be moved in and out or tip as a group or independently in micro motion to increase the ability of each light sensing sensor in the camera to view one or more reflected laser speckles.

Retaining members are pivotably mounted to respective upper ends of the uprights to provide the tipping or tilting functionality referred to above. Accordingly other electromechanical linear actuators including threaded shafts and motor assemblies are mounted to respective sides of the uprights via mounting brackets . The motor assembly is preferably a Portescap 20 series linear actuator available from Danaher Motion of West Chester Pa. The threaded shafts are coupled to couplers which are coupled to pivot arms that in turn are coupled to the pivotable retaining members . Portions of the motor assembly rotate to thread or linearly displace the threaded shafts therethrough to move the pivot arms and thereby pivot tilt or tip the retaining members . Accordingly the light sources light receiving apparatuses and diffusers are independently pivotable.

To graphically explain how the animation occurs for the apparatus of reference can be made to and and the associated description above and or to and the associated description below.

Software that is utilized to process the speckled image and to display it can be any commercially available image processing software such as PAINT SHOP PRO V. 8.0 supplied by Jasc Software Inc. of Eden Prairie Minn. Other software that can be used is LabView available from National Instruments of Austin Tex. or custom written software using an imaging library from the likes of MontiVision of Breiholz Germany.

The utilization of the present technique facilitates quantitative measurement of the anomaly. Alternative to a quantitative determination one can assess the extent of the anomaly by scaling the anomaly with the image that is shown on the computer monitor or is generated in the output such as . Prior art techniques did not permit such measurements or scaling of the anomaly to ascertain the extent of an anomaly in a tire.

The invention described herein in a preferred embodiment does not utilize mirrors for movement of the light. However it is to be appreciated that mirrors may be used to allow the camera to view areas normally inaccessible depending on the light source the camera the diffuser the test substrate and the number of images to be taken of the substrate. Mirrors may be utilized under particular desired testing techniques and conditions.

The application of the apparatus and method of the present application pertains to a wide variety of substrates that can be stressed allowing the surface topography to change during stressing. Including but not limited to any rubber product that has one or more than one of the following components i.e. reinforcements backers strengthening ribs mounting brackets cores honeycombs. These rubber products may be tires automobile truck motorcycle tractor construction equipment and aircraft hoses radiator heater fuel water air hydraulic oil and industrial belts fan power transmission timing conveyer such as for mining and industrial sheets pump diaphragms tank bladders and gaskets and the like.

A variety of laminated substrates of various plastic materials may be used including thermoplastic thermoset materials elastomeric and adhesive materials as well as a wide variety of composites including fiber reinforced composites metal glass fiber laminates honeycomb structures glass or carbon fiber reinforced plastics and the like. The substrates to be tested include a wide variety of vehicle parts such as for cars trucks off road vehicles aircraft farming equipment and the like. One can also detect an anomaly in other substrates such as honeycomb aluminum panels and other composite panels as well as carbon fiber reinforced plastic specimens. Other multilayer materials or laminates can be reviewed such as metal ceramic metal plastic and metal glass fiber compound materials such as those used in the electronic industry aircraft engine parts or parts in the aeronautics industry.

It is to be appreciated that while the drawings show the interior of a tire a cross section of the inside of the outside wall of a toroid a plurality of any of the substrates can be reviewed by having substrate holders for the substrates. Also the wavelength of the light source which is utilized can vary such as visible light about 400 700 nanometers to near visible or greater than visible light. The type of diffuser material including the shape and the angle of the output may also vary.

In general illustrate other presently preferred embodiments and aspects of a system method and software for non destructively testing and inspecting a substrate or object. Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the term substrate is interchangeable with the terms object product article material structure and the like. Many features of these embodiments are similar in many respects to the embodiments described in above which description is incorporated by reference herein. In any case the below described system and method are preferably capable of carrying out the previously described methods of on a substrate or object such as a tire for a full 360 degree view within a relatively fast cycle time such that testing every tire off of a tire production line is more practical than ever before. It is also contemplated that the below described production system and method could also be adapted to carry out the previously described method on any desired product object or substrate and is not limited to just use with tires.

The machine generally includes a base table that is supported by any suitable machine framing not shown with vibration isolation not shown interposed therebetween. The vibration isolation may include four pneumatic leveling boots wherein three of the boots include associated upstream leveling valves and flow control valves and a fourth boot is in fluid communication downstream of one of the other three valves without any upstream leveling or flow control valves. The base table provides support for a pallet which supports an object such as a tire T. The pallet is preferably raised and lowered by one or more air cylinders controlled by one or more valves which are supplied with shop air as depicted by the arrow and may be controlled by the system control module or by a separate machine control module not shown that is in communication with the system control module . It is contemplated however that all or some of the machine functions could instead or additionally be controlled by the system control module which may be in wireless or hardwired electrical communication with the system control module as shown.

Material handling devices are preferably provided to carry the pallet and tire T. An inbound conveyor conveys the pallet and tire T to a stop that is actuated by a pneumatic valve and that suitably locates the pallet with respect to the table and to a proximity sensor that senses presence or absence of the tire T and or pallet . The inbound conveyor stop and valve and proximity sensor are communicated to the system control module . An outbound non anomalous conveyor and an outbound anomalous conveyor are in electrical communication with the system control module and are provided downstream of the table to carry the pallet and tire T off of the table .

An air tight vacuum environment is provided by the following apparatus. An upper dome is lowered into sealing engagement with the top surface of the table by a lift arm which is preferably actuated by a linear displacement device such as a powered screw which is driven by a stepper motor that communicates with the system control module . A lost motion coupling or decoupler mechanism is preferably disposed between the upper dome and the lift arm to help prevent the lift arm from inadvertently damaging the upper dome and to enable the upper dome to locate squarely against the top of the table and to eliminate the transmission of vibration between vibration isolated components and non vibration isolated components. A lower dome is maintained in sealing engagement with the bottom surface of the table to complete a sealed environment between the domes . A vacuum system is provided in communication with the sealed environment through the lower dome . The vacuum system preferably includes an air driven vacuum pump that is in communication with the lower dome and that receives shop air through a regulator filter device and a control valve which is driven by a solenoid in communication with the system control module . A solenoid actuated exhaust valve of the vacuum system is in pneumatic communication with the lower dome and in electrical communication with the system control module .

Finally the production system preferably includes an inspection imaging system which preferably includes an imaging head preferably like that described above with respect to . The imaging head preferably includes electronic imaging devices like cameras and laser light sources and servos for adjusting the angles and horizontal and vertical positions of such electronic imaging devices . The imaging head is preferably advanced from a position under the table to a position above the table and within the tire T by a suitable powered screw and stepper motor . The stepper motor is preferably communicated to the system control module and the imaging devices and servos are preferably communicated to the system control module . A camera position control pendant is also provided in communication with the servos of the imaging head for manually controlling positioning of the imaging devices .

But for purposes of this disclosure the system control module may include any instrumentality or aggregation of instrumentalities operable to compute classify detect display handle originate manipulate manifest process record reproduce receive retrieve switch store or utilize any form of data information intelligence for academic business production scientific or other purposes. Although described in connection with an exemplary computing system environment including a computer the production system and method are operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. The computing system environment is not intended to suggest any limitation as to the scope of use or functionality of the production system or method. Moreover the computing system environment should not be interpreted as having any dependency or requirement relating to any one component or combination of components illustrated in the exemplary operating environment. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics personal digital assistants mobile telephones network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

The computer is responsible for at least some if not all control of the testing machine of . For example the computer is responsible for receiving imaging input carrying out image processing and data analysis and management and transmitting imaging output. To facilitate such functionality the computer has a processor an internal memory an external memory interface an input device interface an output device interface a network interface a machine input output interface and a communications module .

The communications module may be any type of suitable module including a system bus which couples the various above described system components or modules. The system bus may provide for data transmission internally between each of the elements in the computer and externally between the internal elements of the computer and any other elements external of the computer . The system bus represents one or more of any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus an accelerated graphics port a processor or local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures and the like. By way of example and not limitation such bus architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus and the like.

The processor may be configured to provide control logic that provides the functionality for the production system. In this respect the processor may encompass one or more processing units controllers microprocessors micro controllers application specific integrated circuits ASIC complex programmable logic devices CPLD field programmable gate arrays FPGA any combinations of the aforementioned and the like. The processor may be interfaced with the internal memory which is a medium configured to provide at least temporary storage of data and or computer software or computer readable instructions that provide at least some of the functionality of the production system and that may be executed by the processor . As used herein the term processor also includes any ancillary devices such as clocks power supplies and the like.

The internal memory includes computer readable storage or media in the form of removable and or non removable volatile memory and or non volatile memory . Exemplary volatile memory may include random access memory RAM static RAM SRAM dynamic RAM DRAM and the like for running software and data on the processor . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by the processor . By way of example and not limitation the volatile memory may include an operating system application programs other memory modules and data .

Exemplary non volatile memory may include read only memory ROM erasable programmable ROM EPROM electrically erasable programmable ROM EEPROM dynamic read write memory like magnetic or optical disks or tapes and static read write memory like flash memory for storing software and data. A basic input output system BIOS is typically stored in ROM for containing basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within the computer such as during computer boot up.

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile non volatile data storage or media. For example a mass external storage read write device module is shown in the exemplary form of a dynamic read write hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable non volatile magnetic media. Also a dynamic read write device module such as a magnetic or optical drive that reads from and writes to a removable non volatile device such as a magnetic floppy disk magnetic tape cassette digital versatile disk digital video tape optical disk like a CD ROM or other optical media. Moreover a static read write module may be used in the exemplary operating environment for use with a static read write device including but not limited to a flash memory card integrated circuit chip and the like.

The memory media modules discussed above enable storage and communication of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . For example the mass storage device is illustrated as storing an operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components may either be the same as or different from the operating system application programs other program modules and data of the internal memory . The operating system application programs other program modules and data are illustrated as discrete blocks and given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies. It is recognized however that such programs and components reside at various times in different storage media associated with the computer and are preferably executed by the processor of the computer . Computer programs may be installed or loaded into a secondary memory of a computer such as the mass storage device dynamic storage device or static storage device . Upon execution by the processor such computer programs may be loaded at least partially into a primary memory such as the internal memory . Any suitable non volatile memory interface may be used to connect the mass storage device and other memory modules to the system bus .

User interface selection devices or input peripheral devices such as a pointing device e.g. a mouse trackball pen touch pad or the like keyboard modem and the like may be used to enter commands and information into the computer . Although expediently shown within the computer block those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the peripheral devices are actually external device with respect to the computer. Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick satellite dish wireless communication device scanner or the like. The input interface preferably connects the above described input devices and possibly other input devices to the processor preferably via the system bus but may be connected by other interfaces and bus structures such as a parallel port Universal Serial Bus USB infrared device or the like.

Output peripheral devices such as a printer a monitor or other type of display device or other peripheral device such as speakers not shown and the like are also connected to the system bus via the output interface which may be any suitable printer video etc. type of interface. The monitor is preferably a touchscreen display available from Xycom Automation of Saline Mich. Although expediently shown within the computer block those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the peripheral devices are actually external device with respect to the computer.

As used herein the term interface broadly means any suitable form of electronic device or adapter or even a software module or adapter which enables one piece of equipment to communicate with or control another. Any of the interfaces disclosed herein may conform to any suitable protocols such as ethernet or field buses such as Profibus Interbus Devicenet RS 232 parallel small computer system interface USB wireless protocols such as Bluetooth infrared and the like and any other suitable input output I O protocols. Moreover an interface in the context of a software architecture includes a software module component code portion or other sequence of computer executable instructions. Such an interface includes for example a first module accessing a second module to perform computing tasks on behalf of the first module. The first and second modules include in one example application programming interfaces APIs such as provided by operating systems component object model COM interfaces e.g. for peer to peer application communication and extensible markup language metadata interchange format XMI interfaces e.g. for communication between web services . The interfaces may be tightly coupled synchronous implementations such as in Java 2 Platform Enterprise Edition J2EE COM or distributed COM DCOM examples. Alternatively or in addition the interfaces may be loosely coupled asynchronous implementations such as in a web service e.g. using the simple object access protocol . In general the interfaces may include any combination of the following characteristics tightly coupled loosely coupled synchronous asynchronous and the like. Further the interfaces may conform to a standard protocol a proprietary protocol or any combination of standard and proprietary protocols. The interfaces described herein may all be part of a single interface or may be implemented as separate interfaces or any combination therein. The interfaces may execute locally or remotely to provide functionality. Further the interfaces may include additional or less functionality than illustrated or described herein.

The computer may operate in a networked environment in communication with one or more remote computers . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device other common network node and the like and typically includes its own versions of many or all of the internal and external or peripheral elements described above relative to the computer . In a networked environment software modules and or data used by the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote computer or a remote memory storage device not shown associated therewith or connected thereto. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs data as residing in memory of the remote computer .

The network logical connections or communications depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include any other suitable networks and connections. The LAN and or WAN may be a wired network a wireless network a combination thereof and the like. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and global computer networks e.g. the Internet or World Wide Web . When used in a local area networking environment the computer is preferably connected to the LAN through the network adapter or interface . When used in a wide area networking environment the computer preferably includes the modem or any other means for establishing communications over the WAN . The modem which may be internal or external is preferably connected to the system bus via the input interface or other appropriate arrangement. The network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Finally a plurality of different field input and outputs field I O of the test machine are shown connected to the processor via the system bus and machine I O interface . An exemplary and preferred field I O is more specifically illustrated in the organizational block diagram of . The field I O s are in hardwired or wireless electrical communication with at least the following various machine elements push buttons stack lights horns proximity switches solenoids relays key switches analog sensors and the like. Specific examples of such elements are shown in the Figure.

In operation and referring again to the processor is powered by a power supply not shown and initially operates on instructions stored in internal memory . The processor receives commands or data from a user through input devices and receives processes and stores data or instructions from various storage media including the internal memory and through the memory interface and outputs data or instructions to output peripheral devices. Generally data processors of computers are programmed to carry out computer executable instructions such as those associated with or embedded in software or computer programs such as operating systems application programs and the like.

Computer programs may include but are not limited to routines modules objects components data structures and the like for performing particular tasks and or implementing particular abstract data types. Computer programs may exist in a variety of forms both active and inactive. General examples include software programs comprised of instructions in source code object code executable code or other formats firmware programs or hardware description language HDL files and the like. Specific examples include assembler C C objects Visual Basic Visual C XML Java and Microsoft Foundation Classes and the like.

As mentioned previously the computer is adapted to use at least some form of computer readable media which may include volatile and or non volatile media removable and or non removable media and which may be any suitable medium that may be accessed by a computer. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media include computer storage media communication media and any combination thereof. The system and methods described herein may include these and other various types of computer readable media wherein such media may contain store and or carry instructions or programs for implementing some or all of the method steps described below in conjunction with the processor or other data processor. At least some portion of the testing and inspection methods may be practiced locally or in a distributed computing environment where tasks may be performed by remote computers or processing devices that are linked through a communications network such as the LAN WAN or the like. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

Computer storage media may be used to distribute computer programs locally and may include volatile and non volatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions program modules data structures other data and the like. More specifically computer storage media may include RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or memory sticks integrated circuits CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium that may be used to store the desired information and that may be accessed by a computer.

Communication media preferably embody computer readable instructions program modules data structures other data and the like in a compressed or uncompressed data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport means and include any information delivery media. Those skilled in the art are familiar with modulated data signals which have one or more characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signals. In any event exemplary computer readable signals whether modulated using a carrier or not are signals that a computer system hosting or running a computer program can be configured to access including signals downloaded using the Internet or other networks. Wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media are examples of communication media. In a sense the Internet itself as an abstract entity is a computer readable medium and the same is true of computer networks in general. It is therefore to be understood that the testing and inspection methods may be performed by any computing devices suitable for executing one or more of the specified functions using any media and being located anywhere.

One or more databases are provided for storing data automatically collected manually input or by any combination thereof. The database s communicates with one or both of the HMI and a substrate data collector program SDC . The SDC may also be developed using Visual Basic 6.0 and will be described in further detail below with reference to . The database s is preferably developed with Microsoft SQL Server but may be developed with any other known and suitable database programs such as dBase Microsoft Access and the like. The database s and HMI and or SDC are interfaced with any suitable interface module or program such as an Active Data Objects Data Base ADOdb which is a widely known freely available product to those of ordinary skill in the art. The database s will be described in further detail below with respect to .

Also the HMI communicates with a suitable image capture and analysis program such as one developed using MontiVision Development Kit 2.2 or any other suitable image processing software. The image processing program cooperates with any suitable application program interfaces API such as Microsoft DirectX and DirectShow to enable flexible program access to hardware such as digital cameras. DirectX is a collection of multimedia application programming interfaces APIs and provides a standard development platform that enables access to specialized hardware features without having to write hardware specific code. DirectX also enables multimedia applications to take advantage of hardware acceleration features supported by graphics accelerators. Microsoft DirectShow is one of the DirectX technology components and is an architecture for streaming media on the Microsoft Windows platform. DirectShow provides for high quality capture and playback of multimedia streams and supports a wide variety of imaging formats including Advanced Systems Format ASF Motion Picture Experts Group MPEG Audio Video Interleaved AVI MPEG Audio Layer 3 MP3 and WAV sound files. DirectShow supports capture from digital and analog devices based on the Windows Driver Model WDM or Video for Windows and is integrated with other DirectX technologies to automatically detect and use video and audio acceleration hardware when available but is also capable of supporting systems without acceleration hardware. DirectShow is preferably deployed to simplify media playback media format conversion and image capture tasks and provides access to underlying imaging stream control architecture for custom applications.

Moreover the HMI also communicates with a machine control program which is preferably loaded to the computer . In any case the machine control program is preferably developed using any suitable machine automation and control software such as Entivity Think Do Studio 7.1. The HMI and machine control program are interfaced with any suitable hardware driver such as an object linking and embedding OLE for process control OPC programs which are readily available from Rockwell Automation and National Instruments among others.

Initially at step it is determined if an auto button or menu item is pushed or selected. The auto button may be a separate machine hardware push button a touchscreen pick or the like. If auto is not selected then the routine loops to a point prior to step . But if auto is selected then the routine proceeds to step .

At step the routine exits if a machine fault is detected or if a manual push button such as an emergency stop has been pressed. Otherwise the routine proceeds to step . Step represents an exception block wherein the condition is checked continuously and independently of the logic flow.

At step the routine calls a predefined machine homing sub routine. Such a homing subroutine is standard and known to those of ordinary skill in the art and basically commands movable machine sub systems such as the dome lift device s pallet lift device s and camera lift device s to travel toward a known home position.

At step the incoming conveyor is activated and the pallet stop lifted so that the tire T and pallet are loaded onto the machine table in a predetermined location.

At step it is determined whether the tire is present and ready to be tested and inspected by way of communication with the proximity sensor . If the proximity sensor does not detect the tire T then the routine loops back to a position between Steps and to re check if there is a tire present. Otherwise the routine proceeds to step . The Auto Start bubble represents the beginning of the next auto cycle after the routine finishes the current cycle and remains in auto.

At step the pallet and tire T are raised by sending a command to open the air valve and thereby actuate the air cylinder s . Thereafter or substantially simultaneously at step the upper dome is lowered and the imaging head raised by sending commands to the appropriate stepper motors . When the pallet and tire T upper dome and imaging head are in position such as by being sensed by limit switches not shown the routine proceeds to a tire testing and inspection sequence beginning at step of .

In the tire testing and inspection sequence several successive images of the object are preferably captured and stored individually during a testing cycle between a predetermined baseline vacuum test level and a first predetermined vacuum test level. These images are preferably processed with the computer and the results are preferably displayed on the computer monitor in real time. Any desired number N of images are captured and stored as image 1 image 2 etc. through image N. Preferably six images are taken and stored as image 1 through image 6 but any other suitable quantity of images may also be taken and stored such as four images taken and stored as image 1 through image 4.

In capturing a digital image an imaging device such as a CCD is first reset. Any other suitable imaging devices such as a complementary metal oxide semiconductor CMOS may also be used. Then a mechanical and or electrical shutter of the imaging device is opened to expose the CCD to light reflected from the tire to build up electrical charges in the CCD until the shutter closes. The CCD is basically an array of tiny light sensitive diodes or photosites which convert light or photons into electrical charges or electrons that correspond to image pixels. A CMOS device is similar but includes an array of several tiny transistors or photosites that correspond to image pixels. The CMOS approach is more flexible than the CCD approach because each CMOS pixel can be read individually. In either case each photosite is sensitive to light wherein the brighter the light that hits any given photosite the greater the electrical charge that will accumulate at that site. An analog to digital converter measures the electrical charge and creates a digital signal that represents the values of the charge at each pixel. The processor interpolates the data from the pixels to create a color or grayscale digital image. The processor may also perform a predetermined level of compression on the data for more efficient storage. In any event the processor may also direct or store the digital image to a memory as an image data file. Moreover digital live video is defined herein as a succession of digital images. Accordingly as used herein the term image broadly encompasses a still or live video visual image a printed visual image a data file like a bitmap or the like that represents a still or live video image or a scan of a printed image and the like. More specifically the terminology digital image broadly encompasses a still or live video visual image and a data file representing an image. Finally the term anomaly may refer to an actual physical anomaly in an object and to a digital representation such as a blob of that anomaly such as in a digital image.

Referring to at step with the pallet and tire T upper dome and imaging head in position a first or baseline image is captured by the imaging equipment. The predetermined baseline vacuum test level may be a zero value vacuum test level or may be a non zero value vacuum test level. As discussed previously coherent light is directed onto the tire T by the light sources of the imaging head . Coherent light is not received by the cameras directly from the light sources only indirectly as reflected off of the tire T. It is contemplated that some ambient flooding of coherent light could be received by the cameras but not directly from the light sources. In other words the coherent light is directly received by the cameras of the imaging head substantially only as reflected straight from the tire T. The reflected coherent light is captured by the cameras and preferably associated computer memory over the range of test levels as a plurality of digital images of the object as follows.

Then at step a vacuum cycle is initiated wherein the vacuum pump is activated by sending a command to the pump solenoid to open the control valve and pump air out of the vacuum chamber created between the upper and lower domes .

As shown by step the pump is cycled or incremented until a desired predetermined vacuum level is reached. The predetermined vacuum levels may be stored in memory as a look up table or the like.

At step it is determined whether the desired predetermined vacuum level from step has been reached. If not then the routine continuously loops at step until the desired vacuum level is reached. Otherwise the routine proceeds to step wherein another image is captured at the incremented vacuum level.

Thereafter at step it is determined whether the last image N has been taken or captured at the last of several predetermined vacuum levels. If not then the routine loops back and repeats steps through until the last image is captured at the last vacuum level. At this point the vacuum pump is deactivated the solenoid actuated exhaust valve is activated at step and the routine proceeds to a tire validation sequence beginning at step of .

It is contemplated that the tire testing and inspection sequence may be carried out according to any number of acceptable alternatives. For example the initial image need not be captured at a zero vacuum level but may be captured at a first incremented vacuum level. Also the vacuum cycle need not be incremented according to increasing vacuum levels but may be decremented from an initially relatively higher level toward a relatively lower or zero level according to decreasing vacuum levels. Moreover the image captures need not be carried out at predetermined increments and the vacuum cycle need not include discrete stops or increments. Rather the vacuum cycle may be continuous over a range of increments or levels and the image capture may be carried out at predetermined time intervals at predetermined vacuum levels randomly or any combination thereof.

Referring to at step of the tire validation sequence of the routine it is preferable that an image processing step be carried out substantially simultaneously as the upper dome is raised and the imaging head and pallet are lowered in step . In step one or more image processing sub routines are called and carried out and are described with reference to discussed hereinafter below. The sub routines facilitate analysis of the images captured. It is also contemplated that the image processing and analysis step could be carried out as the images are captured in steps through . In other words step could be initiated substantially simultaneously with steps through .

At step it is determined whether an operator has activated a tire failed pushbutton or screen pick. If not it is determined whether the operator has instead activated a tire passed pushbutton or screen pick at step . If the operator has not activated either pushbutton then the routine loops back to step . If however the operator has activated the tire passed button then the outbound non anomalous conveyor is enabled at step to carry the pallet and tire T off of the machine table . If however at step the operator has activated the tire failed button then the anomalous conveyor is instead enabled to carry the pallet and tire T off the machine table at step . At step the appropriate conveyor is activated and the pallet stop lowered to release the tire T and pallet .

At step it is determined whether the tire T has been released by referencing the status of the proximity switch signal. If the tire T has been released then the pallet stop is raised at step and thereafter the routine terminates and proceeds to auto start. If not then the routine continuously loops at step until the tire T is eventually released.

The production information column includes several fields including test profile test cycles operator and test fields. The test profile field represents a name of a tire profile that is currently being used and that contains information regarding camera settings camera position and vacuum levels used to test the tire as will be further described below with regard to the setup touchbutton. The test cycles field represents the number of cycles since last reset. The operator field represents the name of the operator that is logged on. The test field is a unique identifier for the test and is preferably a number that is automatically incremented for each test cycle.

The operator input information preferably includes an image functions touchbutton a reset count button for resetting the test cycles field in the production information column auto vs. manual buttons for placing the machine in an automatic mode or a manual mode and pass or fail buttons that an operator may press upon evaluation of final processed images to send a completed tire down a reject fail conveyor or an accept conveyor.

As shown by the image functions touchbutton may be pressed to yield an image functions toolbar which includes image analysis tools for tire validation purposes and may be pressed again to close the toolbar. The image analysis tools will be described in further detail below with reference to a method and functionality of image processing software illustrated by . In particular a digital image differencing function that yields a cumulative differential image CDI will be described in detail below. In any case the image analysis tools may include the following tool buttons not shown enhanced analyzed overlay invert original start video and stop video.

The enhanced button is pressed to perform an enhanced image process which will be described in detail below and as shown by the dialog box of the user will be prompted to enter a desired filter value and then press an OK button to proceed back to the image analysis toolbar. Preferably a filter value is chosen such that only anomalies will appear in the image and the background will be eliminated. The filter value selection process is iterative wherein a higher filter number will bring more data into the image whereas a low filter number will bring relatively less.

The analyzed button is pressed to perform an analyzed image process wherein the user is prompted to enter values for filtering minimum width minimum height maximum width and maximum height and then press OK. This process produces a further enhanced image based on the filter value specified. The number surface area perimeter and relative orientation or angle of anomalies in the analyzed image can be quantified by the dimensions specified.

The overlay button is pressed to overlay an analyzed image over an original image of the tested tire. Like the processes above once pressed the user will be prompted to enter values for filter minimum width minimum height maximum width and maximum height and then press OK. This process produces a further enhanced image based on the filter value specified. The number surface area perimeter and relative orientation or angle of anomalies in the analyzed image can be quantified by the dimensions specified. Furthermore the color of the anomalies is changed from black to a different color usually yellow and the new color image is then overlaid onto a raw or original image of the tested tire.

Upon pressing any of the above mentioned buttons the real time live images in the array of windows is replaced with the selected image types. In contrast when the start video button is pressed the array of windows displays the real time live images. Additionally when the stop video button is pressed live video is stopped and the last frame from the live video stream is frozen. It is contemplated that the image differencing steps disclosed herein may be carried out in real time to yield live video.

At the end of an image processing routine the final results of the test may be presented in the appropriate windows. The four sectors preferably refer to circumferential sectors and of the tire taken respectively approximately at 0 90 90 180 180 270 and 270 0 . It is contemplated that the sectors could overlap if desired. The main screen is visible upon application startup and can be accessed at any time by touching the main button in the menu row.

From the main screen the test images touchbutton may be selected to show the test images screen depicted in which provides the operator with a means to view manipulate and compare results from up to three different tests at any one time. The operator can print save delete and view any images from the current or previous tests. Beneath the mode indicator bar there are the following six columns a test column referring to the test set number indicating the sequential test identifier four columns representing images from sectors through and an operator input column for the present test set.

In the operator input column the item in the drop down box is the presently selected test set wherein any of the previously discussed image analysis tools shown at the bottom of the column or file management functions load print save delete apply to the test set selected. The image analysis tools function similarly as described above. The file management functions include a load images button that once pressed the operator will be prompted to enter a test set to be displayed via a popup number pad dialog box not shown . Thereafter the newly selected images will be displayed over the currently selected test set.

Once the print images button is pressed the operator is presented with a print preview screen of the test set selected as shown in . The print preview screen will show the test set in whatever state it was last in i.e. analyzed overlaid enhanced inverted or original . The print preview screen also allows the operator to enter a title for the print set and a description for each sector that will print along side the images. The operator presses print to print to the printer and presses close to return to the previous screen. The save images button is pressed to present the operator with a save dialog box from which the currently selected test set can be saved to another location i.e. local hard disk remote server and the like and or be renamed. The delete images button is pressed to query the operator to verify that the files for the currently selected test set should be deleted. If OK is pressed then the files will be permanently deleted.

From any of the menu screens the maintenance menu button may be touched to access the maintenance screen which is shown in and which allows an operator and or maintenance person to verify that all of the machine inputs and outputs I O are working correctly. An operator can also manipulate certain I O while in manual mode. The maintenance screen includes three columns including a first column or inputs column with a digital inputs box and an analog inputs box and a second column or outputs column with a digital outputs box and an analog outputs box. The inputs and output boxes display all of the machine digital inputs and outputs and their current state of ON or OFF and all of the machine analog inputs and outputs and their current value.

A third column is a manual function column including the below described manual command touchbuttons. A vacuum setpoint 1 button is pressed to set system vacuum to setpoint 1 which is predefined in the system setup screen described in further detail herein below. The upper dome is preferably down in order for this function to be enabled. A vacuum setpoint 2 button is press to set system vacuum to setpoint 2 which is also predefined in system setup. Again the upper dome is preferably down in order for this function to be enabled. A set exhaust button is pressed to activate the exhaust solenoid and thereby release the vacuum within the vacuum chamber and is pressed again to deactivate the exhaust solenoid. A raise pallet lift button is pressed to raise the pallet lift and is pressed again to lower the pallet lift. A lower pallet stop button is pressed to lower the pallet stop and is pressed again to raise the pallet stop. A conveyor on button is pressed to activate the incoming conveyor and is pressed again to deactivate the conveyor. A jog dome up button is pressed to jog the upper dome up and is released to stop the upward movement of the upper dome. A jog dome down button is pressed to jog the dome down and is released to stop the downward movement of the upper dome. A laser on button is pressed to activate the imaging equipment lasers and is pressed again to deactivate the lasers.

Not currently integrated into the HMI interface is the functionality of the separate camera position control pendant mentioned previously and illustrated in . The camera position control pendant is used to manually control each axis of the imaging head. A horizontal rocker switch is pressed to move the cameras horizontally toward or away from the tire. A vertical rocker switch is pressed to move the imaging head up and down with respect to the machine table out of and into the lower dome. A tilt rocker switch is pressed to tilt the cameras toward and away from the upper dome. A pan rocker switch is pressed to rotate the imaging head clockwise or counterclockwise.

As shown in the report menu button of the toolbar may be pressed from any of the toolbar menu screens to access a report screen which allows an operator to view various production details. As just one example the production details may include tire profile tire validation pass fail operator and the date time of tested tires. Those of ordinary skill in the art recognize that information presented on this screen can be customized to any given application according to needs of a particular customer. A build report button may be pressed to generate a report after entering start and end dates in the fields to the left of the report button.

From any of the toolbar menu screens including the main report screen of a setup menu button of the toolbar may be pressed to access a drop down button menu including tire camera and system setup buttons as shown in . Pressing the various setup buttons leads to corresponding setup screen which allows the operator to setup various profiles.

Pressing the tire button permits a user to access a tire profile or setup screen which is shown in and is used to accommodate variations in tire models due to size looseness and illumination. The tire profile may be manually selected for each batch of tires run. But it is contemplated that if the tires are incorporated with a barcode RFID other identifier technology that can be recognized via OCR Optical Character Recognition and the like then an auto identify system can be adapted for use with this tire profile function to automatically populate and or select the values and settings discussed below. In any case the screen includes a tire profile box a camera box a vacuum box and a position box.

The camera box addresses camera settings wherein several camera settings are shown such as gain exposure brightness contrast and gamma that pertain to the currently selected profile from the tire profile box. It is contemplated that camera iris and focal fields among others could be added to this box. In any case one or more of the fields can be modified and saved to the current profile.

Similarly in the vacuum box there are shown current maximum and minimum vacuum settings that can be modified and saved to the current profile.

The position box controls camera position relative to the tire being tested and allows an operator to configure up to 6 different positions. As shown there is a position array including five columns and six rows. The five columns include positions 1 through 6 of the 6 different positions a vertical position column a horizontal position column a tilt position column and a sector column. The position field in each of the relevant columns is the actual position in inches that the individual camera should move from its home position. The clear field in each of the relevant columns is a position in inches where no obstructions are present and the camera can safely move from one position to the next. The numbers one through six are buttons that may be used in conjunction with the copy cut paste and clear buttons. The current field displays current vertical horizontal tilt and sector data of the camera and is not a button. The pendant of is used to move a camera to an appropriate spot using live video feedback. The operator then enters the current position coordinates into the appropriate position number.

At the bottom of each of the vertical horizontal tilt and sector columns there is an entry field a go to button and a home button. Pressing the go to button under a particular position number of a particular position type will move appropriate portions of the imaging head to all relevant axes. In other words if the go to button is pressed in the vertical column then only the corresponding portion of the imaging head will move to the vertical axis position specified. Likewise pressing the home button sends the imaging head to the home position for that position number or axis.

In the tire profile box an existing tire profile may be selected for viewing via the drop down menu ACME TIRE . The tire profile function allows a user to save the camera vacuum and position settings described above or retrieve already saved such settings. Otherwise an add button may be pressed to create a new tire profile. A save button may be pressed to save any changes made to the currently selected profile. And a delete button may be pressed to permanently delete the currently selected profile.

Beneath the position array there is a row of tool buttons including cut copy paste and clear. Pressing the cut tool button copies the currently selected position values and turns the position number color from green to red thereby indicating that the values will be cleared after pressing the paste tool button. A position is selected by clicking on the position number which will turn the number from grey to green. Pressing the copy tool button merely copies the currently selected position values and turns the position number color from green to yellow. Pressing the paste button pastes the values from a position that was cut or copied from i.e. yellow or red position whereafter the yellow or red position number color is turned back to grey. Pressing the clear button clears values from the currently selected position number 1 6.

A second page not shown of the tire profile may contain fields for entering tire specific data such as manufacturer model size new or used customer name anomaly constraints and the like.

As shown in the setup button of the toolbar may be pressed to access the drop down button menu after which the camera setup button may be pressed to access a camera setup screen which is shown in and allows an operator to setup the default properties by sector such as gain exposure brightness contrast and gamma. This screen provides a live video stream from the currently selected camera which can be selected from the drop down field for previewing and or modification. Below the drop down field the properties of currently selected camera are shown including gain and exposure. Below that a camera sector section shows the sector of the tire that is associated with the currently selected camera. This property can be changed by clicking the checkbox of the appropriate sector. Further below a camera settings button can be pressed whereafter the operator will be prompted with a dialogue box that will allow the operator to change the camera gain exposure brightness contrast and gamma as shown in which show the preferred settings.

As shown in the setup button of the toolbar may be pressed to access the drop down button menu after which the system setup button may be pressed to access a system setup screen which is shown in and allows an operator to modify system default vacuum image archival and test settings. A vacuum box displays the current vacuum level in inches of mercury inHg and settings for maximum vacuum minimum vacuum and first and second vacuum setpoints. Setpoint 1 is the maximum default vacuum level for carrying out the testing and inspection process wherein this value is used if another value is not specified in the tire profile. Setpoint 2 is the minimum default vacuum level for carrying out the testing and inspection process wherein this value is used if another value is not specified in the tire profile. The desired number of vacuum points are preferably equidistantly scaled over the vacuum range with a minimum of 0.5 in Hg increments. For example if the vacuum range is 0 2.5 in HG then images at 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 and 2.5 will be taken. If however the vacuum range is 0 3.5 in HG then images at 0 0.7 1.4 2.1 2.8 and 3.5 will be taken.

A vacuum calibration box is provided for carrying out several vacuum calibration steps. Vacuum calibration is carried out by first putting the system in manual by pressing the manual button on the main screen and then lowering the upper dome via the maintenance screen. Next the exhaust button on the system setup screen is pressed to eliminate any vacuum in the vacuum chamber. Then the zero button is pressed to obtain a zero offset value and thereafter a vacuum setpoint 1 button is pressed to set the vacuum level to the value in the setpoint 1 field. Finally a linearize button is pressed to finish the calibration. Thereafter the exhaust button may be pressed to exhaust the vacuum chamber to enable lifting of the dome.

A file settings and test configuration box is also provided. A file settings portion includes an archive path field to define where processed images are stored and further includes an image file name field to define a file name template wherein an exemplary default format is TireProfile TestID Sector.bmp. One of the check boxes unfiltered image enhanced analyzed and overlay may be checked for the desired type of image to be displayed at the end of the image processing. These settings and their associated functionality will be discussed below in detail with respect to routines and associated software. A settling time field may be completed to define the time in milliseconds before starting the vacuum cycle once the dome is fully lowered against the machine table. Finally a save all settings button may be pressed to save all system settings.

As shown in the system log menu button of the toolbar may be pressed from any of the toolbar menu screens to access a system log screen which allows an operator to view various system events. For example all system messages warnings and faults are saved and displayed on this screen. An all tab may be selected to view all messages warnings and faults. Whereas message warning and fault tabs may be selected to screen for the selected types of events. Page up and page down buttons enable scrolling among the various events.

As shown in the about menu button of the toolbar may be pressed from any of the toolbar menu screens to access an about screen which allows an operator to view information regarding the system type software version and contact information.

As shown in any of the toolbar menu screens discussed above a shutdown menu button may be pressed to close the program.

Using the apparatus and methods described above and using preferred image processing routines described herein it is possible to capture a first straight reflection from a test object as a first image and thereafter capture a second straight reflection from the test object as a second image and then compare the difference of the reflected light from the two images between unstressed and stressed conditions of the object and or between stressed conditions of different magnitudes. The cameras directly receive the coherent light substantially as reflected straight from the test object. Moreover the cameras and or the control module capture the reflected coherent light over the range of test levels as a plurality of digital images of the test object.

According to the reflection law of physics when a surface of the test object moves each individual reflective ray of light moves to a different position wherein the imaging equipment senses the position change thereby yielding a difference between image captures. Using the routines discussed herein anomalous regions within the captured images can be viewed without confusion of fringes and or double images associated with previous testing and inspection approaches. The images can be further processed to enhance the images for better viewing by humans to count anomalies to measure anomalies and or to display just the anomalies or the anomalies as overlaid onto a baseline image.

In general an exemplary differencing routine may include captures of six images equally spaced between 0.0 in. Hg. and 2.5 in. Hg. Capture is triggered by a vacuum transducer connected to the CPU wherein the vacuum transducer is read or sampled many times per second. At each setpoint an image is captured according to a live differencing routine described herein below . Three pairs of images taken at 0.0 and 0.5 in Hg 1.0 and 1.5 inHg and 2.0 and 2.5 inHg are differenced to produce image A image B and image C. Images A and B and C are added to produce a raw cumulative differential image raw CDI which is thereafter digitally processed or finessed to produce a resultant CDI. The resultant CDI is further digitally processed using an enhancement routine to produce an enhanced CDI an analyzed CDI and or an overlaid CDI. The methods described herein may be performed by the computer as a computer program and various predetermined setpoints or other values may be stored in memory as a look up table or the like.

The resultant CDI is composed of speckle patterns that exhibit a pixel value from 0 thru 255 grayscale from black to white with light or bright areas representing the presence of motion or departure from a previous position i.e. the presence of an anomaly . As discussed above with respect to the image functions button of the DVS HMI an operator may set a filter value to specify a threshold level with all portions of the image above that filter value appearing white and everything below turning black i.e. the presents of an anomaly . The computer may then count the number of black anomalous areas and calculate anomaly surface areas and perimeters in pixels. The chosen resultant image can then be displayed on the interface screen inverted or overlaid and then the image files stored.

A more detailed description of the functionality of the image processing software is presented below and illustrated in showing several GUI screen shots and various image processing subroutines any one or more of which may be carried out as or called by step of using MontiVision or any other suitable image processing software. Preferably all subroutines are carried out for each individual camera of the imaging head and any properties of MontiVision function blocks that are not explicitly stated or shown are preferably assumed to have their default properties. As an initial matter default properties for MontiVision BayerToRGB filters and for MontiVision Demosaic Method and Correction Matrix are preferably set to none .

A video configuration routine is shown in and is used to initialize camera properties when the HMI of is activated. As shown in a VideoSource function represents capture of a video signal or stream and a line connects a capture node of this function to an input node of a Resize function. The Resize function effectively resizes the video stream and dictates certain properties of the video signal as exemplified by a Resize properties dialog box of wherein an exemplary preferred output image size is 1280 pixels in width by 1024 pixels in height and includes nearest neighbor NN interpolation. The output from the Resize function goes to an input of a Color Space Converter which converts between different color spaces e.g. RGB24 to RGB32 RGB to YUV etc. thereby connecting different modules that do not support each other s color space. The output from the Color Space Converter goes to an input of a Video Renderer function which renders a video stream to a VGA PAL NTSC or like monitor using a graphics card TV Out function and uses the DirectX module to achieve best possible performance. Accordingly video stream can be displayed in a window or on a full monitor screen or on an analog monitor TV or the like.

A live video routine is illustrated in and is called when an operator presses the start video button of the HMI. Thereafter image data is obtained preferably from all of the cameras then resized as discussed above and rendered so that it can be displayed on the HMI. Only one camera process is shown as an example. The live video routine is preferably identical to that of except that an Image Grabber function is applied between the Resize and Color Space Converter functions. In general the Image Grabber is used to capture stills or snapshots of the video stream and supports output of various file formats including Bitmap .bmp JPEG jpg TIFF .tif and PNG .png . This snapshot functionality is preferably implemented using an IMVTrigger Interface function of MontiVision. A video frame is saved as single image file on every trigger event and the names of the output files can be defined using file name templates if desired. depicts the output file properties of the Image Grabber that are set as shown including a file name of VideoSnapshot with an automatic counter that assigns sequential numerical extensions to the file names. Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the particular file names are exemplary and may be specified for any given application as desired. Preferably the Image Grabber allows for capture of the last frame of the video stream which is displayed after the operator presses the stop video button on the HMI.

An image capture routine is shown in and is used to capture snapshots of objects. Baseline shots or captures for a Live Differencing routine are captured using this function. Basically this routine is identical to that described with respect to except the Video Renderer function is replaced with a Null Renderer function which terminates video that does not need to be displayed but that cannot be left unterminated.

A view file routine is shown in and is used to display processed still images as opposed to the unprocessed live video on the HMI. Here an Image File Source function outputs to the Video Renderer discussed previously. The dialog box of depicts the preferred property settings for the Image File Source.

A live differencing routine is illustrated in and is used to stream live differencing video on the HMI and to capture image stills that will be processed as cumulative differential images as will be discussed in greater detail herein below. The first three steps or functions include the VideoSource camera capture Resize and Color Space Conversion functions discussed previously. The output from the Color Space Converter is fed to a Splitter function which splits the video stream into multiple separate output video streams of the same content. One output video stream is an input to an Image File Renderer function and another output video stream is an input to an Absolute Difference function.

The Image File Renderer is used to create one or more single image files taken from the video stream and supports the following file formats Bitmap .bmp JPEG jpg TIFF .tif and PNG .png . Incoming images from the video stream can be saved to a directory or the filter may use the trigger mode wherein an image file can be saved on each trigger event. The preferred output file properties are shown in the dialog box of .

The Absolute Difference function is a filter that accepts unprocessed video from the Splitter function and the saved image file from an Image File Source and calculates the absolute values of the pixel differences of the two input images. The Image File Source function is used to output the saved or base image file to an input of an Absolute Difference function downstream of the Splitter function. The preferred properties are depicted in the dialog box of .

Output from the Absolute Difference function is accepted downstream by a Monadic Arithmetic filter that is used to modify pixel channels of a current image frame being processed using one of several arithmetic operations. As shown in of the properties dialog a multiply filter with a scalar of 20 is specified for application to the image. As an example an addition operation using a scale value of 10 would increase all channel values of all pixels by 10 thereby providing a brighter resulting image wherein 0 black and 255 white.

Output from the Monadic Arithmetic function is accepted as input by a Linear Filter function which convolves the frames of the current video stream using a predefined linear filter kernel. The filter supports several filter kernels and combinations of Sobel or Prewitt kernels including Gauss High pass Laplace Sobel and Prewitt Matrices of sizes 3 3 or 5 5. The Linear Filter may thus provide edge detection smoothing Gaussian noise reduction contrast enhancement and the like. Preferred properties of the Linear Filter are depicted in the corresponding dialog box of .

Output from the Linear Filter function is accepted as input by an Image Grabber having the preferred output file properties depicted in the corresponding dialog box of . The output from the Image Grabber is communicated to the Video Renderer discussed previously.

Referring now to the flow chart of an absolute differencing routine is illustrated and is preferably applied to all of the cameras over a preferred six predetermined test values. After completion of the various computer routines described above at step the pixel values of a first image or image 1 of the preferred six images are digitally subtracted i.e. absolute difference pixel for corresponding pixel from the pixel values of a second image or image 2 of the preferred six images. The resultant differential is stored as image A. If image 1 is a baseline image captured while the object is unstressed or subjected to a zero value test level then image 1 will likely be substantially relatively dark i.e. registering pixel values closer to 0 than to 255 on the grayscale. If image 2 is an image captured while the object is stressed to some non zero test level value then image 2 will exhibit some relatively light areas in the presence of anomalies registering pixel values progressively away from 0. Again at step the pixel values of image 3 are digitally subtracted i.e. absolute difference pixel for corresponding pixel from the pixel values of image 4. The resultant differential is stored as image B. Likewise at step the pixel values of image 5 are digitally subtracted i.e. absolute difference pixel for corresponding pixel from the pixel values of image 6. The resultant differential is stored as image C. Basically this routine results in differential images A B and C that are essentially spaced apart from one another along the range of test levels.

Steps through are preferably carried out using an Absolute Difference routine of MontiVision that is depicted by the MontiVision screen shot of . depicts an Absolute Difference function of the first of the several pairs of images and corresponds directly to step . Here an Absolute Difference function accepts output from 1 an Image File Source 1 function that presents a second image of a pair of images saved according to the Source 1 filter properties dialog of and from 2 an Image File Source 2 function that presents a preceding first image of the pair of images saved according to the Image File Source filter properties dialog box of . The Absolute Difference filter accepts the images from the saved image files of the Image File Sources and calculates the absolute values of the pixel differences of the two input images which output is accepted as input to the Image File Renderer discussed previously and whose preferred output filter properties are depicted in the corresponding dialog of including the file name Result . Moreover is also exemplary of steps and . Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the absolute differencing routine may contain more or less than the steps described herein to produce an absolute differenced image and that the filenames are arbitrary and may be different from those used herein.

Referring now to the flow chart of an alternative absolute differencing routine is illustrated and is preferably applied to all of the cameras over four instead of six predetermined test values. At step the pixel values of a first image or image 1 of the four images are digitally subtracted pixel for corresponding pixel from the pixel values of a second image or image 2 of the four images. The resultant differential is stored as image A . At step the pixel values of image 2 are digitally subtracted pixel for corresponding pixel from the pixel values of a third image or image 3 of the four images. The resultant differential is stored as image B . Likewise at step the pixel values of image 3 are digitally subtracted pixel for corresponding pixel from the pixel values of a fourth image or image 4 of the four images. The resultant differential is stored as image C . Basically this routine results in differential images A B and C that are essentially adjacent one another along the range of test levels.

Referring to the flow charts of at step the pixel values of the differential images images A B and C or A B and C are added pixel for corresponding pixel to produce a raw cumulative differential image CDI shown as image D or D . This step among other things effectively integrates or stacks the appearance of anomalies from different portions of the test range because some anomalies may appear in one portion of a test range but not another. The nature of non destructive testing in general and in deformation specifically is such that some anomalies may appear over certain portions of the test range and disappear over others. Accordingly stacking the images to provide the raw CDI yields one comprehensive show all image for analyzing quality of the test object.

Referring again to the raw CDI is preferably further processed wherein the three sets of differenced pairs are added together brightened smoothed and inverted to produce a resultant CDI that renders anomalies more visible to the human eye. Accordingly in step the raw CDI is brightened so as to be visible to the human eye. In other words the pixel values of the raw CDI are increased. In step the now brightened CDI is smoothed to reduce graininess or noise and otherwise increase image aesthetics. In step the brightened and smoothed CDI is inverted so as to show relatively dark anomalies against a relatively lighter non anomalous background of the object. As used herein the term invert means that the pixel values are adjusted such that a 0 pixel value becomes a 255 pixel value vice versa and a 1 pixel value becomes a 254 pixel value vice versa and so on. In other words to invert an image means to make a negative of the image.

Referring now to the flow chart of once the resultant CDI has been produced it may be desirable to further improve the visual appearance of the resultant CDI by applying an enhancement routine . As shown one or both of a Topography filter function and a Segmentation filter function are applied to the resultant CDI.

The enhancement routine is also depicted in the MontiVision screen shot of . An Image File Source function is used to access the automatically generated Final file from the previously described CDI routine and displays the object image as having black or dark anomalies against a relatively light or grey background as shown in the properties dialog box of .

Next the Topography filter automatically generates a topography map from the current video frame received from the Image File Source so as to limit the number of output grey or color levels. In other words topographically filtering means to selectively filter out certain grayscale or colorscale image gradations to effectively reduce image noise and present a clearer image. Using the Topography filter the resultant CDI video frame is preferably downsampled and upsampled using a gaussian 5 5 filter kernel up to a factor of 16 as shown in . The topographically filtered output goes to an input of a Color Space Converter as described previously to convert between different color spaces and thereby connect different MontiVision modules that do not support each other s color space. In this case the Color Space Converter output connects to a Segmentation filter used for image segmentation.

Segmentation is basically an automatic conversion from grayscale to black and white and is a preferred pre processing step for a downstream automatic blob detection function. As shown in the properties dialog box of manual thresholding is chosen for example at a value of 10 and all color channels are specified for the segmentation. Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the particular settings and values chosen herein may be varied and adjusted depending upon the particular application involved. After the image is segmented it is processed by a Monadic Arithmetic filter that is used to modify pixel channels of the current image frame being processed using one of several arithmetic operations. As shown in of the properties dialog a multiply filter with a scalar of 1 is specified for application to the image.

Finally the output from the Monadic step is saved using an Image File Render function specifying a default file name of Capture as shown in the properties dialog of . Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the enhanced CDI routine may contain more or less than the steps described herein to produce an enhanced CDI.

Referring now to the flow chart of once the now enhanced CDI has been produced it may be desirable to analyze the enhanced CDI by applying an analysis routine to effectively identify and quantify anomalies in the enhanced CDI to produce an analyzed CDI. As shown one or both of an automatic Blob Counter function and an automatic Blob Finder function are applied to the enhanced CDI from the previously described enhancement routine.

The analysis routine is also depicted in the MontiVision screen shot of . An Image File Source function is called to output the previously enhanced CDI which is saved with an exemplary file name of Filter00000.bmp. A Color Space Converter converts the enhanced image for use by a downstream tool Select Mediatype which determines the type of media that should be used for a filter connection to a downstream Blob Counter. The Select Mediatype is not a video transformation filter but rather is used to set a connection between two filters to a specific media type e.g. RGB 24 YUV or the like. Many filter functions may support more than one media type as inputs and outputs. When two relatively upstream filters are connected they use the first media type that is acceptable by or common to both filters. But sometimes that common media type is not compatible for other downstream filters such as the downstream Blob Counter in this situation. In this case the Select Mediatype filter is used to set the connection to the right media type. The Select Mediatype filter is transparent for all stream data and transports the data with a minimum delay without loss of performance.

The Blob Counter is basically a filter to automatically detect and to count all blobs within a given image or video stream. The blobs are representative of anomalies of the tested object and may for example be black or dark objects or contours against a white or light background or vice versa. One filter excludes all blobs outside a minimum and maximum size and the second filter excludes all blobs whose seven hu invariants are outside minimum and maximum values. Hu invariants are basically invariants to the scale rotation and reflection of an image except for the seventh hu invariant whose sign is changed by reflection. As shown in the Blob Counter properties dialog box of the list contour retrieval is chosen to arrange all blobs in one list and contour drawing is enabled an approximate contour accuracy of 0.2 is chosen for contour improvement to reduce contour complexity and blob contour properties evaluation is enabled. As shown in the contour filter tab of the Blob Counter properties dialog of the contour filtering is enabled wherein contour sizes of between 0 and 10 000 pixels in width and height are selected. As also shown in the pre postprocessing tab of the Blob Counter properties dialog of preprocessing segmentation threshold of 128 of 255 is specified. Also edge detection is disabled and only dark blobs are to be found.

Referring again to the output of the Blob Counter is accepted as input by a Blob Finder filter which automatically calculates one or more blob characteristics such as orientation or angle perimeter area minimum bounding rectangle upright bounding rectangle spatial and central moments and hu invariants. Additionally the Blob Finder filter may calculate a convex hull for the blob or reduces contour complexity with an approximation routine. The Blob Counter and Finder are preferably used together to optimize blob analysis. As shown in the properties dialog box of the list contour retrieval is chosen an approximate contour accuracy of 0.2 is chosen for contour improvement contour moments are used as a base for calculation of position and orientation or angle and the video output includes a minimum bounding rectangle and an upright bounding rectangle. As also shown in the contour filter tab of the Blob Finder properties dialog box the contour filtering is enabled wherein contour sizes of for example between 0 and 10 000 pixels in width and height are selected. As also shown in the pre postprocessing tab of the Blob Counter properties dialog of preprocessing segmentation threshold of 128 of 255 is specified. Also edge detection is disabled and only dark blobs are to be found and automatic region of interest ROI is selected for postprocessing.

Referring again to an Image Grabber function is called to accept output from the Blob Finder to capture a snapshot output in a bitmap .bmp format with a file name of Filter000001 as shown in which depicts the preferred file properties of the image grabber. Finally a Null Renderer function is called to terminate imagery that does not need to be displayed but that cannot be left unterminated. Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the analyzed CDI routine may contain more or less than the steps described herein to produce an analyzed CDI.

Referring now to the flow chart of once the resultant CDI has been produced it may be desirable to further improve the visual appearance of the resultant CDI by applying an overlay routine wherein the resultant CDI is enhanced and analyzed and then overlaid on a baseline image of the test object to illustrate where the anomalies are in relation to the baseline image of the test object. The routine includes similar steps as previously discussed with regard to with a few exceptions to enable a clear overlay of the enhanced and analyzed image over a baseline image. is a MontiVision screen shot that corresponds to the flow chart of .

As shown in a Topography filter step is applied and is identical to that previously described except that the image output from the Topography filter step is inverted as represented by step and as shown in the Topography properties dialog box of . It may also be recognized that the topographically filtered image is inverted before the Segmentation filter is applied as shown by step in . Also as shown in a filter tab of a Segmentation properties dialog box the binarization manual threshold is set to 230 as opposed to 10 to reflect the fact that the topographic output has been inverted.

Next a Blob Counter function and Blob Finder function are somewhat different from that previously discussed above. As shown in properties dialog boxes of the Blob Finder output does not include bounding rectangles and the blob contours are not to be drawn. As shown in the filter tabs of the dialog boxes of contour filtering is enabled with contour sizes of for example between 0 and 1 000 instead of 10 000 pixels in width and height are selected. Finally only bright instead of dark blobs are to be found reflecting the inverted status of the image as shown in the pre postprocessing tab of the properties dialog boxes of .

Referring to a ColorTwist function is applied to the Blob Finder output to convert one or more of three color channels according to a 4 4 matrix specified as shown by the colortwist properties dialog box in . As discussed previously with respect to the image function touchbutton with reference to the ColorTwist function preferably changes the color of the anomalies from dark or black to yellow. As depicted by step of the flow chart of the inverted analyzed image is overlaid on the baseline image with a digital dyadic logical OR function as also depicted in the filter tab of the Dyadic Logic properties dialog box of . Before applying a Color Space Converter function the baseline image is called from the saved image file ImageA 000001.bmp from the Image File Source 2 function from the Live Differencing routine described previously as shown in the properties dialog of . Finally the output from the logical OR function is saved using the Image File Renderer with the properties shown in . Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the overlay CDI routine may contain more or less than the steps described herein to produce an overlaid CDI.

As shown below in Table 1 the dat ParamsSystem table contains default vacuum file management dome display and mode settings. VacuumSetpoint1 and 2 are the default limits for a given Tire Profile. A user can specify other limits within a Tire Profile as long as they do not exceed the VacuumMax or Min values.

As shown below in Table 2 the dat Users table contains the names passwords and access level of users.

As shown below in Table 3 the dat SystemLog contains a log of system events. All messages warnings and faults are saved to this table. A message is a statement regarding normal operation of the system. A warning alerts the user to a non critical system process issue. A fault alerts a user to a critical issue that must be attended to immediately in order to proceed further.

As shown below in Table 4 the dat TestSettings table contains information regarding the machine setup and differencing analysis parameters of each tire tested.

As shown below in Table 5 the dat TestLog table stores general information regarding a tire test. A unique identification TestID is generated for each test with an incremental record number. Other tables that store test details then reference this unique identification.

As shown below in Table 6 the dat TestResults table stores details about anomalies found in a certain area and sector of a tire. The TestId value provides the reference to the dat TestLog table.

As shown below in Table 7 the dat TireProfile table contains tire profiles. Tire profiles describe and define characteristics of the tire that are then used in the tire test process.

The Move Files button allows a user to move CDI s from a local directory to an archive directory after a report has been created. Once a user presses the button a Move Files screen is displayed as shown in . If the directory containing the CDI s is known then a user can type in the directory in the Source Folder textbox and press GOTO DIRECTORY. Otherwise a user can find the folder by browsing through the system folders wherein a BROWSE button loads a browse folders dialogue box not unlike what Windows users are accustomed to. Once a particular folder is selected the listbox will be automatically populated with the bitmap images found in that folder. The user selects the files that need to be moved. Once all of the files have been selected the MOVE button will begin the transfer process. The user will be asked via a popup dialog box to verify whether or not to make the move because the original files will be deleted. If YES on the dialog box is pressed then the program will verify that the files follow the correct name format so the files can be copied to the correct location and if so will begin the transfer process. After the files have been moved the listbox will be updated to reflect that the files no longer exist in the current directory. The CLOSE button may be pressed to exit this screen.

The REPRINT button allows the user to print past tire reports. Once the REPRINT button has been pressed a popup dialog box will appear prompting the user to enter the Tire and Test Number for the tire report to be printed. After the Tire and Test Number have been entered the user may press an OK button to continue or a CANCEL button to exit. Once the OK button has been pressed the tire report will be printed if the Tire and Test number entered are valid. It is contemplated that the software could include an edit function wherein existing reports could be retrieved data therein edited and re saved.

To begin a tire report a user starts with data fields located in a General section of the screen. Fields containing drop down menus can be used in one of two ways a selection can be made from a drop down menu or the user can type in the information if it does not exist in the drop down menu. The preferred sequence for filling out the General form is as follows 1 Select or type in the purpose of the test i.e. R D Sales 2 Select a customer name or enter a new one 3 Select a customer number menu items are dependent on customer name selected or enter a new one 4 Select a case number menu items are dependent on customer number selected or enter a new one 5 Select a U.S. Department of Transportation DOT number menu items are dependent on case number selected or enter a new one 6 Select a unique tire ID if testing a previously tested tire menu items are dependent on case number selected enter a new one if unique marking exists and is a new test tire or leave blank if new test tire and no unique marking exist wherein default id will be fire number . This field is used to distinguish tires having the same DOT number 7 Select your name from the Tester drop down menu or enter it if it does not exist 8 Select the tire type tire location and the test type 9 Select all of the tire areas that were tested 10 Press next. If all of the data has not been filled out the user will be asked to complete the form in full.

Referring now to the Tire Characteristics screen is used to record characteristics or data about the tire like make model size stiffness whether new or used or clean or dirty and environmental aspects of the tire test such as temperature and relative humidity and notes fields. Under the title Tire Characteristics appears the filename syntax or scheme to be used in order for the Move Files function to work. If the user is creating a report on a previously tested tire the manufacturer model and size will automatically be filled out. If it is a new tire then the manufacturer model and size should be selected or filled out in the order just stated. The other fields can be filled in any order. When all the information has been entered the user can press the NEXT button to continue or the PREVIOUS button to go back to the previous screen.

Referring now to a Test Results screen is used to record certain data or characteristics of the tire testing such as the date time quantitative and qualitative anomaly details and filter parameters if tire was tested using the differencing process described herein . The anomaly details may include the quantity of anomalies per tire sector the area of smallest and largest anomalies per sector and the minimum and maximum heights and widths of the anomaly filter levels used. The area heights and widths may be measured and or presented in pixels millimeters and or inches. As indicated on the screen shot by the area under the title TEST RESULTS a unique test results screen is preferably provided for each of the different tire areas tested. The various test results sections for any given tire may be as follows inside bead inside crown inside DOT outside bead outside crown and outside DOT all of which are particular areas of a tire known to those of ordinary skill in the art of tire testing. When all of the information for the current area is entered the NEXT button will display the next area to fill out. The tire areas requiring data depend on the areas checked in the General section. If all of the tire areas requiring data are filled out then the NEXT button will prompt the user to determine if each area of the tire tested was done with the same fixture setup or not via popup dialog box. The PREVIOUS button will display the previous test area or section.

Referring now to a Test Fixture Parameters screen is used to record machine settings used for the test. Machine settings are synonymous with machine characteristics or machine data and may include the type of laser light source used laser power in mW milliwatts laser angles minimum and maximum vacuum test levels and camera setting details such as camera exposure time focus focal length iris and the like. If different test settings were used for different areas of the tire then the NEXT button will take the user to the next area where the same fields will need to be filled out. The various test fixture parameter sections for any given tire may be as follows inside bead inside crown inside DOT outside bead outside crown and outside DOT. If all the fields for all test areas have been filled the save button will be enabled. Pressing the SAVE button will prompt the user to determine whether or not to continue with the saving process. If the user clicks YES then the data will be saved to the database and the user will be prompted to determine whether or not to print the report. Once the user clicks yes or no to print the report the user will be brought back to the General screen where the CDI s can be archived or moved and another test report can be filled out.

Referring to Table 8 below the dat ParamsCustomer table contains all the customer information needed for the customer drop down menus in the Tire Data Collector interface. If a tire for a new customer is being tested the tester will have to enter in the customer information manually after which the information will be saved for future use.

As shown in Table 9 below the dat ParamsTires table contains information regarding tires for the drop down menus in the Tire data Collector interface. If certain tire characteristics or parameters do not exist then the parameters will have to be manually entered in via the Tire Data Collector interface and saved for future use.

Referring to Table 10 below the dat ParamsTester table contains personnel data or characteristics for those people testing tires and provides the information for the Tester drop down menu in the Tire Data Collector interface. Depending on the system a person may select their name from a drop down menu or they may have to swipe their badge and or enter a password to login to the system. If a person does not exist in the table they will have to be entered in manually via the operator interface.

As shown in Table 11 below the dat TestFixture table contains data or characteristics regarding the machine setup and differencing analysis parameters. The TestId field provides the reference to the dat TestLog table.

Referring to Table 12 below the dat TestLog table stores general data or characteristics regarding a tire test. A unique id TestID is generated for each test incremental record number . Other tables that store test details then reference this id.

Referring to Table 13 below the dat TestResults table stores data or characteristics about the anomalies found in a certain area and sector of a tire. The TestId value provides the reference to the dat TestLog table.

The order of execution or performance of the methods illustrated and described herein is not essential unless otherwise specified. That is elements or steps of the methods may be performed in any order unless otherwise specified and that the methods may include more or less elements than those disclosed herein. For example it is contemplated that executing or performing a particular element before contemporaneously with or after another element is within the scope of the invention.

As used in this specification and claims the terms for example for instance and such as and the verbs comprising having including and their other verb forms when used in conjunction with a listing of one or more components or other items are each to be construed as open ended meaning that that the listing is not to be considered as excluding other additional components or items. Moreover directional words such as top bottom upper lower radial circumferential axial lateral longitudinal vertical horizontal and the like are employed by way of description and not limitation. Other terms are to be construed using their broadest reasonable meaning unless they are used in a context that requires a different interpretation. When introducing elements of the present invention or the embodiment s thereof the articles a an the and said are intended to mean that there are one or more of the elements.

While the forms of the invention herein disclosed constitute presently preferred embodiments many others are possible. It is not intended herein to mention all of the possible equivalent forms or ramifications of the invention. It is understood that the terms used herein are merely descriptive rather than limiting and that various changes may be made without departing from the spirit or the scope of the invention. For example the number and type of lasers to be utilized can vary substantially and the software in the computer that is described herein can be varied depending upon the changes in technology with respect to the computer or computer devices and updates to the types of software or customer requirements.

