---

title: Pleating system
abstract: The present invention provides a method and apparatus for pleating paper. The apparatus includes a pair of pleating rollers, means to rotate one of said pleating rollers, a first pair of support rollers in supporting contact with a first of said pair of pleating rollers and a second pair of support rollers in supporting contact with a second of said pair of pleating rollers. Each of said pleating rollers has a plurality of radially reduced sections. An elongated pleating finger member is positioned in at least a plurality of radially reduced sections, and means are provided to movably support each of said elongated pleating finger members.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07465267&OS=07465267&RS=07465267
owner: 
number: 07465267
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050124
---
This application claims the benefit of the subject matter of Provisional Patent Application No. 60 538 633 for a Pleating System which was filed with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office on Jan. 23 2004. The entire disclosure and contents of the above application is hereby incorporated by reference.

The invention relates to a mechanism for high speed pleating and more particularly to an apparatus for the continuous high speed pleating of paper such as Kraft paper or the like.

According to a first broad aspect of the invention there is provided an apparatus for pleating paper comprising a pair of pleating rollers means to rotate one of said pleating rollers a first pair of support rollers in supporting contact with a first of said pair of pleating rollers and a second pair of support rollers in supporting contact with a second of said pair of pleating rollers. Each of said pleating rollers have a plurality of radially reduced sections and an elongated pleating finger member is supported for being positioned in at least a plurality of radially reduced sections.

Means are provided to movably support each of said elongated pleating finger members. The elongated pleating fingers are parallel to each other and are selectably movable toward and away from each other to varying the height of pleats that are formed and are movable toward and away from said pleating rollers. The elongated pleating fingers remain parallel to each other in all positions.

Advantageously the support rollers are offset from each other on the order of about 8 degrees. In an embodiment of the invention the angle formed between a first line drawn through the center of a first support roller to the center of a pleating roller and a second line drawn through the center of each of said pleating rollers is about 4 degrees.

The apparatus includes paper feed means for feeding paper preferably Kraft paper between the pleating rollers.

In an embodiment of the invention the pairs of elongated pleating fingers are spaced from each other by a distance that is approximately equal to the height of pleats produced by said apparatus for pleating paper.

Each of the elongated pleating fingers has a radial region at its proximal end for providing a decreasing space between pleating fingers as paper enters the space between pairs of elongated pleating fingers. In a preferred embodiment of the invention the radial region is rounded.

In an embodiment of the invention pairs of elongated pleating fingers are spaced apart by a lesser amount at their proximal ends than at their distal ends. Additionally pairs of elongated pleating fingers are spaced apart by a first distance along a first region at the elongated fingers proximal end and are spaced apart by a second distance along a second region. The second region extends from the first region to the elongated pleating fingers distal end. In a preferred embodiment of the invention the second distance is greater than the first distance 

In another embodiment of the invention a projection member is proximate the junction of said first region and said second region and is movably supported to variably project into the space between the pairs of elongated pleating fingers. The projection member may project about 20 thousandths of an inch into the space between the pairs of elongate pleating fingers.

In an embodiment of the invention the pleating rollers are formed of a deformable material and are substantially flattened in the region of contact between said pleating rollers. The material of the pleating rollers can be about 80 durometer hardness rubber and the rollers can have a steel core.

In an embodiment of the invention a plurality of the radially reduced sections have a width of about 0.37 inches and the rollers have a first plurality of sections having a width of about 0.38 inches. A second plurality of sections has a width of about at least about one inch and the rollers have a diameter of about 1.5 inches.

In an embodiment of the invention the length from the proximal end to the second region is about one inch and the length of the second region is about 3.5 inches. The total length of the first region and said second region is up to about five inches.

In an embodiment of the invention paper is pleated by feeding paper to a pair of pleating rollers. Drive means are provided to rotate one of said pleating rollers. A first of the pair of pleating rollers can be supported by a first pair of support rollers. A second of the pair of pleating rollers can be supported by a second pair of support rollers. Each of the pleating rollers has a plurality of radially reduced sections and an elongated pleating finger member is positioned in at least a plurality of radially reduced sections. Advantageously each radially reduced section accommodates a pleating finger.

In an embodiment of the invention each of the elongated pleating finger members are movable in order to adjust the distance between elongated pleating fingers by a predetermined amount and thereby producing pleats of a corresponding predetermined height.

The process is initiated by unwinding Kraft paper from a continuous roll feeding the Kraft paper to said pleating rollers and withdrawing pleated paper from said elongated pleating fingers.

It is advantageous to define several terms before describing the invention. It should be appreciated that the following definitions are used throughout this application.

Where the definition of terms departs from the commonly used meaning of the term applicant intends to utilize the definitions provided below unless specifically indicated.

For the purposes of the present invention the term offset as applied to the relationship between support rollers and pleating rollers refers the angle formed between a first line drawn through the center of a first support roller to the center of a pleating roller and a second line drawn through the center of a second support roller to the center of the pleating roller. As the terms are herein employed an offset of 8 degrees between a pair of support rollers is equivalent to an offset of 4 degrees for each roller.

For the purposes of the present invention the term radial region refers to a concave region a rounded region or a region having a tapered or gradually decreasing thickness.

For the purposes of the present invention the term continuous roll means sheet paper wound about a core that is paper that encircles or spirals an interior core member.

Pleating devices have been in commercial use for over a hundred years and pleated fabrics have been used for apparel. Pleated paper has been used for filters such as automotive oil air and gasoline filter media.

The use of pleated paper as a low cost high volume void fill can be greatly enhanced if the paper can be repeated by a high speed system that consistently produces pleats of a predetermined size. Pleat height is typically measured in terms of the normal distance or right angle distance between a pair of parallel lines that touch the apices of the pleats. The hypotenuse of the pleat angle stays consistent but the apex angle and the pleat height can vary. The use of pleated Kraft paper for a void filter or pleated wrap material requires the formation of an acute angle and a sufficiently sharp crease at the apex to resist the migration of the pleats toward an obtuse angle. The system preferably generates pleats with an apex angle under 45 degrees and more preferably with an angle of less than 25 degrees.

As shown in the embodiment of the system indicated generally as includes a pair of counter rotating pleating rollers and . The rollers are preferably about 80 durometer rubber mounted on a steel shaft and respectively. The durometer range may vary about 10 but a variation of no greater than about 5 is preferred. The rollers can also be formed of other durable materials such as steel. The backpressure generated by the pleating action is extremely high and therefore it is desirable to use large diameter rollers in order to resist the bending or sagging of the rollers. However it has now been found that the reliability and consistency of the pleating action can be greatly improved through the use of a small diameter roller. It can be desirable to produce pleated paper in 48 inch widths and thus the rollers can bow when under the pressure of the pleating action. Each roller and is reinforced by a dual set of 2 inch diameter rollers D C B and respectively. The support rollers can be offset slightly upstream for the bottom support rollers and slightly downstream for the upper support rollers in order to counter the forward and backpressure created by the twisting action of the pleating rollers. The point of contact of the support roller and the pleating roller is preferably offset about four degrees thus generating a counterpressure indicated in respect to roller by arrow . The angle is measured on the basis of a line drawn through the center of the two pleating rollers and a line drawn from the center of a pleating roller and the contact point between the pleating and support rollers. Roller rotation directions are indicated by arrows and .

The pleating action is controlled or regulated by a pair of finger members and that are position in the key regions of the pleating rollers. The finger members are mounted such that the distance between the fingers can be adjusted as indicated by arrows or in the opposite direction from the arrows. The pleat height is substantially equal to the distance . If the pleat apices are crushed flat then the height is approximately equal to the distance between the pleat apices. The pleating action is facilitated by the use of a projection on the finger . The fingers and are also adjustable forward and aft that is further into or out of the region between the rollers as indicated by arrow . The projection can be on either finger and preferably is on only one finger.

As illustrated in the rollers are spaced apart by a distance indicated as . The space is referred to herein as a key. The width of the rollers is indicated by arrows . The projection on the finger is preferably threaded such that it can project to a greater or lesser extent into the path of the pleats of the pleated paper.

The embodiment of the invention as illustrated in shows keys or spaces between the rollers and . The fingers are positioned in each of these spaces. In this embodiment two narrow rollers are positioned to alternate with wide rollers .

As illustrated in the embodiment of pleats are formed by the series of pleating rollers and . The pleating rollers can have keys or spaces that can be spaced about approximately to of an inch as indicated by arrow and the roller key width between fingers is preferably about of an inch. The unpleated sheet edge is indicated by the reference numeral . The upper section of the pleats engages the projection of the fingers and and correspondingly the lower section of the pleats engage the fingers and . Arrows indicated the pleat height. As illustrated in the fingers indicated by reference numerals and are positioned in the gap between the rollers and the shaft called the keys. The width of the narrow rollers indicated by arrows is about of an inch and the width of the wide rollers is about 1.1 inches wide as indicated by arrow . The two narrower sections are about 0.375 inches in width as indicated by arrow and spaced about 0.365 inches as indicated by arrow . The steel core shaft is preferably about 1 inch in diameter and the pleating rollers and preferably have a diameter of about 1.5 inches. Advantageously the dimensions are within 10 plus or minus of the preferred dimensions. The width of the fingers is less than the space between rollers in order to provide clearance between the fingers and the rollers. The width of the fingers can be about 0.25 inches.

The embodiment of shows a pair of pleat roller driving a sheet of paper in the direction of the indicated by the arrow . The backpressure is indicated by arrow . It should be understood that an equivalent backpressure is applied to each pleat roller. The pleating action begins in the region upstream and proximate the projections of the fingers. The formation of the pleats can be adjusted by the movement of the fingers toward or away from the pleat rollers as indicated by arrows .

In the embodiment of the pleating region is indicated generally as . The pleating rollers and are shown with their corresponding shafts and . The direction of rotation is indicated by arrow . The fingers and are adjustable as indicated by arrows . The formed pleats are indicated by reference numeral The threaded member is shown extending into the path of the pleats. The pleating action is shown to begin with the paper contacting the surface of a finger. The pleats are backed up or essentially closed due to the action of the threaded member that projects into the path of the pleated paper. When the paper moves downstream of the project the pleats can open to some extent.

The mechanism for driving the rollers may be gears belts or other know driving mechanisms. Preferably only one pleating roller is driven and the other rollers rotate due to the pressure applied to them by other rollers.

While the theory of what is happening or might happen during a pleating operation is not part of the invention a discussion of the theory is provided for the purpose of attempting to provide a full understanding of what is happening or what might be happening. It should be understood that the description of the theory of the operation does not serve to limit the scope of the invention.

The pleating system as shown in starts with fingers and respectively manufacturing pleats with the pressure from rolls and respectively. The pleat pack is the point at which the pleats make vertical 0 degree apices. If the diameters of the pleating rollers and are large then the distance to the point of manufacture of the pleat pack becomes longer than the pleat height which appears to allow the pleats to form on the rolls and rather than on the fingers and . The arc of the rollers between the point at which the paper leaves the pleating roller and the point where the paper first contacts the inner surface of the fingers and should be no longer than the pleat height.

As illustrated in the embodiment of to further facilitate the desired pleating action an 80 durometer roller and is allowed to compress and deform substantially to a flat region which inhibits pleating on the roll as shown in . The flattening of the rollers is understood to facilitate the pleating operation by decreasing the arc of the roller between the point at which the paper leaves the pleat rollers and the pleat point at which pleating starts. The flattening of the rollers thus is sufficient to decrease the arc of the roller between the point at which the paper leaves the pleat rollers and the pleat point at which pleating starts.

Dimension c 0.8 inches and represents the distance of the projection to the proximal end of the fingers. The diameter of threaded projection member is preferably about 0.15 inches. Distal end dimension e 0.215 and is noted to be less than the proximal end dimension. The finger length f is 3.5 inches and the fingers have a travel that is varied b sliding carriers and on tracks not shown. A radius section to reduce paper interference is preferably 0.225 inches. This leaves a pleating area h of about 0.575 inches which is preferred. illustrates the projection member projecting from the lower surface of the upper finger . Dimension b represents the extent to which the threaded projection member projects into the path of the pleats. The preferred dimension is about 0.020 inches. This projection or bump is variable and provides backpressure to the pleats.

Although the present invention has been fully described in conjunction with several embodiments thereof with reference to the accompanying drawings it is to be understood that various changes and modifications may be apparent to those skilled in the art. Such changes and modifications are to be understood as included within the scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims unless they depart there from.

