---

title: Methods and systems for measuring an aberated wave front
abstract: Methods and systems are described for a system for measuring aberrations in a wave front. In the improved system multiple closely-spaced, small-aperture laser beams traverse an aberrating flow that introduces deflections of small-aperture laser beams from which aberrated wavefronts can be constructed. These beams may then be focused on position sensing devices using focusing lenses. The position sensing devices may then detect the positions of these beams and a difference between the detected position and the unaberrated position of the beams detected. This information may then be used to determine information regarding the optical aberrations introduced by the flow that may be used, for example, in improving communications systems and/or laser weapon systems.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07295292&OS=07295292&RS=07295292
owner: The University of Notre Dame
number: 07295292
owner_city: Notre Dame
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050519
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. provisional application No. 60 572 477 filed May 20 2004 entitled Malley Derivative Sensor and Probe which is hereby incorporated by reference herein.

The United States Government owns rights in the present invention as research relevant to the development of the invention was supported by United States federal funds from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research Contract Grant Number F49620 02 C 0051.

The present invention relates generally to measurement systems and more particularly to methods and systems for measuring aberrations in a wave front.

When an otherwise planar wave front of an optical signal such as for example a laser beam travels through a medium with a variable index of refraction its wave front may become distorted. When the transmission distance through the medium is relatively small and the aberrations are caused by a flow with a changing density field these optically aberrating effects are referred to as aero optical effects. These optically aberrating effects often degrade the performance of optical systems using such optical signals. These optical systems may include for example weaponry related systems and optical free space communications systems.

Aberrations of an optical wave front may be caused by the wave front passing through one or more variable index turbulent flow fields. Such flow fields may originate in a mixing layer between two dissimilar index flow streams commonly referred to as two index mixing . Or aberrations of a wave front may result from the optical signal passing through separated flows boundary layers and free shear layers. The latter scenarios often occur when using lasers on flight vehicles traveling at high flight speeds e.g. Mach numbers greater than 0.3 .

The optically aberrating effects of high speed turbulent boundary layers have been the subject of research since the early 1950 s which produced the first theoretical formulation for the optically aberrating effects based on statistical measures of the turbulence. Work on turbulent boundary layers and separated shear layers intensified in the late 1960 s and through the 1980 s due to an interest in placing lasers on aircraft.

A Malley Derivative Sensor hereafter referred to as a Malley probe is an optical instrument that can make direct accurate measurements of dynamically distorting wave fronts including the characteristics of the Optical Path Difference OPD and Optical Path Length OPL of a wave front. A single beam instrument for measuring OPD a statistical measure of OPD was described in an article by Malley M. Sutton G. W. and Kincheloe N. Beam Jitter Measurements for Turbulent Aero Optical Path Differences 31 Applied Optics at 4440 4443 1992 which is incorporated by reference in its entirety herein however the Malley Sutton and Kincheloe instrument required a priori information about the convective speed of the aberrating flow and provided only a statistical measure of the aberrating character of the flow.

The Malley Sutton and Kincheloe instrument further cannot be used to determine the convection velocity of the aberrations and the analysis of the instrument s single beam could not provide realizations of the aberrated wave fronts.

In accordance with the invention methods and systems are provided for obtaining information regarding an optical wave front that passes through a flow resulting in aberrations to the wave front. These methods and systems include one or more position sensing devices that are capable of detecting a position of a first beam and a position of a second beam. Both the first and second beams pass through the flow and the distance between the first and second beams is less than 20 times the diameter of the first beam. Further a processor is provided that is capable of determining a displacement of the first beam and a displacement of the second beam based on the detected positions of the first and second beam and determining information regarding the wave front based on the determined displacements.

Additional objects and advantages of the invention will be set forth in part in the description which follows and in part will be obvious from the description or may be learned by practice of the invention. The objects and advantages of the invention will be realized and attained by means of the elements and combinations particularly pointed out in the appended claims.

It is to be understood that both the foregoing general description and the following detailed description are exemplary and explanatory only and are not restrictive of the claimed invention.

The accompanying drawings which are incorporated in and constitute a part of this specification illustrate one several embodiment s of the invention and together with the description serve to explain the principles of the invention.

Reference will now be made in detail to the present embodiment s exemplary embodiments of the invention an example s of which is are illustrated in the accompanying drawings. Wherever possible the same reference numbers will be used throughout the drawings to refer to the same or like parts.

In this embodiment laser beams and traverse a flow such as for example a turbulent airflow. Further as illustrated laser beams and in this example travel in a direction that is perpendicular to the direction of flow . A further description of a system for generating an exemplary test flow is described below.

After traversing flow laser beams and each pass through their respective beam focusing lens and . Beam focusing lenses each provide a reference focal length for measuring an angle of deflection in laser beams due to flow . The focal lengths of these lenses and their use in measuring angles of deflection are discussed in further detail below.

After passing through the applicable beam focusing lenses or laser beams and are directed to two PSDs and . PSDs are common in the art and one of skill in the art would understand that any type of available PSD may be used such as for example a quad cell PSD or a lateral effect detector. Further in other examples PSDs and may be replaced with a single PSD that is capable of detecting the positions of multiple beams i.e. both laser beams and .

PSDs and detect the position of the respective beam and . The detected positions may then be transferred to a processor not shown for processing in order to obtain information regarding aberrations in the aperture through which the laser beams and are projected in order to determine the aberrations introduced by the flow . In one embodiment PSDs and have an output in terms of current. In such an embodiment this current value may be converted to a voltage that may be sampled by for example an analog to digital A D converter to produce a digital output of the detected position. This detected position may then be transmitted to the processor for processing. Further the processor may be any type of computer and or processor such as for example a commercially available computer. A further description of methods and systems for processing the detected positions is provided below including exemplary methods for using this information to calculate a convection speed for aberrations caused by the flow along with calculating an Optical Path Difference OPD and Optical Path Lengths OPLs for the wave fronts over the aperture for projecting optical signals through the flow.

In this example prior to entering flow if a large aperture flat unaberrated wave front propagates through the aberrating flow its wave front becomes distorted. If a Malley Probe small aperture beam is projected through the flow at an angle perpendicular to the large aperture flat wave front after traversing flow the probe beam emerges deflected at an angle which is perpendicular to the large aperture wave front at the location of the probe beam . Further in this example beam will be displaced a distance from its undistorted location hereinafter referred to as undistorted path after passing through the focusing lens . PSD then detects the position of beam as a function of time. From this detected position the distance between the detected position and the undistorted path is determined. In this example PSD detects the position of beam based on the centroid of beam 

The deflection angle may then be calculated as t arctan t f where f is the focal length of beam focusing lens . In this example a focal length f of 1.0 m was used. However in other embodiments different focal lengths may be used without departing from the invention.

Further these calculations may for example be performed by a processor not shown connected to PSD . This processor may for example receive the deflection distance t as a function of time and calculate the deflection angle t as function of time. Further in other examples these calculations may be performed in real time. Further PSDs and may have a response time on the order of 20 nanoseconds or faster so that their signals have virtually no delay in their response. This allows high sampling rates and thus the ability to measure accurate correlations even with close beam spacing. Further as discussed above the processor may be any type of processor such as for example a commercially available computer.

As shown test system may include an air inlet a test section and a diffuser . In this system air inlet may be for example a 150 1 contraction inlet. Further diffuser may be joined to a large plenum e.g. a grated plenum not shown . The plenum may be pumped to a low pressure by vacuum pumps such as for example three Allis Chalmer 3 310 CFM vacuum pumps. Further in an example employing three vacuum pumps the plenum may be pumped by one two or three pumps to generate a desired Mach number in the flow such as for example a Mach Number between M 0.3 and 0.95.

In the embodiment of test section may have a cross section of 9.9 10.1 cm and is capable of being lengthened or shortened to adjust the thickness of the boundary layer. In addition the lower side of test section e.g. the side of the tunnel whose boundary layer is being investigated may include one or more objects to facilitate generating the initial growth of a turbulent boundary layer. For example in one embodiment medium grain sandpaper along the first 50 cm of test section is included. Further the boundary layer in this example is allowed to grow naturally from that point to a tunnel length of between 60 to 110 cm. The flow then enters a measurement portion of test section .

The mirror on mounting plate in the illustrative example includes a first surface mirrored optical flat that is mounted at the mid height of measurement section on the mounting plate. The mounting plate is preferably shaped to minimize any separated flow over the mirror. Further in this example the upper wall of measurement section is contoured to compensate for any blockage effect of mirror and mounting plate . Mirror is used in this example to eliminate complications that may be present due to propagation of the laser beam through both the lower wall and the upper wall . Also by reflecting the measurement beams and directly back along their propagation path through the same boundary layer at the same location the optical path through the bottom boundary layer of the beams and is double thus increasing the measurement signal to nose ratio.

In this example laser beams and pass through a 50 50 beam splitter then through lower wall and into the turbulent boundary layer of flow . Laser beams and are then reflected by mirror back through the turbulent boundary layer of flow and through lower wall . Laser beams and are then reflected by 50 50 beam splitter towards beam focusing lenses and and PSDs and respectively.

Measurement section may also include a hot wire . In one embodiment a single hot wire is used with a commercial constant temperature anemometer with a built in low pass filter. Hot wire as one of ordinary skill in the art would appreciate may be any type of conventional hot wire for taking conventional hot wire measurements to obtain boundary layer profiles. Further in this example the sampling rate for the hot wire measurements is 60 kHz with a low pass frequency cut off value of 30 kHz. Further in this example hot wire is placed inside measurement section on a traverse system not shown just behind the optical measurement location and the hot wire is calibrated at the range of Mach numbers being tested e.g. M 0.2 to 0.6 . Hot wire may be used in this example to determine boundary layer profiles e.g. U y and u y for different test section lengths at different Mach numbers.

As mentioned above two beam Malley probe may be used to measure the convection speed of aberrations in a wave front caused by the flow. The following provides a more detailed description of two exemplary methods for calculating this aberration convection velocity. These methods are referred to herein as the cross correlation method and the spectral method.

The following provides a description of the cross correlation method. Pursuant to this exemplary method the aberration convection velocity is calculated by first computing a time delayed correlation function between two deflection angles t and t for the two probe beams and . The convection speed U for the aberrations may then be computed by knowing the separation s between beams and and a time delay of the highest correlation where R max i.e where R reaches its maximum value . The separation s is the separation of beams and prior to any aberrations and s in this example is the separation of the beams along the direction as flow where beams and are perpendicular to flow . Thus the convection velocity U may be calculated as 

The following provides a description of the spectral method for computing the convection velocity. In this example the time delay may be computed by analyzing a spectral cross correlation function 

This spectral method may be preferable when low frequency noise is present in the signal. Such low frequency noise may result from tunnel or platform vibrations that may be caused by for example Malley probe being on a vehicle such as an airborne platform. Tunnel vibrations may result in vibrations of the measurement equipment i.e. the focusing lenses PSDs etc. that may introduce low frequency noise into the signal. Additionally the Fourier transforms discussed above may be computed using any conventional approach such as for example by using a Fast Fourier Transform FFT .

As discussed above Malley Probe is an optical instrument that can make direct accurate measurements of dynamically distorting wave front including the character of the wave front s Optical Path Length OPL and Optical Path Difference OPD . The following provides a more detailed description of exemplary methods for determining the OPL and OPD for the aberrated wave front.

As discussed above PSDs and measure the locations of beams and respectively as a function of time. From these detected beam deflections t the deflection angle t may be calculated as t arctan t f where f is the focal length of beam focusing lens 

According to Huygens principle beams and will emerge from the aberrating flow normal to the wave front of a larger aperture laser projected through the same flow field. Thus the deflection angle of one of the small aperture beams i.e. beam and is the negative of the spatial gradient of the wave front at the probe beam location x y t grad OPL x y t . This may also be expressed for the stream wise direction x as 

As discussed above Malley probe may be used to extract the convection velocity U of flow which may also be referred to as an optically aberrating structure . The convection velocity U may be calculated by for example either the above described cross correlation or spectral methods. The deflection angle t of a probe beam or is the spatial derivative of the wave front. The convection velocity U may then be used to unfold the OPL using the fact that the aberrations convect with the fluid structures dx dt U 

After OPL x t is calculated at the single probe location x a Taylor s frozen flow hypothesis can be made to project OPL upstream and downstream by trading time and position as where 

In one embodiment Malley probe may be adapted in order to use sub apertures of an incoming large aperture wave front. In such an example a modified Malley probe may be used that receives an incoming wave front. Mirrors or other devices then split this received wave front into smaller closely spaced beams. These closely spaced beams are then analyzed by the Malley probe in the same manner as in the 2 beam Malley probe described above. This system may be used for example as a measurement tool for a direct characterization of optical aberrations and or as a sensor in adaptive optics systems designed to compensate for the effects of flow disturbances. As such such a system may be useful in laser weapon systems astronomy and laser communications systems that propagate laser beams through the atmosphere. Additionally such a system may also be useable in laboratory equipment for combustion chemically reacting flows as well as high temperature and high speed flows.

Two mirrors and split beam into two smaller aperture beams which will be referred to as sub aperture beam and sub aperture beam . These two beams and are then reflected by mirrors and respectively. Although this exemplary embodiment redirects these beams in other embodiments mirrors and need not be used or additional mirror s may be used for altering the direction path of beams and 

A sub aperture iris and then clips a portion of sub aperture beams and respectively to produce beams and beam to a diameter which depends on the size of the original entrance pupil which in this exemplary application could be between 1 mm and 10 cm and the spacing between the beams is 1 20 times their beam diameters such as was the case with the above described Malley probe of . The combination of mirrors and along with sub aperture irises will be collectively referred to as an optical narrowing mechanism. Although this embodiment illustrates one example of an optical narrowing mechanism other mechanisms for obtaining smaller diameter beams from a larger aperture wave front may be used without departing from the invention.

Beam and beam then pass through a beam focusing lens and respectively that focuses the beam and on its respective PSD and . Beams and may then be processed in the same manner as discussed above with reference to in order to obtain information regarding the convection velocity of the aberrations introduced into the wave front of beam along with OPL and OPD information for the wave front. This information may then be used in processing beam in order to for example correct for errors introduced by the aberrations. For example these aberrations may be corrected for or their effects minimized by adding a proper conjugate wavefront using for example a fast deformable mirror. Further in other embodiments Malley probe may utilize three beams where the beams are designed such that they form an angle. These three beams may be useful in determining the direction of a flow when its direction is unknown. For example methods such as described above may be used in conjunction with triangulation techniques to obtain information regarding the direction of the flow and using this information the convection velocity for the flow along with OPD and OPL information for the optical signal may be determined.

Further although was discussed with reference to creating two smaller aperture beams from an incoming larger aperture beam in other examples three or more beams may be used without departing from the invention.

In yet another embodiment a Malley probe such as described above may be used as an atmospheric turbulence reconstructor. Such a system may utilize a multi beam Malley probe to measure aberrations in a wave front of a signal being transmitted over land for a distance of for example 100s of meters and up. Such a system may be used for example to create a model of the aberrations that a transmission signal s such as for example a laser beam for free space communications may undergo while traveling along its transmission path. This transmission path may traverse 100 s of meters over which the transmission signal e.g. a communications laser beam s may be subject to multiple turbulent flows. For example the transmission path may go above or around buildings cliffs or other structures that subject the transmission signal s to various turbulent flows.

In an exemplary atmospheric turbulence reconstruction system a plurality of beams are propagated along the transmission path of the transmission signal and measurements are taken for the beams at various points along the path. These measurements may then be used to account for atmospheric turbulence along the transmission path by for example making corrections on the front end of the transmission signal. For example the measurements may be used to create a model of the aberrations introduced along the transmission path. This model may then be used on the front end to correct for these aberrations prior to transmission of the transmission signal.

Further in this example the plurality of laser beams thru may be arranged in a pattern simulating a larger aperture beam e.g. 10 30 cm . This larger aperture is preferably approximately the same size as the aperture of the transmission signal which in this example is assumed to be between 10 and 30 cm.

Further in addition to detecting the position of the beams at the end of the transmission path measurements may also be taken at other points along the path by for example splitting off a portion of beams thru using a beam splitter and sending the split of beam to a modified Malley probe such as discussed above. Taking measurements at various points along the transmission path may help to give a fuller understanding of the flow the wave fronts are subject to which may aid in accounting for correcting errors introduced by these aberrations. Moreover the sites along the transmission path selected for taking these measurements may be selected such that they take measurements in areas know to have higher turbulent flows e.g. when the beam is passing over around a particular structure . Also in an example air temperatures along the transmission path may also be recorded and taken into account when modeling aberrations introduced into the wave front of the communications beam.

Although the above embodiment was described with reference to the far field pattern of laser beams of aperture dimensions ranging from 10 to 30 cm which are made to propagate through a turbulent aberrating intervening air medium in other examples the system may be applied to other systems. For example similar system may be applied to other free space communications system or for example directed energy laser weapons. Additionally in laser weapon application a guide star and or target designation concepts may also be employed. Such guide stars and target designation concepts are known to one of ordinary skill in the art.

As illustrated beam and pass through a beam splitter which may be for example a plate type beam splitter. Beams and then pass through flow and are then redirected by a beam redirecting mirror . Beams and then pass back through flow and are then redirected by beam splitter .

Beam and then are redirected by right prism. Beam then passes through a rhombus prism that moves beam further away from beam in order to send them through separate lens and lens . Although in this example a right prism and a rhombus prism were used in other examples other types of similar equipment may be used such as for example first surface mirrors. Further although in this example only beam was moved in other examples beam may be moved instead both beams and may be moved or neither beam may be moved.

Beams and then respectively pass through their respective beam focusing lens and . In this example beam focusing lenses and may have a focal length of for example 1 m. Beam and are then reflected back and forth a number of times between a respective mirror system and . This serves to allow beams and to traverse a larger optical path in a smaller area.

Beams and then pass through a filter and that reduces the intensity of the respective beam in order to prevent saturation of the PSD. Although in this example filters are used in other examples they need not be used and their use may be determined based on the intensity of the beams or by for example notch filtering to eliminate ambient light or background light that might find its way to this point in the optical train. Moreover the other discussed Malley probes such as Malley probe of may also utilize such filters.

After passing through the filter and the beams and are detected by PSDs and respectively. The positions of these beams may then be processed as described above to obtain information regarding the convection velocity of aberrations in the wave front along with OPD and OPL information for the wave fronts.

In the above exemplary compact Malley probe both the transmission and receiving optical equipment of the Malley probe is mounted on a single plate and the laser beam is reflected back through the flow by mirror . This single plate for example may be a 29 cm 29 cm support plate. However in other examples the transmission equipment e.g. laser and beam splitter may be mounted on one support plate and the receiving optics mounted on a separate support plate. This arrangement may be convenient for situations where the flow field to be measured is relatively large in size or not convenient for placing return mirror .

Additionally in the above example laser may be any type of laser such as for example an He Ne laser with separate beam collimation and attenuation optics or for example a battery operated semi conductor laser with integrated collimation and intensity controls.

Additionally as mentioned above a Malley probe may be utilized on an airborne platform to model the aberrations introduced into a wave front of an optical signal propagating through the atmosphere. Such an optical signal may be for example a signal for free space communications or a laser weapons system. This model may then be used to estimate the effectiveness of the optical system and possibly to correct for aberrations in the optical signal due to the atmosphere.

Other embodiments of the invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art from consideration of the specification and practice of the invention disclosed herein. It is intended that the specification and examples be considered as exemplary only with a true scope and spirit of the invention being indicated by the following claims.

