---

title: Pattern forming method, arranged fine particle pattern forming method, conductive pattern forming method, and conductive pattern material
abstract: The present invention provides a pattern forming method comprising bonding a compound to a substrate, the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety, contacting a radical-polymerizable unsaturated compound with the substrate, and exposing light thereto patternwise, so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated. A conductive pattern forming method applying the pattern forming method, and a conductive pattern material obtained by the conductive film forming method.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07393567&OS=07393567&RS=07393567
owner: FUJIFILM Corporation
number: 07393567
owner_city: Tokyo
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050323
---
This application claims priority under 35USC 119 from Japanese Patent Application Nos. 2004 085653 2004 090653 2004 090652 and 2005 82699 the disclosure of which are incorporated by reference herein.

The present invention relates to a pattern forming method capable of easily forming a pattern having excellent resolution on the surface of a solid an arranged fine particle pattern forming method capable of regularly arranging fine particles patternwise on a substrate a conductive pattern forming method capable of forming a conductive pattern of silver copper or the like that has excellent durability on a substrate in a high density and that is excellent for production and a conductive pattern material useful for electrical wiring material electromagnetic wave preventive film magnetic film etc.

The modification of the surface of a solid with a polymer has been widely studied in industrial fields since surface properties such as wetting staining adhesivity surface friction and cytotropism of a solid can be changed. Of these surface modification techniques surface modification with a surface graft polymer involving the direct covalent bonding of a polymer to the surface of a solid is known to have the following characteristics 

i This surface modification technique is advantageous in that a firm bond is formed between a surface and the graft polymer and

ii Characteristic properties can be exhibited that are attributable to a large difference in affinity for material existing between a graft polymer and a polymer formed by ordinary spreading and crosslinking.

Various techniques have been proposed for the application of surface graft polymers having the aforementioned advantages by making the use of their characteristic properties. For example these surface graft polymers are used in the arts relating to living organisms such as cell cultures antithrombotic artificial blood vessels and artificial articulation and the art of hydrophilic film and hydrophilic supports for printing plates requiring surface hydrophilicity.

Further when such a graft polymer is formed patternwise properties characteristic to the graft polymer are reflected in the pattern. Thus graft polymers are used in various arts including printing plate precursor divisional culturing and dye image formation.

It is reported by Matsuda et al. in Journal of biomedical materials research 2000 vol. 53 page 584 that a hydrophilic graft pattern formed using a fixed polymerization initiator called iniferter fixed to a surface is used as a material for culturing cell divisions. It is also reported by Matsuda et al. in Langumuir 1999 vol. 15 page 5 560 that the adsorption of a dye toluidine blue to a graft pattern makes it possible to form a pattern of a visible image.

A technique for a graft polymer pattern obtained by patternwise polymerization of a hydrophilic or hydrophobic monomer in the presence of an iniferter polymerization initiator fixed to surface as well as a technique for obtaining a pattern of dye polymer by graftizing a monomer having a dye structure are reported by Metters A. T. et al. in Macromolecules 2003 vol. 36 page 6 739.

A technique which comprises attaching an initiator imagewise to a gold substrate with a microcontact printing method and then allowing the occurrence of atom transfer polymerization ATRIP polymerization in the presence of the initiator to form patternwise for example a HEMA hydroxyethyl methacrylate or MMA methyl methacrylate graft polymer that is then used as a resist is reported by C. J. Hawker et al. in Macromolecules 2000 vol. 33 page 597.

A method which comprises anion radical polymerization or cation radical polymerization of a silane compound fixed to a substrate to form a graft pattern is proposed by Ingall et al. in J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1999 vol. 121 page 3 607.

However the aforementioned methods for preparing a graft pattern on the surface of a solid using iniferter method or atom transfer polymerization method of the related art are disadvantageous in that they require too long a reaction time and thus leave something to be desired in terms of production. The methods using anion radical polymerization or cation radical polymerization too are disadvantageous in that they require close control over the polymerization reaction and thus leave something to be desired for production.

It has thus been desired to provide a pattern forming method which comprises modifying the surface of a solid with a graft polymer to obtain an effective surface modified material or highly functional material. However no methods capable of easily forming a graft polymer pattern within a practical production time have as yet been provided.

A technique for arranging fine particles is important for the performance enhancement of aspects such as surface area resolution and density of materials such as catalysts recording materials sensors electronic devices and optical devices. Thus this technique is under extensive study.

For example Japanese Patent No. 2 828 374 proposes a particle agglomerating method which comprises developing a liquid dispersion medium of fine particles over a substrate to form a thin liquid layer and then reducing the thickness of the liquid dispersion medium so that it is equal to or smaller than the particle diameter of the particles and thus cause the fine particles to agglomerate by surface tension. In accordance with the invention disclosed in the above cited patent a layer of fine particles can be regularly agglomerated on a predetermined region to form a uniform particle integrated layer. However this technique is disadvantageous in that it is applied with difficulty for the purpose of arranging fine particles patternwise only in a desired region.

As a technique for arranging fine particles patternwise there is disclosed in Japanese patent application laid open JP A 2002 273209 a method which comprises patternwise exposure of the surface of an oxide substrate such as TiOto light to form a hydrophilic and hydrophobic pattern thereon and then arranging fine particles according to the pattern. The patterned fine particles obtained according to this method are merely physically adhered to the surface of the substrate and are not fixed to the surface of the substrate and thus can easily leave the substrate when stressed. Thus this method cannot be applied to devices etc. This method is also disadvantageous in that particles are adhered also to areas other than the predetermined pattern area. It has thus been desired to provide a method capable of forming a fixed particle pattern having high selectivity.

As another method for arranging fine particles patternwise there is known a patterned particle lamination method using a microstamp as disclosed by G. M. Whitesides in Advanced Materials vol. 8 page 245 1996. In accordance with this method polymer particles having a submicron size can be orderly integrated in a desired region. Further the resulting pattern has high selectivity. However this method is disadvantageous in that a difficult operation is required involving control over the rate of evaporation of solvent in the preparation of an orderly integrated particle laminate structure malting it difficult to prepare a desired pattern. This method is also disadvantageous in that it is not suitable for the formation of a large area pattern for these reasons. This method has a further disadvantage in that the adhesion between the patternwise laminated particles and the substrate is too weak It has thus been desired to provide a method for the formation of a particle adhered pattern capable of attaining a practically sufficient adhesion.

Various conductive pattern materials have been heretofore used to form circuit boards. Referring to a typical example of such a technique JP A 2004 31588 discloses a method which comprises forming a thin layer of conductive material On an insulating material by a known method such as vacuum deposition subjecting the thin layer to resist treatment patternwise exposure of the resist to light to remove part of the resist and then etching the material to form a desired pattern. This method requires at least four steps. In the case where a wet etching process is carried out a step of disposing waste liquid is needed making a complicated process necessary.

As another conductive pattern forming method there is known a conductive pattern material comprising a photoresist. This method comprises subjecting a substrate that is coated with a photoresist polymer or that has a dry film like photoresist adhered thereto to exposure with ultraviolet light through an arbitrary photomask to form a lattice shaped or otherwise shaped pattern. This method is useful for the formation of an electromagnetic wave shield requiring high electrical conductivity.

However with the recent development of micromachines and the trend for further reduction in the size of super LSI there has been a growing demand for the reduction in size of these wiring structures to a level as small as nanometers. The related art of metal etching is limited in its capability to reduce the size of wiring structures. Further it is likely that fine wiring portions will when being worked.

As conductive patterns there have been noted not only continuous thin metal layers but also metal particle patterns obtained by allowing metal particles to be selectively adsorbed to a specific region.

Recently with the development of an advanced information society electronic appliances have seen remarkable development. In particular the development of computer technology that supports the development of an advanced information society is greatly attributed to enhancement of the recording density of magnetic discs not to mention enhancement of integration of semiconductor LSI. The enhancement of the recording density of magnetic discs requires the minimization of defects in the magnetic medium layer and the enhancement of smoothness of the magnetic medium layer.

To this end a layer having magnetic metal particles dispersed in the surface of a substrate is used at present. It is further known that the patterning of metal particles makes it possible to enhance the recording capacity. In other words patternwise formation of a metal particle adhered region has been more important. However this method involving the formation of a fine metal particle pattern for the purpose of enhancing recording density has the same disadvantage as the aforementioned method for forming a thin metal layer pattern making it difficult to form a fine metal particle pattern having high resolution.

A first aspect of the invention is to provide a pattern forming method comprising bonding a compound to a substrate the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety and contacting a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound with the substrate and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated.

A second aspect of the invention is to provide an arranged fine particle pattern forming method comprising bonding a compound to a substrate the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety contacting a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound with the substrate and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated and adhering fine particles to the region where the graft polymer is generated.

A third aspect of the invention is to provide a conductive pattern forming method comprising bonding a compound to a substrate the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety contacting a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound with the substrate and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated and providing a metal ion or a metal salt to the region where the graft polymer is generated and reducing the metal ion or a metal ion in the metal salt to deposit a metal.

The fourth aspect of the invention is to provide a conductive pattern material obtained by the above conductive pattern forming method of the third aspect of the invention.

The fifth aspect of the invention is to provide a conductive pattern forming method comprising bonding a compound to a substrate the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety contacting a compound that has both a radical polymerizable functional group and a functional group that interacts with either an electroless plating catalyst or a precursor thereof with the substrate and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated and providing an electroless plating catalyst or a precursor thereof to the region where the graft polymer is generated and carrying out electroless plating to form a patterned thin metal layer.

The sixth aspect of the invention is to provide a is to provide a conductive pattern material obtained by the above conductive pattern forming method of the fifth aspect of the invention.

The pattern forming method according to the invention pattern forming method comprising bonding a compound to a substrate the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety hereinafter occasionally referred to as photocleavable compound bonding step and contacting a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound with the substrate and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated hereinafter occasionally referred to as graft polymer generating step .

The detailed mechanism of the invention is not yet made obvious but may be presumed as follows. That is the polymerization reaction of the invention involves a free radical polymerization that proceeds at a high rate and requires no close control making it easy to form a graft polymer pattern on the surface of a solid.

First the outline of the pattern forming method according to the invention will be described in connection with . shows a conceptual diagram illustrating the outline of the pattern forming method according to the invention.

As shown in the substrate originally has a functional group represented by Z present on the surface thereof. A compound Q Y having a substrate bonding moiety O and a photopolymerization initiating moiety Y which can undergo photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization is provided to the substrate so that it comes in contact with the surface of the substrate. In this manner the functional group Z present on the surface of the substrate and the substrate bonding moiety O are bonded to each other so that the compound Q Y is introduced to the surface of the substrate as shown in photocleavable compound bonding step . Thereafter the substrate is exposed to light patternwise with a known graft polymer material such as monomer in contact with the substrate as shown in . In this manner a graft polymer is generated in the exposed area with the polymerization initiating moiety Y in the compound Q Y as a starting point a region where a graft polymer is generated while no graft polymer is generated in the unexposed area a region where a graft polymer is not generated as shown in graft polymer generating step .

The group represented by Z in is a functional group present on the surface of the substrate. Specific examples of the functional group include hydroxyl group carboxyl group and amino group. Such a functional group may be originally present on the surface of the substrate due to the properties of the substrate such as silicon substrate and glass substrate. Alternatively such a functional group may be allowed to exist on the surface of the substrate by subjecting the substrate to surface treatment such as corona treatment.

The structure of the compound having a photopolymerization initiating moiety which can undergo photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization hereinafter simply referred to as polymerization initiating moiety and a substrate bonding moiety will be further described hereinafter. Referring further to this compound in connection with a model of compound Q Y having a substrate bonding side O and a polymerization initiating moiety Y the polymerization initiating moiety Y is generally a structure comprising a single bond capable of undergoing cleavage by light.

Examples of the single bond capable of undergoing cleavage by light include single bonds capable of undergoing cleavage by utilizing cleavage of carbonyl cleavage of carbonyl light free rearrangement reaction of carbonyl cleavage reaction of phenacyl ester cleavage reaction of sulfonimide cleavage reaction of sulfonyl ester cleavage reaction of N hydroxysulfonyl ester cleavage reaction of benzylimide cleavage reaction of active halogen compound etc. When the aforementioned compound undergo such a reaction the single bond capable of undergoing cleavage by light is severed. Examples of the single bond capable of undergoing cleavage include a C C bond a C N bond a C O bond a C Cl bond a N O bond and a S N bond.

When the polymerization initiating moiety Y containing such a single bond capable of undergoing cleavage by light undergoes cleavage of the single bond by light the polymerization initiating moiety Y causes the generation of radical because it acts as a starting point of graft polymerization at the graft polymer generating step. Examples of the structure of the radical generating polymerization initiating moiety Y having a single bond capable of undergoing cleavage by light include those containing the following groups.

Aromatic ketone groups phenacyl ester groups sulfonimide groups sulfonyl ester groups N hydroxysulfonyl ester groups benzylimide groups trichloromethyl groups benzyl chloride groups etc.

A radical generated by the cleavage of the polymerization initiating moiety Y by exposure can act as a starting point for graft polymerization reaction to generate a desired graft polymer if there is a polymerizable compound around the radical a region where a graft polymer is generated . At the unexposed area on the other hand the polymerization initiating moiety Y undergoes no cleavage causing no production of graft polymer a region where a graft polymer is not generated .

The substrate bonding moiety O is composed of a reactive group capable of reacting with the functional group Z present on the surface of the substrate to undergo bonding. Specific examples of such a reactive group include the following groups.

The polymerization initiating moiety Y and the substrate bonding moiety O may be bonded to each other directly or via a connecting group. Examples of the connecting group include those containing atoms selected from the group consisting of carbon nitrogen oxygen and sulfur. Specific examples of the connecting group include saturated carbon groups aromatic groups ester groups amide groups ureido groups ether groups amino groups and sulfonamide groups.

These connecting groups may further have substituents. Examples of the substituents include alkyl groups alkoxy groups and halogen atoms.

Specific examples Exemplary Compounds 1 to 16 of the compound Q Y having a substrate bonding moiety Q and a polymerization initiating moiety Y will be given below with cleavage portions but the invention is not limited thereto.

The photocleavable compound bonding step of the invention involves the bonding of such a compound Q Y to the substrate.

As a method of bonding such an exemplified compound Q Y to the functional group Z present on the surface of the substrate there may be used a method which comprises dissolving or dispersing the compound Q Y in a proper solvent such as toluene hexane and acetone and then coating the solution or dispersion over the surface of the substrate or a method which comprises dipping the substrate in the solution or dispersion. In these methods the concentration of the compound Q Y in the solution or dispersion is preferably from 0.01 by mass to 30 by mass particularly from 0.1 by mass to 15 by mass. The temperature of the solution or dispersion to be in contact with the substrate is preferably from 0 C. to 100 C. The time during which the solution or dispersion comes in contact with the substrate is preferably from 1 second to 50 hours more preferably from 10 seconds to 10 hours.

The substrate to be used in the invention is not specifically limited. As the substrate of the invention there may be used a substrate having on the surface thereof a functional group which acts as a starting point for the generation of graft polymer such as hydroxyl group carboxyl group and amino group or a substrate which has been subjected to surface treatment such as corona treatment to generate hydroxyl group carboxyl group or the like.

A tabular substrate is generally used but the invention is not necessarily limited to tabular substrate. The graft polymer may be similarly introduced into the surface of a substrate having an arbitrary shape such as cylinder.

Specific examples of the substrate to be used in the invention include various substrates having surface hydroxyl group such as glass quartz ITO and silicon and plastic substrates such as PET polypropylene and polyimide which have been subjected to surface treatment such as corona treatment to produce hydroxyl group carboxyl group or the like.

The thickness of the substrate may be predetermined depending on the purpose and is not specifically limited. However the thickness of the substrate is normally from 10 m to 10 cm.

The bonding of the compound Q Y to the surface of the substrate is followed by the graft polymer generating step.

At the graft polymer generating step a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound e.g. hydrophilic monomer which is a material of the desired graft polymer is contacted with the substrate which has been subjected to treatment at the aforementioned photocleavable compound bonding step. Thereafter patternwise exposing to light is carried out so that the polymerization initiating group on the exposed area is activated to generate a radical. With the radical as a starting point the radical polymerizable unsaturated compound undergoes graftization reaction. As a result a graft polymer is produced only on the exposed area.

Examples of the method of contacting the radical polymerizable unsaturated compound with the surface of the substrate include a method which comprises coating a solution or dispersion of the radical polymerizable unsaturated compound over the surface of the substrate and a method which comprises dipping the substrate in the solution or dispersion.

As the radical polymerizable unsaturated compound to be used at the graft polymer generating step there may be used any compound having a radical polymerizable group. Examples of such a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound include hydrophilic monomers hydrophobic monomers macromers oligomers and polymers having polymerizable unsaturated group. In the invention hydrophilic monomers are particularly preferred.

Radical polymerizable unsaturated compounds to be used at the graft polymer generating step will be specifically exemplified.

The term hydrophilic polymer having polymerizable unsaturated group as used herein is meant to indicate a radical polymerizable group containing hydrophilic polymer having an ethylene addition polymerizable unsaturated group such as a vinyl group an allyl group and a meth acryl group incorporated in its molecule. This radical polymerizable group containing hydrophilic polymer needs to have a polymerizable group at the terminal of main chain and or in its chain preferably both at the terminal of main chain and in its chain. The hydrophilic polymer having a polymerizable group at the terminal of main chain and or in its chain will be referred to as radical polymerizable group containing hydrophilic polymer hereinafter.

Such a radical polymerizable group containing hydrophilic polymer can be synthesized in the following manner.

Examples of the synthesis method employable herein include a a method involving the copolymerization of a hydrophilic monomer with a monomer having an ethylene addition polymerizable unsaturated group b a method which comprises copolymerizing a hydrophilic monomer with a monomer having a double bond precursor and then subjecting the copolymer to treatment with a base or the like so that a double bond is incorporated in the copolymer and c a method involving the reaction of the functional group of a hydrophilic polymer with an ethylene addition polymerizable unsaturated group. Particularly preferred among these methods is the method involving the reaction of the functional group of a hydrophilic polymer with an ethylene addition polymerizable unsaturated group from the standpoint of adaptability to synthesis.

Examples of the hydrophilic monomer to be used in the synthesis of the radical polymerizable group containing hydrophilic polymer in the aforementioned methods a and b include carboxyl groups sulfonic acid groups phosphoric acid groups amino groups salts thereof and monomers having a hydrophilic group such as hydroxyl group amide group and ether group e.g. meth acrylic acid alkaline metal and amine salts thereof itaconic acid alkaline metal and amine salts thereof 2 hydroxyethyl meth acrylate meth acrylamide N monomethylol meth acryl amide N dimdethylol meth acrylamide allylamine hydrohalogenic acid salts thereof 3 vinylpropionic acid alkaline metal and amine salts thereof vinylsulfouic acid alkaline metal and amine salts thereof 2 sulfoethyl meth acrylate polyoxyethylene glycol mono meth acrylate 2 acrylamide 2 methyl propanesulfonic acid acid phosphoxypolyoxyethylene glycol mono meth acrylate.

Examples of the hydrophilic polymer to be used in the method c include hydrophilic homopolymers or copolymers obtained from at least one selected from the group consisting of these hydrophilic monomers.

As the monomer having an ethylene addition polymerizable unsaturated group copolymerizable with hydrophilic monomer during the synthesis of radical polymerizable group containing hydrophilic polymer in the method a there may be used e.g. allyl group containing monomer. Specific examples of such an allyl group containing monomer include allyl meth acrylate and 2 allyloxyethyl methacrylate.

As the monomer having a double bond precursor copolymerizable with hydrophilic monomer during the synthesis of radical polymerizable group containing hydrophilic polymer in the method b there may be used 2 3 chloro 1 oxopropoxy ethyl methacrylate.

As the monomer having an addition polymerizable unsaturated group to be used in the introduction of unsaturated group by the reaction of carboxyl group amino group or salt thereof in the hydrophilic polymer with a functional group such as hydroxyl group and epoxy group during the synthesis of radical polymerizable group containing hydrophilic polymer in the method c there may be used meth acrylic acid glycidyl meth acrylate allyl glycidyl ether 2 isocyanato ethyl meth acrylate or the like.

As methods of producing macromonomers which can be used in the invention there have been proposed various methods in Yuya Yamashita Chemistry and Industry of Macromonomer IPC Shuppankyoku Chapter 2 Synthesis of Macromonomers Sep. 20 1989.

Particularly useful examples of the hydrophilic macromonomers employable herein include macromonomers derived from carboxyl group containing monomers such as acrylic acid and methacrylic acid sulfonic acid based macromonomers derived from monomers such as 2 acrylamide 2 methyl propanesulfonic acid vinylstyrenesulfonic acid and salt thereof amide based macromonomers derived from meth acrylamide N vinyl acetamide N vinylformamide and N vinylcarboxylic acid amide monomer macromonomers derived from hydroxyl group containing monomers such as hydroxyethyl methacrylate hydroxyethyl acrylate and glycerol monomethacrylate and macromonomers derived from alkoxy group or ethylene oxide group containing monomers such as methoxyethyl acrylate methoxypolyethylene glycol acrylate and polyethylene glycol acrylate. Further monomers having a polyethylene glycol chain or polypropylene glycol chain too can be used as macromonomers of the invention.

The molecular weight of useful one among these hydrophilic macromonomers is preferably from 250 to 100 000 particularly from 400 to 30 000.

As the hydrophilic monomer there may be used a monomer having a positive charge such as ammonium and phosphonium or a monomer having a negative charge or an acid group which can be dissociated to negative charge such as salfonic acid group carboxyl group phosphoric acid group and phosphonic acid group. Besides these hydrophilic monomers hydrophilic monomers having a nonionic group such as hydroxyl group amide group sulfonamide group alkoxy group and cyano group may be used.

For example meth acrylic acid alkaline metal and amine salts thereof itaconic acid alkaline metal and amine salts thereof allylamine hydrohalogenic acid salts thereof 3 vinylpropionic acid alkaline metal and anine salts thereof vinylsulfonic acid alkaline metal and amine salts thereof styrenesulfonic acid alkaline metal and amine salts thereof 2 sulfoethylene meth acrylate 3 sulfopropylene meth acrylate alkaline metal and amine salts thereof 2 acrylamide 2 methyl propanesulfonic acid 2 acrylamide 2 methyl propanesulfonic acid acid phosphoxypolyoxyethylene glycol mono meth acrylate salts thereof 2 dimethylaminoethyl meth acrylate hydrohalogenic acid salts thereof 3 trimethylammonium propyl meth acrylate 3 trimethylammoniumpropyl meth acrylate N N N trimethyl N 2 hydroxy 3 methacryloyloxypropyl ammonium chloride etc. may be used. Further 2 hydroxyethyl meth acrylate meth acrylamide N monomethylol meth acrylamide N dimethylol meth acrylamide N vinylpyrrolidone N vinylacetamide polyoxyethylene glycol mono meth acrylate or the like may be used.

The solvent to be used in the dissolution or dispersion of the aforementioned radical polymerizable unsaturated compound is not specifically limited so far as it can dissolve the radical polymerizable unsaturated compound and additives added as necessary.

For example in the ease where a hydrophilic compound such as hydrophilic monomer is used water or an aqueous solvent such as water soluble solvent is preferably used. A mixture of these aqueous solvents or such an aqueous solvent having a surface active agent incorporated therein is preferred. The term water soluble solvent as used herein is meant to indicate a solvent which can be mixed with water at an arbitrary ratio. Examples of such a water soluble solvent include alcohol based solvents such as methanol ethanol propanol ethylene glycol and glycerin acids such as acetic acid ketone based solvents such as acetone and amide based solvents such as formamide.

Further in the case where a hydrophobic compound such as hydrophobic monomer is used an alcohol based solvent such as methanol ethanol and 1 methoxy 2 propanol ketone based solvent such as methyl ethyl ketone or hydrocarbon based solvent such as toluene is preferably used.

The exposure method to be used in the pattern forming method of the invention is not specifically limited Ultraviolet rays or visible light may be used so far as they can provide an energy high enough to cause cleavage at the aforementioned polymerization initiating moiety Y .

Examples of the light source to be used in the patternwise exposure include ultraviolet rays deep ultraviolet rays and laser light. Preferred among these light sources are ultraviolet rays and laser light.

The use of the pattern forming method of the invention makes it possible to form a pattern having a high resolution. By effecting patternwise exposure for recording of a highly fine image a highly fine pattern can be formed according to exposure. Examples of the exposure method for the formation of a highly fine pattern include light beam scanning exposure using an optical system and exposure using a mask. Any exposure method may be used depending on the desired resolution of pattern.

Specific examples of the highly fine pattern exposure method include stepper exposure methods such as i ray stepper exposure KrF stepper exposure and ArF stepper exposure.

The substrate which has been thus subjected to the pattern forming method of the invention to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated is then subjected to treatment such as dipping in solvent to remove the remaining homopolymer so that it is purified. In some detail the substrate is washed with water or acetone and then dried. From the standpoint of removability of homopolymer means such as ultrasonic cleaning is preferably employed.

The substrate which has been thus purified has no homopolymer left behind on the surface thereof but only a patterned graft polymer firmly bonded thereto.

In accordance with the pattern forming method of the invention a fine pattern can be easily formed according to the resolution of exposure. Thus the pattern forming method of the invention can be widely applied.

The arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention involves the use of the aforementioned pattern forming method of the invention and comprises bonding a compound to a substrate the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety contacting a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound with the substrate and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated and adhering fine particles to the region where the graft polymer is generated.

In the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention the polymerization initiating moiety preferably contains any selected from the group consisting of a C C bond a C N bond a C O bond a C Cl bond a N O bond and a S N bond.

Further the graft polymer according to the invention preferably has a polar group therein. It is particularly preferred that the graft polymer have a polar group in its side chains. It is particularly preferred that the polar group be an ionic group which can be dissociated to ions.

The detailed mechanism of the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention is not yet definite but may be presumed as follows. In other words the polymerization reaction of the invention involves free radical polymerization as mentioned above and thus proceeds at a high rate. Further the polymerization reaction of the invention requires no close control. Accordingly a graft pattern can be easily formed on the surface of a solid.

Further the graft polymer formed by the method of the invention is chemically bonded to the compound having a polymerization initiating moiety and a substrate bonding moiety connected to the surface of the substrate at one terminal thereof. In this arrangement the graft polymer is extremely firmly fixed to the substrate. Further since the graft polymer is fixed to the substrate at one terminal thereof but is free at the other the graft polymer has little restraint and hence an extremely high movability. Thus the graft polymer produced by the method of the invention has a functional group having a high polarity incorporated in its molecule in addition to the aforementioned basic properties such as high movability and firm bond to the substrate. In this arrangement an interaction is formed between the graft polymer having a polar group and the fine particles making it possible to adhere the fine particles to the graft polymer dynamically firmly.

As a result fine particles can be adhered selectively and firmly according to the finely patterned graft polymer produced region having a high resolution.

The mechanism of adhesion of fine particles is not specifically limited. Any of ionic adsorption by polar group ion group etc. electrostatic adsorption adhesion and adsorption adhesion by dipole interaction may be included in the invention.

Further in accordance with the invention when fine particles are adhered to the region where the graft polymer is generated to form interaction between the graft polymer and the fine particles as mentioned above the region where the graft polymer is generated has very high particle adhering properties as compared with the region where the graft polymer is not generated making it possible to fully remove even slight particles adhered to areas other than the desired area by cleaning. As a result an arranged fine particle pattern having an extremely high selectivity can be obtained.

The arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention will be further described hereinafter.

As mentioned above the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention comprises bonding a compound to a substrate the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety hereinafter occasionally referred to as photocleavable compound bonding step contacting a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound with the substrate and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated hereinafter occasionally referred to as graft polymer generating step and adhering fine particles to the region where the graft polymer is generated hereinafter occasionally referred to as fine particle adhering step .

The photocleavable compound bonding step in the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention involves the bonding of a compound having a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety to a substrate.

For the details of the photocleavable compound bonding step reference can be made to that in the aforementioned pattern forming method of the invention.

The graft polymer generating step in the conductive pattern forming method of the invention is a step of contacting a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound with the substrate which has carried out the photocleavable compound bonding step and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated.

For the details of the graft polymer generating step reference can be made to that in the aforementioned pattern forming method of the invention.

As the radical polymerizable unsaturated compound to be used in the present step there may be used any compound having a radical polymerizable group. Examples of such a compound include hydrophilic monomers hydrophobic monomers macromers oligomers and polymers having polymerizable unsaturated group. As the compound having radical polymerizable group of the invention there may be preferably used a hydrophilic polymer macromer or monomer having a hydrophilic group as a polar group from the standpoint of adhesion adsorption of fine particles.

In accordance with the aforementioned photocleavable compound bonding step and graft polymer generating step a fine pattern is formed according to the resolution of exposure composed of the region where the graft polymer is generated and the region where the graft polymer is not generated.

In the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention the photocleavable compound bonding step and graft polymer generating step are followed by the Fine particle adhering step which will be described in detail hereinafter.

In the Fine particle adhering step of the invention fine particles are adhered to the graft polymer thus produced. By attaching various functional fine particles adapted to the properties of the graft polymer fine particles are imagewise arranged. In this manner the desired region allows the fine particles to exhibit their excellent functions. The adhesion of fine particles will be further described hereinafter.

As the fine particles to be used in the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention there may be used any fine particles which can be adhered to the aforementioned graft polymer. Since a preferred embodiment of the graft polymer is one having a polar group as already described the fine particles of the invention preferably have physical properties such that they can produce interaction with the polar group and can be bonded thereto. The fine particles to be used may be properly predetermined depending on the purpose of the functional surface to be formed. Further the diameter of the fine particles can be predetermined depending on the purpose.

Further the diameter of the fine particles can be predetermined depending on the purpose. The diameter of the fine particles vary with the purpose but are normally preferably from 0.1 nm to 1 m more preferably from 1 nm to 300 nm particularly from 5 nm to 100 nm.

In a preferred embodiment of implementation of the invention fine particles are ionically adsorbed. Accordingly it goes without saying that the diameter and the adsorbed amount of fine particles are limited by the surface charge of the fine particles and the number of ionic groups.

Referring to the form of adsorption of fine particles to the graft polymer in the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention taking ionic group as polar group the fine particles are arranged regularly almost in a single layer or such that none nanoscale fine particle is adsorbed to each of ionic groups in the long graft polymer to form a multi layer arrangement depending on the existing conditions of ionic groups in the graft polymer.

The functional fine particles which can be used as fine particles according to the invention will be further described hereinafter in connection with specific examples.

In the case where the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention is used to prepare an optical material as the functional particulate material there is preferably used at least one particulate material selected from particulate resin and particulate metal oxide.

As the particulate resin there may be used a particulate material having a central portion called core made of an organic polymer. As the particulate metal oxide there may be used silica SiO titanium oxide TiO zinc oxide ZnO tin oxide SnO or the like. Alternatively a particulate pigment called transparent pigment or white pigment such as calcium carbonate aluminum hydroxide magnesium hydroxide clay and talc may be used so far as it has a desired shape as mentioned below.

The particulate resin preferably has a high hardness from the standpoint of durability. In some detail a spherically particulate material made of a resin such as acrylic resin polystyrene resin polyethylene resin epoxy resin and silicon resin may be used. In particular a particulate crosslinked resin is preferred. In this usage the diameter of the particulate resin is preferably from 10 nm to 900 nm particularly from 100 nm to 700 nm which falls within the visible light wavelength range. In this embodiment the particles which are ionically bonded to the graft polymer are arranged regularly almost in a single layer.

As the functional particulate material to be used in the case where the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention is used to prepare a color filter sharp cut filter or nonlinear optical material for optical apparatus there may be used a particulate material made of semiconductor such as CdS and CdSe or a metal such as gold. In this case when silica glass or alumina glass is used as a substrate the resulting product can be used as a color filter or the like. Further since this product is confirmed to have a great three dimensional optical nonlinear receptivity the product can be expected as a nonlinear optical material for optical switch optical memory material etc. Specific examples of the particulate material to be used herein include particulate materials made of noble metal such as gold platinum silver and palladium or alloy thereof. From the standpoint of stability materials which are not suddenly dissolved in alkali such as gold and platinum are preferably used.

Referring further to the case where the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention is used to prepare the aforementioned nonlinear optical material as the ultrafinely particulate material of metal compound to be preferably used there may be used an ultrafinely particulate material having an average particle diameter of from 10 to 1 000 angstrom made of a simple body such as gold Au silver Ag copper Cu platinum Pt palladium Pd rhodium Rh osmium Os iron Fe nickel Ni and ruthenium Ru or alloy of at least one of these simple bodies. Referring to the particle diameter the particulate material may be either primary or secondary. The particulate material preferably doesn t scatter visible light. In particular a particulate noble metal selected from the group consisting of Au Pt Pd Rh and Ag or particulate metal selected from the group consisting of Ti V Cr Mn Fe Ni Cu Zn Cd Y W Sn Ge In and Ga having a particle diameter of 10 run or less dispersed independently in a solvent such as toluene is preferred.

In the case where these ultrafinely particulate materials are used to prepare a nonlinear optical material using an ordinary method such as sol gel method dipping method sputtering method ion planting method and vapor to liquid deposition method it has been disadvantageous in that the particulate material can be easily agglomerated making it difficult to increase the concentration of fine particles in the composite or causing the drop of productivity. In particular those having so low a concentration of fine particles that the fine particles have little contribution to physical properties are limited in usage and thus are not suitable for image memory and optical integrated circuit utilizing three dimensional nonlinear optical effect. On the contrary the particulate material of the invention is chemically bonded ionically to the ionic group polar group in the graft polymer bonded to the surface of the substrate. These ionic groups are present in the graft polymer in a high density making it easy to increase the concentration of fine particles. Accordingly the resulting optical material too is suitable particularly for such a nonlinear optical material.

In the case where the fine particle adhered pattern forming method of the invention is used to prepare an organic light emitting element when fine particles obtained by agglomerating organic dye molecules which emit light when excited by hot carrier are used as functional fine particles to form a layer containing these fine particles on the surface of a substrate having an electrode an organic light emitting element can be formed. Examples of the organic dye employable herein include the following organic dyes. However the invention is of course not limited to these organic dyes. The organic dye to be used herein is properly selected taking into account the purpose etc.

Examples of the organic dye constituting the fine particles for organic light emitting element include blue light emitting oxazole based dyes such as p bis 2 5 phenyloxazole benzene POPOP green light emitting coumarine based dyes such as coumarine 2 coumarine 6 coumarine 7 coumarine 24 coumarine 30 coumarine 102 and coumarine 540 red light emitting rhodamine based red dyes such as rhodamine 6G rhodamine B rhodamine 101 rhodamine 110 rhodamine 590 and rhodamine 640 and oxazine based dyes capable of emitting light in near infrared range and suitable for optical functional element adapted for optical communication such as oxazine 1 oxazine 4 oxazine 9 and oxazine 118.

Further examples of the organic dye include cyanine based dyes such as phthalocyanine and cyanine iodide compound. Among these dyes those which can be easily dissolved in a polymer such as acrylic resin are preferably selected for the purpose of forming a thin layer. Examples of these dyes include POPOP coumarine 2 coumarine 6 coumarine 30 rhodamine 6G rhodamine B and rhodamine 101.

Further fine particles formed by an organic molecule to be used in organic electroluminescence EL film e.g. 8 hydroxyquinoline aluminum Alq 1 4 bis 2 2 diphenylvinyl biphenyl polyparaphenylene vinylene PPV derivatives distyryl arylene derivatives styryl biphenyl derivatives phenanthroline derivatives or media obtained by adding additives to these organic molecules may be used.

Useful examples of the fine particles according to the invention other than the above exemplified fine particles include the following compounds.

Particulate metal oxides such as iron oxide titanium oxide zinc oxide cobalt oxide chromium oxide tin oxide and antimony oxide inorganic compounds such as silicon oxide zirconium oxide titanium oxide alumina magnesium oxide and tin oxide and ultrafinely particulate materials of metal such as aluminum tin and zinc.

While the fine particles to be used in the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention has been described the invention is not limited thereto. It goes without saying that various fine particle adhesion patterns having a functional surface which can make the use of physical properties possessed by the functional particulate material can be formed according to the purpose.

If the aforementioned various particulate materials have charge themselves like particulate silica a graft polymer having a polar group having a charge opposite that of the particulate material may be formed on the surface of the substrate.

Further if a particulate material having no charge itself like particulate gold is used a particle surface modifier having a charge is used to prepare a particulate material having a charge which is then adhered adsorbed to the graft polymer. The use of the latter method makes it possible to increase the width of the degree of selection during the use of the particulate material.

Examples of the method of attaching the aforementioned particulate material to the graft polymer to form an arranged fine particle pattern include 1 a method which comprises spreading a dispersion of a particulate material having a charge over the graft polymer produced area of a substrate having a graft polymer formed imagewise thereon and 2 a method which comprises dipping a substrate having a graft polymer formed imagewise thereon in a dispersion of a particulate material.

These particulate materials are preferably adhered to the substrate in the maximum amount that they can be adhered adsorbed to the polar groups present in the graft polymer from the standpoint of durability. Therefore in both the methods 1 and 2 it is preferred that excessive amount of charged particulate material be supplied and the time during which the dispersion comes in contact with the substrate having a graft polymer imagewise formed thereon be from 10 about seconds to 180 minutes more preferably from about 1 minute to 100 minutes to form sufficient interaction between the polar group in the graft polymer and the particulate material. Further the dispersed concentration of the particulate material in the dispersion is preferably from about 10 to 20 by mass from the standpoint of efficiency in the accomplishment of functionality on the functional surface.

Referring to specific forms of adhesion of particulate material an ionic monomer such as ammonium having a positive charge may be used as a polar group to imagewise form a graft polymer having ammonium group on the surface of the substrate. Thereafter the substrate is dipped in a dispersion of particulate silica for a predetermined period of time so that the particulate silica is patternwise adsorbed to the substrate. The substrate is then washed with water to remove extra dispersion. The substrate is then lightly rubbed with cotton or the like to fully remove particles from areas other than the desired area. Thus an arranged fine particle pattern having a patternwise adhesion of silica particles is formed.

In this manner a graft polymer can be imagewise formed on the substrate. The aforementioned fine particles can be adhered to the graft polymer to provide an arranged fine particle pattern having a desired function. The thickness of the arranged fine particle pattern thus formed may be predetermined according to the purpose but is normally preferably from 0.001 m to 10 m more preferably from 0.005 m to 5 m most preferably from 0.01 m to 1 m. When the thickness of the arranged fine particle pattern is too small the arranged fine particle pattern tends to have deteriorated scratch resistance. On the contrary when the thickness of the arranged fine particle pattern is too great the arranged fine particle pattern tends to have deteriorated adhesion.

Exemplifying further the usage of the arranged fine particle pattern obtained by the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention proper selection of particulate material makes it possible to accomplish various functions on the functional surface. For example the use of a conductive organic or inorganic particulate material makes it possible to accomplish electronic electrical functions on the functional surface. The use of a magnetic particulate material such as particulate ferrite makes it possible to accomplish magnetic functions on the functional surface. The use of a particulate material capable of absorbing reflecting or scattering light having a specific wavelength makes it possible to accomplish optical functions on the functional surface. Accordingly the arranged fine particle pattern of the invention can find wide application in the art of various industrial products medicines catalysts varistors variable resistor coating compounds cosmetic products etc. In addition to these various functions possessed by the various constituents of particulate material a polymer material can be used as a substrate making it possible to utilize the moldability of the polymer material. Thus it can be expected to develop a novel material.

Specific examples of the aforementioned wide application include various OA devices or household appliances such as image forming material having colorant particles adhered thereto optical parts to be used in nonlinear optical element local shield film against ultraviolet ray visible light infrared ray etc. fish net television parts telephone parts OA device parts electric cleaner parts fan parts air conditioner parts refrigerator parts washing machine parts humidifier parts and tableware drier parts sanitary parts such as stool and washstand parts other building materials vehicle parts daily goods toys and miscellaneous. Conductive pattern forming method and conductive pattern material.

The conductive pattern material forming method and conductive pattern material of the invention involve the use of the aforementioned pattern forming method of the invention.

In other words the first embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern material forming method of the invention comprises bonding a compound to a substrate the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety contacting a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound with the substrate and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated providing a metal ion or a metal salt to the region where the graft polymer is generated and reducing the metal ion or a metal ion in the metal salt to deposit a metal.

In the present embodiment the step of reducing the metal ion or metal ion in the metal salt to deposit a metal may be further followed by a heating step.

The first embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern material of the invention is obtained by the above first embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern material forming method of the invention.

The graft polymer in the first embodiment of the aforementioned conductive pattern forming method or conductive pattern of the invention preferably has a polar group therein. It is particularly preferred that the graft polymer have a polar group in its side chain. The polar group is preferably an ionic group which can be dissociated to ions. The region where the graft polymer is generated in the present embodiment is preferably a hydrophilic region.

In the first embodiment of the conductive pattern forming method or conductive pattern material of the invention a metal ion or metal salt is provided to the graft polymer bonded directly to the substrate as mentioned above. The metal ion or a metal ion in the metal salt is reduced to deposit a metal. In this manner a continuous thin metal layer or a metal particle adhered layer having metal particles adhered dispersedly to the graft polymer is patternwise formed. This thin metal layer or metal particle adhered layer exhibits an electrical conductivity as well as high strength and abrasion resistance.

In the invention methods of providing a metal ion and or metal salt in the first embodiment can be roughly divided into 1 a method which comprises allowing a metal ion to be adsorbed by a region where a graft polymer is generated composed of a compound having a polar group ionic group 2 a method which comprises impregnating a region where a graft polymer is generated composed of a compound having a high affinity for metal salt such as polyvinyl pyrrolidone with a metal salt or a solution containing a metal salt and 3 a method which comprises impregnating a hydrophilic graft polymer produced region with a solution containing a metal salt or having a metal salt dissolved therein.

In accordance with the aforementioned embodiment 3 even if the compound constituting the hydrophile graft polymer produced region has a positive charge a necessary metal ion or metal salt can be provided.

The second embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern material forming method of the invention comprises bonding a compound to a substrate the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety contacting a compound that has both a radical polymerizable functional group and a functional group that interacts with either an electroless plating catalyst or a precursor thereof with the substrate and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated providing an electroless plating catalyst or a precursor thereof to the region where the graft polymer is generated and carrying out electroless plating to form a patterned thin metal layer.

The first embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern material of the invention is obtained by the above second embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern material forming method of the invention.

In the each embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern forming method or conductive pattern material of the invention the compound having a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety preferably contains any selected from the group consisting of a C C bond a C N bond a C O bond a C Cl bond a N O bond and a S N bond as the polymerization initiating moiety.

In the second embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern forming method or conductive pattern material of the invention a graft polymer having a functional group interacting with an electroless plating catalyst or a precursor thereof is patternwise formed. An electroless plating catalyst or precursor a thereof is then provided to the region where the graft polymer is generated. Then the electroless plating is carried out to form a thin metal layer. In this embodiment too a graft polymer having a functional group interacting with an electroless plating catalyst or precursor thereof is bonded to the substrate. Thus the thin metal layer formed exhibits an electrical conductivity as well as high strength and abrasion resistance as in the aforementioned first embodiment.

In accordance with the invention a region where a graft polymer is generated having a high resolution can be easily formed on the substrate when the substrate is subjected to scanning exposure based on digital data or patternwise exposure using a predetermined mask pattern. The detailed mechanism of this procedure is not yet definite. However it is thought that since the polymerization reaction for the production of graft polymer involves free radical polymerization which proceeds at a high rate and requires no close control a graft polymer pattern can bc easily formed on the surface of a solid.

The graft polymer constituting the region where the graft polymer is generated thus formed is chemically bonded to the compound having a polymerization initiating moiety and a substrate bonding moiety connected to the surface of the substrate at one terminal thereof. In this arrangement the graft polymer is extremely firmly fixed to the substrate. Further since the graft polymer is fixed to the substrate at one terminal thereof but is free at the other the graft polymer has little restraint and hence an extremely high movability.

Therefore the region where the graft polymer is generated of the invention can form a highly fine graft polymer pattern having a high strength even if it is a thin layer. In the case where the metal salt or the like is ionically adhered adsorbed to the graft polymer the molecules thus adsorbed to the graft polymer are firmly fixed to the graft polymer. Thus a thin metal region having a high strength can be formed. In particular in the case where the metal region forms a thin metal layer continuous layer it is thought that a fine wiring pattern free of break can be formed.

Further in the invention the graft polymer has an extremely high movability as mentioned above. Therefore the adhesion adsorption rate is extremely high as compared with that in the case where a metal is adsorbed to an ordinary crosslinked polymer layer increasing the amount of metal which can be adsorbed to unit area. Therefore in the case where the adsorbed amount of metal is controlled to form a continuous thin metal layer or a high density metal particle adhered layer is heated to fuse adjacent metal particles to each other to form a continuous metal layer a fine wiring pattern can be formed. When such a wiring is formed electrical conductance cannot be prevented or wire break cannot occur due to voids present between metals.

The conductive pattern forming method and conductive pattern material of the invention will be further described hereinafter.

The first embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern forming method of the invention bonding a compound to a substrate the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety hereinafter occasionally referred to as photocleavable compound bonding step contacting a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound with the substrate and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated hereinafter occasionally referred to as graft polymer generating step providing a metal ion or a metal salt to the region where the graft polymer is generated hereinafter referred to as metal ion or metal salt providing step and reducing the metal ion or a metal ion in the metal salt to deposit a metal hereinafter occasionally referred to as metal particle layer forming step .

The second embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern forming method of the invention comprises bonding a compound to a substrate the compound having both a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety photocleavable compound bonding step contacting a compound that has both a radical polymerizable functional group and a functional group that interacts with either an electroless plating catalyst or a precursor thereof with the substrate and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated graft polymer generating step providing an electroless plating catalyst or a precursor thereof to the region where the graft polymer is generated hereinafter occasionally referred to as electroless plating catalyst providing step and carrying out electroless plating to form a patterned thin metal layer hereinafter occasionally referred to as electroless plating step .

The photocleavable compound bonding step in the conductive pattern forming method of the invention involves the bonding of a compound to a substrate the compound having a polymerization initiating moiety capable of undergoing photocleavage to initiate radical polymerization and a substrate bonding moiety.

For the details of the photocleavable compound bonding step reference can be made to that in the aforementioned pattern forming method of the invention.

The graft polymer generating step in the conductive pattern forming method of the invention is a step of contacting a radical polymerizable unsaturated compound with the substrate which has carried out the photocleavable compound bonding step and exposing light thereto patternwise so as to form a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated.

For the details of the graft polymer generating step reference can be made to that in the aforementioned pattern forming method of the invention.

As the radical polymerizable unsaturated compound to be used in the first embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern forming method of the invention there is preferably used a hydrophilic polymer macromer or monomer having a hydrophilic group as a polar group from the standpoint of adhesion adsorption of metal ion or meal salt. As the radical polymerizable unsaturated compound to be used in the second embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern forming method of the invention there may be used a compound having a radical polymerizable functional group and a functional group interacting with an electroless plating catalyst or precursor thereof. The functional group interacting with an electroless plating catalyst or precursor thereof in the radical polymerizable unsaturated compound corresponds to a polar group.

In accordance with the aforementioned photocleavable compound bonding step and graft polymer generating step a fine pattern is formed according to the resolution of exposure composed of the region where the graft polymer is generated and the region where the graft polymer is not generated.

In accordance with the conductive pattern forming method of the invention the formation of a region where a graft polymer is generated by the aforementioned photocleavable compound bonding step and graft polymer producing step is followed by i a step of providing a metal ion or metal salt to the region where the graft polymer is generated and then reducing the metal ion or metal ion in the metal salt to cause the metal to separate out first embodiment or ii a step of providing an electroless plating catalyst or a precursor thereof to the region where the graft polymer is generated and then subjecting the substrate to electroless plating to form a thin metal layer second embodiment whereby a conductive pattern is formed. This conductive pattern forming method will be further described hereinafter.

In the first embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern forming method of the invention a step of providing a metal ion or a metal salt to the region where the graft polymer is generated metal ion or metal salt providing step and a step of reducing the metal ion or metal ion in the metal salt to cause the metal to separate out metal particle layer forming step are effected to form a conductive pattern. In some detail in the first embodiment a metal ion or metal salt is adhered adsorbed to a functional group capable of attracting metal ion such as hydrophilic group or metal salt contained in the graft polymer according to the function thereof. Subsequently the metal ion or the like which has been adsorbed is reduced to cause the precipitation of simple body of metal on the region where the graft polymer is generated. A thin metal layer or a metal particle adhered layer having metal particles dispersed therein is formed according to the form of precipitation.

In the first embodiment the method of providing a metal ion or metal salt may be properly selected depending on the compound constituting the region where the graft polymer is generated. Further the region where the graft polymer is generated is preferably a hydrophilic region from the standpoint of adhesion of metal ion or the like. In this case the compound constituting the region where the graft polymer is generated is a hydrophilic compound.

In some detail the method of providing a metal ion or metal salt may be properly selected from the group consisting of 1 a method which comprises allowing a metal ion to be adsorbed to the ionic group in a graft polymer if the graft polymer has an ionic group polar group 2 a method which comprises impregnating a region where a graft polymer is generated with a metal salt or a solution of metal salt if the graft polymer has a high affinity for metal salt like polyvinyl pyrrolidone and 3 a method which comprises dipping a region where the hydrophilic graft polymer is generated hydrophilic region in a solution containing a metal salt or a solution having a metal salt dissolved therein in order to impregnate the region with a solution containing metal ion and or metal salt. In particular in accordance with the method 3 the properties of the graft polymer are not specifically questioned making it possible to provide a desired metal ion or metal salt to the region where the graft polymer is generated.

In the second embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern forming method of the invention a step of providing an electroless plating catalyst or precursor thereof to the region where the graft polymer is generated interacting region electroless plating catalyst providing step and a step of carrying out electroless plating to form a patterned thin metal layer electroless plating step are sequentially effected to form a conductive pattern.

That is in the second embodiment the graft polymer having a functional group i.e. polar group interacting with an electroless plating catalyst or a precursor thereof interacts with an electroless plating catalyst or a precursor thereof. Subsequently electroless plating is carried out to form a thin metal layer.

As a result a metal particle layer is formed. In the case where a thin metal layer continuous layer is formed a region having a high electrical conductivity is particularly formed. Further the region where the graft polymer is not generated doesn t have any metal ion metal salt and electroless plating catalyst precursor adsorbed thereto or is not impregnated with any of these components. Thus no metal particle layer is formed on the region where the graft polymer is not generated. In this manner a nonconductive insulating region is formed.

The metal ion or metal salt providing step and metal particle layer forming step in the aforementioned first embodiment will be further described hereinafter.

The metal salt to be used in the invention is not specifically limited so far as it can be dissolved in a proper solvent suitable for providing the metal salt to the region where the graft polymer is generated to dissociate into metal ion and base anion . Examples of the metal salt employable herein include M NO MCl M SO and M PO in which M represents a metal atom having a valence of n . As the metal ion there is preferably used one obtained by dissociation of the aforementioned metal salt. Specific examples of such a metal ion include Ag Cu Al Ni Co Fe and Pd. The conductive layer is preferably made of Ag. The magnetic layer is preferably made of Co.

In the case where the method 1 which comprises allowing a metal ion to be adsorbed to the ionic group in a graft polymer if the graft polymer has an ionic group is used to provide a metal ion or metal salt to the region where the graft polymer is generated a solution containing dissociated metal ions obtained by dissolving the aforementioned metal salt in a proper solvent may be spread over the surface of a substrate having a region where a graft polymer is generated present thereon. Alternatively the substrate having a region where a graft polymer is generated present thereon may be dipped in the solution. By bringing the solution containing metal ions into contact with the substrate metal ions can be ionically adsorbed to the aforementioned ionic group. In order to fulfill this adsorption the concentration of metal ion or metal salt in the solution to be brought into contact with the substrate is preferably from 1 to 50 by mass more preferably from 10 to 30 by mass. The time during which the solution comes in contact with the substrate is preferably from about 10 seconds to 24 hours more preferably from about 1 minute to 180 minutes.

In the case where the method 2 which comprises impregnating a region where a graft polymer is generated with a metal salt or a solution of metal salt if the graft polymer has a high affinity for metal salt like polyvinyl pyrrolidone is used to provide a metal ion or metal salt to the region where the graft polymer is generated the aforementioned metal salt may be directly adhered to the substrate in particulate form. Alternatively a dispersion of the metal salt in a proper solvent capable of dispersing metal salt therein may be spread over the surface of the substrate having a region where a graft polymer is generated present thereon. Alternatively the substrate having a region where a graft polymer is generated present thereon may be dipped in the dispersion. In the case where the graft polymer is made of a hydrophilic compound the region where the graft polymer is generated has a high water retention. Accordingly making the use of the high water retention the region where the graft polymer is generated can be impregnated with the dispersion of metal salt. In order to fulfill the impregnation with the dispersion the concentration of metal ion or metal salt in the dispersion to be brought into contact with the substrate is preferably from 1 to 50 by mass more preferably from 10 to 30 by mass. The time during which the dispersion comes in contact with the substrate is preferably from about 10 seconds to 24 hours more preferably from about 1 minute to 180 minutes.

In the case where the method 3 which comprises dipping a region where the hydrophilic graft polymer is generated hydrophilic region in a solution containing a metal salt or a solution having a metal salt dissolved therein to impregnate the region with a solution containing metal ion and or metal salt is used to provide a metal ion or metal salt to the region where the graft polymer is generated a dispersion of the aforementioned metal salt in a proper solvent capable of dispersing the metal salt therein or a solution of dissociated metal ions obtained by dissolving the aforementioned metal salt in a proper solvent may be coated over the surface of the substrate having a region where the hydrophilic graft polymer is generated presents thereon. Alternatively the substrate having the region where the graft polymer is generated present thereon may be dipped in the solution. In this method too making the use of the high water retention the hydrophilic graft polymer produced region can be impregnated with the dispersion or dispersion similarly to the aforementioned case. In order to fulfill the impregnation with the dispersion or solution the concentration of metal ion or metal salt in the dispersion to be brought into contact with the substrate is preferably from 1 to 50 by mass more preferably from 10 to 30 by mass. The time during which the dispersion comes in contact with the substrate is preferably from about 10 seconds to 24 hours more preferably from about 1 minute to 180 minutes.

In the invention the reducing agent to be used to reduce the metal salt or metal ion adsorbed to or contained in the region where the graft polymer is generated hydrophilic region and form a metal particle layer is not specifically limited so far as it has such physical properties that the metal salt compound used can be reduced to cause the metal to separate out. Examples of the reducing agent employable herein include hypophosphites tetrahydroborates and hydrazine.

Such a reducing agent may be properly selected depending on the relationship with the metal salt or metal ion used. For example if an aqueous solution of silver nitrate is used as an aqueous solution of metal salt for supplying metal ion or metal salt sodium tetrahydroborate is preferably used. If an aqueous solution of palladium dichloride is used hydrazine is preferably used.

Examples of the method of adding the aforementioned reducing agent include a method which comprises providing a metal ion or metal salt to the surface of the substrate having a region where a graft polymer is generated present thereon washing the substrate with water to remove extra metal or metal ion dipping the substrate provided with such a surface in water such as ion exchanged water and then adding a reducing agent to water and a method which comprises directly spreading an aqueous solution of reducing agent having a predetermined concentration over the surface of the substrate or adding dropwise the aqueous solution of reducing agent to the surface of the substrate. The added amount of the reducing agent is preferably in excess at the equivalence point with metal ion more preferably not smaller than 10 times the equivalent.

The presence of a uniform high strength metal particle layer developed by the addition of the reducing agent can be visually confirmed. However the structure of the metal particle layer can be confirmed by observing the surface of the metal particle layer under transmission electron microscope or AFM atomic force microscope . The thickness of the metal particle layer can be easily measured by any ordinary method such as method involving the observation of a section of the metal particle layer under electron microscope.

 Relationship Between the Polarity of Functional Group in the Graft Polymer and the Metal Ion or Metal Salt During Surface Graft Polymerization 

In the case where the graft polymer constituting the graft pattern has a functional group having a negative charge a region where a simple body of metal thin metal layer or metal particles separates out is formed by allowing a metal ion having a positive charge to be adsorbed to the graft pattern and then reducing the metal ion thus adsorbed to the graft pattern.

 Relationship Between the Polarity of Hydrophilic Compound bound Hydrophilic Group and the Metal ion or Metal Salt 

In the case where the graft polymer constituting the graft pattern has an anionic group such as carboxyl group sulfonic acid group and phosphonic acid group as a hydrophilic functional group as previously mentioned the patterned area selectively has a negative charge. By allowing a metal ion having a positive charge to be adsorbed to the patterned area and then reducing the metal ion adsorbed to the patterned area a metal particle layer region e.g. wiring is formed.

On the other hand in the case where the graft polymer chain constituting the graft pattern has a cationic group such as ammonium group as disclosed in JP A 10 296895 the patterned area selectively has a positive charge. By impregnating the patterned area with a solution containing a metal salt or a solution having a metal salt dissolved therein and then reducing the metal ion in the solution with which the patterned area has been impregnated or the metal ion in the metal salt a metal particle layer region e.g. wiring is formed.

These metal ions are preferably bonded to the patterned area in the maximum amount such that they can be provided adsorbed to the hydrophilic group on the hydrophilic surface from the standpoint of durability.

Examples of the method of providing a metal ion to the hydrophilic group include a method which comprises spreading a solution or dispersion of a metal ion or metal salt over the surface of a support and a method which comprises dipping the surface of the support in the solution or dispersion. In both the coating method and dipping method the time during which the solution or dispersion comes in contact with the surface of the support is preferably from about 10 seconds to 24 hours more preferably from about 1 minute to 180 minutes to supply excessive amount of metal ions so that sufficient ionic bonds to the hydrophilic group can be made.

The number of kinds of the aforementioned metal ions to be used herein is not only one but also plural as necessary. In order to obtain a desired electrical conductivity a plurality of materials may be previously mixed.

The pattern formed according the invention can be confirmed to have metal particles dispersed compactly in the surface graft layer by observing the surface or section thereof under SEM or AFM. Referring to the size of the metal particles thus prepared the particle diameter of the metal particles is from about 1 m to 1 nm.

In the case where the conductive pattern prepared according to the aforementioned method has metal particles densely adsorbed thereto to form an apparently thin metal layer the conductive pattern may be used as it is. However in order to assure that the desired electrical conductivity can be efficiently provided the pattern thus formed is preferably further subjected to heat treatment.

The heating temperature at the heat treatment step is preferably 100 C. or more more preferably 150 C. or more particularly about 200 C. The heating temperature is preferably 400 C. or less taking into account the treatment efficiency or the dimensional stability of the support. The heating time is preferably 10 minutes or more more preferably from about 30 minutes to 60 minutes. The mechanism of action of heat treatment is not yet definite. However it is thought that some adjacent metal particles are fused to each other to enhance the electrical conductivity of the conductive pattern.

The electroless plating catalyst providing step and electroless plating step in the second embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern forming method of the invention will be described hereinafter.

At the present step an electroless plating catalyst or precursor thereof is provided to the interacting region formed at the aforementioned graft polymer generating step.

The electroless plating catalyst to be used at the present step is mainly a metal having a valence of 0 such as Pd Ag Cu Ni Al Fe and Co. In the invention Pd and Ag are preferred because of their high handleability and catalytic activity. As the method of fixing the metal having a valence of 0 to the interacting region there may be used e.g. a method which comprises applying to the interacting region a metal colloid having a charge adjusted to have interaction with the interacting group on the interacting region. In general a metal colloid can be prepared by reducing metal ions in a solution having a surface active agent or protective agent having a charge present therein. The charge of the metal colloid can be adjusted by the surface active agent or protective agent used herein. By allowing the metal colloid having a charge thus adjusted to interact with the interacting group contained in the graft pattern the metal colloid electroless plating catalyst can be selectively adsorbed to the graft pattern.

The electroless plating catalyst precursor to be used at the present step is not specifically limited so far as it can form an electroless plating catalyst when subjected to chemical reaction. The ion of metal having a valence of 0 as used in the aforementioned electroless plating may be mainly used. The metal ion which is an electroless plating catalyst precursor becomes a metal having a valence of 0 which is an electroless plating catalyst when subjected to reduction reaction. After being provided to the substrate the metal ion which is an electroless plating catalyst precursor may be subjected to separate reduction reaction before being dipped in the electroless plating bath so that it is converted to a metal having a valence of 0 which is an electroless plating catalyst or may be dipped as it is in the electroless plating bath where it is converted to a metal electroless plating catalyst by the reducing agent contained therein.

In actuality the metal ion which is an electroless plating catalyst precursor is provided to the graft pattern in the form of metal salt. The metal salt to be used herein is not specifically limited so far as it can be dissolved in a proper solvent to dissociate into metal ion and base anion . Examples of the metal salt employable herein include M NO MCln M SO and M PO in which M represents a metal atom having a valence of n . As the metal ion there is preferably used one obtained by dissociation of the aforementioned metal salt. Specific examples of such a metal ion include Ag ion Cu ion Al ion Ni ion Co ion Fe ion and Pd ion. Preferred among these metal ions are Ag ion and Pd ion from the standpoint of catalytic activity.

In order to provide a metal colloid which is an electroless plating catalyst or a metal salt which is an electroless plating catalyst precursor to the graft pattern a solution of dissociated metal ions obtained by dispersing or dissolving a metal colloid in a proper dispersant or solvent may be spread over the surface of the substrate having a graft pattern present thereon. Alternatively the substrate having a graft pattern present thereon may be dipped in the solution. By allowing a solution containing metal ions to come in contact with the substrate the metal ions can be adsorbed to the interacting group on the interacting region or the interacting region can be impregnated with the metal ions by making the use of ion ion interaction or dipole ion interaction. In order to fulfill this adsorption or impregnation the concentration of metal ion or metal salt in the solution to be brought into contact with the substrate is preferably from 0.01 to 50 by mass more preferably from 0.1 to 30 by mass. The time during which the dispersion comes in contact with the substrate is preferably from about 1 minute to 24 hours more preferably from about 5 minutes to 1 hour.

At the present step the substrate which has been provided an electroless plating catalyst or precursor thereof on the interacting region is subjected to electroless plating to form a patterned metal layer. In other words when electroless plating is effected at the present step a high density metal layer metal pattern is formed on the graft pattern obtained at the aforementioned step according to the pattern thus formed. The metal pattern thus formed has an excellent electrical conductivity and adhesion.

Electroless plating is a procedure involving the precipitation of metal by chemical reaction using a solution containing a metal ion to be precipitated as a plating metal.

At the present step electroless plating is carried out e.g. by washing a substrate having a patterned electroless plating catalyst provided thereon with water to remove extra electroless plating catalyst metal and then dipping the substrate in an electroless plating bath. As the electroless plating bath to be used herein there may be used any known electroless plating bath.

In order to dip the substrate having a patterned electroless plating catalyst precursor provided thereon in the electroless plating bath while the electroless plating catalyst precursor is being adsorbed to or incorporated in the graft pattern the substrate is washed with water to remove extra precursor metal salt or the like and then dipped in the electroless plating bath. In this case the reduction of the precursor and subsequent electroless plating are effected in the electroless plating bath. As the electroless plating bath to be used herein too there may be used any known electroless plating bath.

Referring to the formulation of ordinary electroless plating bath the main constituents are 1. plating metal ion 2. reducing agent and 3. additives stabilizer for enhancing the stability of metal ion. This plating bath may comprise known additives such as plating bath stabilizer incorporated therein besides these constituents.

As the kinds of the metal to be incorporated in the electroless plating bath there have been known copper tin lead nickel gold palladium and rhodium. Particularly preferred among these metals are copper and gold from the standpoint of electrical conductivity.

There are reducing agents and additives suitable for the aforementioned metals. For example an electroless copper plating bath contains Cu SO as a copper salt HCOH as a reducing agent and a chelating agent such as EDTA and Rochelle salt which are copper ion stabilizers as an additive. The plating bath for use in electroless plating of CoNiP contains cobalt sulfate and nickel sulfate as metal salt sodium hypophosphite as a reducing agent and sodium malonate sodium malate and sodium succinate as complexing agent. An electroless palladium plating bath contains Pd NH Clas a metal ion NHand HNNHas reducing agent and EDTA as a stabilizer. These plating baths may contain components other than the aforementioned components.

The thickness of the metal layer thus formed can be controlled by predetermining the concentration of metal salt or metal ion in the plating bath the time of dipping in the plating bath or the plating bath temperature but is preferably 0.5 m or more more preferably 3 m or more from the standpoint of electrical conductivity. The time of dipping in the plating bath is preferably from about 1 minute to 3 hours more preferably from about 1 minute to 1 hour.

The metal layer portion of the metal pattern thus obtained was confirmed to have electroless plating catalyst or plating metal particles dispersed compactly in the surface graft layer and relatively great particles deposited thereon when observed sectionally under SEM. The interface of the metal layer portion is composed of graft polymer and fine particles in hybrid state. Accordingly even if the difference in height between fallen portion and raised portion on the interface of substrate organic component with inorganic material electroless plating catalyst or plating metal was 100 nm or less the metal pattern exhibited a good adhesion.

In the second embodiment of implementation of the conductive pattern forming method of the invention the aforementioned electroless plating step may be followed by a step of effecting electroplating electroplating step .

At the present step electroplating may be effected with the metal layer formed at the aforementioned electroless plating step as an electrode. In this manner another metal layer can be easily formed the metal pattern conductive pattern having an excellent adhesion to the substrate to an arbitrary thickness with this metal pattern as a base. The addition of this step makes it possible to form a patterned metal layer to a thickness according to the purpose and thus is suitable for the adaptation of the conductive pattern of the invention to various applications such as wiring pattern.

As the electroplating method there may be used any of known electroplating methods. Examples of the metal to be used at the present electroplating step include copper chromium lead nickel gold silver tin and zinc. Preferred among these metals are copper gold and silver from the standpoint of electrical conductivity. More desirable among these metals is copper.

The thickness of the metal layer obtained at the electroplating step depends on the purpose and can be controlled by properly adjusting the concentration of metal in the plating bath the dipping time or the current density. The thickness of the metal layer in the case where the conductive pattern is used in ordinary electrical wiring is preferably 0.3 m or more more preferably 3 m or more from the standpoint of electrical conductivity.

The conductive pattern material of the invention is obtained by the aforementioned conductive pattern forming method of the invention.

The conductive pattern material of the invention has a highly fine and durable high density metal particle pattern formed on the surface of a substrate. This metal particle pattern can be formed at a simple step. This conductive pattern material of the invention can be expected to find wide application to high density magnetic disc magnetic head magnetic tape magnetic sheet magnetic disc etc. The conductive pattern material of the invention can be used also to form various circuits. By properly selecting pattern forming means the conductive pattern material can form a fine conductive region. Thus the conductive pattern material of the invention can be expected to find wide application including the formation of circuits such as micromachine and super LSI.

In the case where as the substrate there is used a transparent film such as PET the conductive pattern material of the invention can be used as a transparent patterned conductive film. Examples of the usage of such a transparent conductive film include transparent electrodes for display light shielding devices solar cells touch panels and other transparent conductive films. However the transparent conductive film is useful particularly as an electromagnetic wave shield filter to be attached to CRT or plasma display. Such an electromagnetic wave shield filter needs to have a high electrical conductivity and transparency and thus is preferably provided with a metal article layer in lattice form. The lattice lines preferably have a width of from 20 to 100 m and the gap between the lattice lines is preferably from about 50 to 600 m. This lattice may not be necessarily formed regularly by a straight line but may be formed by a curve.

In the invention a finer pattern having a line width of 10 m or less can be formed. Thus the invention can easily form a metal wiring or metal particle adhered layer having an arbitrary pattern form allowing various predeterminations according to the purpose.

The conductive pattern forming method obtained according to the invention is capable of forming a fine pattern having a high electrical conductivity. The conductive pattern material metal particle pattern material obtained according to the invention can have metal particles dispersed densely therein in such an arrangement that a metal particle dispersed layer having an excellent durability is formed in a desired fine pattern and thus can find wide application to materials having a high electrical conductivity and arbitrary pattern such as metal wiring material and electromagnetic wave shield including materials for forming circuits such as micromachine and super LSI electromagnetic wave shields to be attached to CRT or plasma display transparent electrodes for display light shielding devices solar cells touch panels other transparent conductive films high density magnetic discs magnetic heads magnetic tapes magnetic sheets magnetic discs and other magnetic materials.

The invention will be further described hereinafter in the following examples but the invention is not construed as being limited thereto.

The synthesis of the aforementioned exemplary compound 1 is effected by the following two steps. The scheme of these steps will be described below.

24.5 g 0.12 mol of 1 hydroxycyclohexylphenyl ketone was dissolved in a mixture of 50 g of DMAx and 50 g of THF. To the solution was then gradually added 7.2 g 0.18 mol of NaH 60 in oil over ice bath. To the mixture was then added dropwise 44.2 g 0.18 mol of 11 bromo 1 undecene 95 . The mixture was then reacted at room temperature. The reaction was terminated in 1 hour. The reaction solution was then poured into ice water. The reaction was then extracted with ethyl acetate to obtain a mixture containing Compound a in the form of yellow solution. 37 g of the mixture thus obtained was then dissolved in 370 ml of acetonitrile. To the solution was then added 7.4 g of water. To the mixture was then added 1.85 g of p toluenesulfonic acid monohydrate. The mixture was then stirred at room temperature for 20 minutes. The resulting organic phase was then extracted with ethyl acetate. The solvent was then distilled off. The residue was then subjected to column chromatography filler Wakogel C 200 developing solvent 1 80 mixture of ethyl acetate and hexane to isolate Compound a.

To 5.0 g 0.014 mol of Compound a were added two droplets of Speir catalyst HPtCl.6HO 2 PrOH 0.1 mol l . To the mixture was then added dropwise 2.8 g 0.021 mol of trichlorosilane over ice bath. The mixture was then stirred. After 1 hour to the mixture was added dropwise 1.6 g 0.012 mol of trichlorosilane. The temperature of the mixture was then returned to room temperature. After 3 hours the reaction was terminated. After the termination of the reaction unreacted trichlorosilane was distilled off under reduced pressure to obtain Compound A.

18 g of a polyacrylic acid average molecular weight 25 000 was dissolved in 300 g of DMAc dimethyl acetamide . To the solution were then added 0.41 g of hydroquinone 19.4 g of 2 methacryloyloxyethyl isocyanate and 0.25 g of dibutyl dilaurate. The reaction mixture was then reacted at 65 C. for 4 hours. The resulting polymer exhibited an acid value of 7.02 meq g. The carboxyl group was then neutralized with 1 mol l of an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide. The reaction solution was then added to ethyl acetate to cause the precipitation of a polymer which was then thoroughly washed to obtain a hydrophilic polymer P having a polymerizable group.

Examples 1 to 3 will be given below as examples of the pattern forming method of the invention but the invention is not limited thereto.

A glass substrate produced by Nippon Sheet Glass Co. Ltd. was dipped in piranha solution 1 1 by volume mixture of sulfuric acid and 30 hydrogen peroxide overnight and then cleaned with purified water. The substrate thus treated was put in a separable flask in which the air within had been replaced by nitrogen and then dipped in a dehydrated toluene solution of 12.5 wt of Compound A for 1 hour. The substrate was withdrawn from the solution and then washed sequentially with toluene acetone and purified water. Thus a substrate A1 was obtained.

0.5 g of the hydrophilic polymer P was dissolved in a mixture of 4.0 g of purified water and 2.0 g of acetonitrile to prepare a graft forming layer coating solution. The graft forming layer coating solution thus prepared was then spread over the substrate A1 using a spin coater. In some detail the spin coater was operated at 300 rpm for 5 seconds and then at 1 000 rpm for 20 seconds. The substrate A1 having a graft forming layer coating solution spread thereover was then dried at 100 C. for 2 minutes. The thickness of the graft forming layer thus dried was 2 m.

Using a Type UVX 02516S1LP01 exposing machine produced by USHIO INC. the substrate having a graft forming layer coating solution spread thereover was then exposed to light for 1 minute with a Type NC 1 pattern mask produced by TOPPAN PRINTING CO. LTD. fixed to the substrate with a clip in such an arrangement that it came in close contact therewith. The substrate thus exposed was freed of the mask and then thoroughly washed with purified water.

Thus a pattern A1 a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated was formed.

A glass substrate produced by Nippon Sheet Glass Co. Ltd. surface resistance 10 sq model No. 49J183 vacuum metallized with ITO was subjected to ultrasonic cleaning sequentially with isopropyl alcohol acetone methanol and purified water for 5 minutes or more respectively and then dried by blowing nitrogen thereagainst. The substrate thus treated was put in a separable flask in which the air within had been replaced by nitrogen and then dipped in a dehydrated toluene solution of 12.5 wt of Compound a for 1 hour to overnight. The substrate was withdrawn from the solution and then washed sequentially with toluene acetone and purified water. Thus a substrate A2 was obtained.

A graft forming layer coating solution was spread over the substrate A2 and then dried in the same manner as in Example 1. The graft forming layer thus dried had a thickness of 2 m.

The substrate was subjected to patternwise exposure with a pattern mask in the same manner as in Example 1. The substrate thus exposed was freed of mask and then thoroughly washed with purified water.

Thus a pattern A2 a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated was formed.

PET biaxially stretched polyethylene terephthalate film having a thickness of 188 m which had been corona treated on one side thereof was cut into a size of 5 cm 5 cm. The substrate was put in a separable flask in which the air within had been replaced by nitrogen and then dipped in a dehydrated toluene solution of 12.5 wt of Compound A for 1 hour to overnight. The substrate was withdrawn from the solution and then washed sequentially with toluene acetone and purified water. Thus a substrate A3 was obtained.

1.0 ml of a 20 wt aqueous solution of acrylic acid was dropped onto the surface of the substrate A3. A sheet of quartz glass was put on the PET substrate substrate A3 so that the aqueous solution of acrylic acid was disposed interposed between the sheet of quartz and the PET substrate.

The substrate was subjected to patternwise exposure with a pattern mask in the same manner as in Example 1. The substrate thus exposed was freed of mask and then thoroughly washed with purified water.

Thus a pattern A3 a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated was formed.

The patterns A1 to A3 obtained in Examples 1 to 3 were each confirmed for pattern by the following confirming methods 1 and 2 .

The patterns formed on the substrates A1 to A3 were each observed under atomic force microscope AFM Nanopics 1000 produced by Seiko Instruments Inc. DFM cantilever used . The line width of the minimum line and space which was able to be analyzed is set forth in Table 1 below.

The substrates A1 to A3 were each dipped in a 0.1 wt aqueous solution of methylene blue for 5 minutes and then washed with purified water. Thereafter the various patterns were each confirmed under optical microscope. The line width of the minimum line and space which was able to be analyzed is set forth in Table 1 below.

As can be seen in the results of Table 1 Examples 1 to 3 in which patterns were formed according to the pattern forming method of the invention allowed easy formation of a fine graft polymer pattern.

Examples 4 to 9 will be given below as examples of the arranged fine particle pattern forming method of the invention but the invention is not construed as being limited thereto.

A glass substrate produced by Nippon Sheet Glass Co. Ltd. was dipped in piranha solution 1 1 by volume mixture of sulfuric acid and 30 hydrogen peroxide overnight and then cleaned with purified water. The substrate thus treated was put in a separable flask in which the air within had been replaced by nitrogen and then dipped in a dehydrated toluene solution of 12.5 wt of Compound a for 1 hour. The substrate was withdrawn from the solution and then washed sequentially with toluene acetone and purified water. Thus a substrate B1 was obtained.

0.5 g of the hydrophilic polymer P was dissolved in a mixture of 4.0 g of purified water and 2.0 g of acetonitrile to prepare a graft forming layer coating solution. The graft forming layer coating solution thus prepared was then spread over the substrate B1 using a spin coater. In some detail the spin coater was operated at 300 rpm for 5 seconds and then at 1 000 m for 20 seconds. The substrate B1 having a graft forming layer coating solution spread thereover was then dried at 100 C. for 2 minutes. The thickness of the graft forming layer thus dried was 2 m.

Using a Type UVX 02516S1LP01 exposing machine produced by USHIO INC. the substrate having a graft forming layer coating solution spread thereover was then exposed to light for 1 minute with a Type NC 1 pattern mask produced by TOPPAN PRINTING CO. LTD. fixed to the substrate with a clip in such an arrangement that it came in close contact therewith. The substrate thus exposed was freed of the mask and then thoroughly washed with purified water.

The pattern B1 was observed under atomic force microscope AFM Nanopics 1000 produced by Seiko Instruments Inc. DFM cantilever used . As a result the pattern B1 was confined to have a pattern a region where a graft polymer is generated having a width of 9 m formed thereon.

The substrate having the pattern B1 acrylic acid graft pattern was dipped in an aqueous dispersion of particulate TiO 1.5 wt produced by C.I.KASEI.CO. LTD. having a positive charge for 1 hour withdrawn thoroughly washed with water and then dried to obtain an arranged fine particle pattern material 1.

The surface of the arranged fine particle pattern material 1 thus obtained was then observed at 50 000 magnification under a Type S800 scanning electron microscope produced by JEOL . As a result the pattern was found to have particulate TiOaccumulated thereon. The resolution of the pattern was 9 m as calculated in terms of width. It was also found that little particles had been adhered to areas other than the region where the graft polymer is generated demonstrating that selective adsorption of functional particles bad been effected to attain an excellent resolution.

The arranged fine particle pattern material 1 thus obtained was rubbed with cloth 50 times in water and then observed under electron microscope. As a result the same sharp pattern as observed before rubbing with cloth was confirmed demonstrating that the pattern form cannot be damaged by rubbing and the adhesion of particles is strong.

The particulate TiOwas then measured for zeta potential using Zetasizer 2000 produced by Malvern Instruments Inc. . As a result the zeta potential of the particulate TiOwas found to be 42 mV demonstrating that the TiOhad a positive charge.

A glass substrate produced by Nippon Sheet Glass Co. Ltd. surface resistance sq model No. 49J183 vacuum metallized with ITO was subjected to ultrasonic cleaning sequentially with isopropyl alcohol acetone methanol and purified water for 5 minutes or more respectively and then dried by blowing nitrogen thereagainst. The substrate thus treated was put in a separable flask in which the air within had been replaced by nitrogen and then dipped in a dehydrated toluene solution of 12.5 wt of Compound a for 1 hour to overnight. The substrate was withdrawn from the solution and then washed sequentially with toluene acetone and purified water. Thus a substrate B2 having Compound a bonded thereto was obtained.

A graft forming layer coating solution was spread over the substrate B2 and then dried in the same manner as in Example 4. The graft forming layer thus dried had a thickness of 2 m.

The substrate was subjected to patternwise exposure with a pattern mask in the same manner as in Example 4. The substrate thus exposed was freed of mask and then thoroughly washed with purified water.

The pattern B2 was observed under atomic force microscope AFM Nanopics 1000 produced by Seiko Instruments Inc. DFM cantilever used . As a result the pattern B2 was confirmed to have a pattern graft polymer produced region having a width of 8 m formed thereon.

The substrate having the pattern B2 was dipped in an aqueous dispersion of particulate TiOhaving a positive charge washed with water and then dried in the same manner as in Example 4 to obtain an arranged fine particle pattern material 2.

The arranged fine particle pattern material 2 thus obtained was then observed in the same manner as in Example 4. As a result the pattern was found to have particulate TiOaccumulated thereon. The resolution of the pattern was 9 m as calculated in terms of width. It was also found that little particles had been adhered to areas other than the region where the graft polymer is generated demonstrating that selective adsorption of functional particles had been effected to attain an excellent resolution.

The arranged fine particle pattern material 2 thus obtained was washed in the same manner as in Example 4 and then observed under electron microscope. As a result the same sharp pattern as observed before rubbing with cloth was confirmed demonstrating that the pattern form cannot be damaged by rubbing and the adhesion of particles is strong.

PET biaxially stretched polyethylene terephthalate film having a thickness of 188 m which had been corona treated on one side thereof was cut into a size of 5 cm 5 cm. The substrate was put in a separable flask in which the air within bad been replaced by nitrogen and then dipped in a dehydrated toluene solution of 12.5 wt of Compound A for 1 hour to overnight. The substrate was withdrawn from the solution and then washed sequentially with toluene acetone and purified water. Thus a substrate B3 having Compound a bonded thereto was obtained.

1.0 ml of a 20 wt aqueous solution of acrylic acid was dropped onto the surface of the substrate B3. A sheet of quartz glass was put on the PET substrate substrate B3 so that the aqueous solution of acrylic acid was disposed interposed between the sheet of quartz and the PET substrate.

The substrate was subjected to patternwise exposure with a pattern mask in the same manner as in Example 4. The substrate thus exposed was freed of mask and then thoroughly washed with purified water.

The pattern B3 was observed under atomic force microscope AFM Nanopics 1000 produced by Seiko Instruments Inc. DFM cantilever used . As a result the pattern B3 was confirmed to have a pattern graft polymer produced region having a width of 10 m formed thereon.

The substrate having the pattern B3 was dipped in an aqueous dispersion of particulate TiOhaving a positive charge washed with water and then dried in the same manner as in Example 4 to obtain an arranged fine particle pattern material 3.

The arranged fine particle pattern material 3 thus obtained was then observed in the same manner as in Example 4. As a result the pattern was found to have particulate TiOaccumulated thereon. The resolution of the pattern was 9 m as calculated in terms of width. It was also found that little particles had been adhered to areas other than the region where the graft polymer is generated demonstrating that selective adsorption of functional particles had been effected to attain an excellent resolution.

The arranged fine particle pattern material 3 thus obtained was washed in the same manner as in Example 4 and then observed under electron microscope. As a result the same sharp pattern as observed before rubbing with cloth was confirmed demonstrating that the pattern form cannot be damaged by rubbing and the adhesion of particles is strong.

The procedure of Examples 4 to 6 were followed except that the aqueous dispersion of particulate TiOhaving a positive charge to be used at the particle adhering step was replaced by a 1.5 wt aqueous dispersion of particulate AlO produced by C.I.KASEI.CO. LTD. respectively. Thus arranged fine particle pattern materials 7 to 9 of Examples 7 to 9 respectively were prepared.

The arranged fine particle pattern materials 7 to 9 thus obtained were each observed for accumulation of particles under scanning electron microscope. As a result it was observed that a sharp functional pattern having particulate AlOadsorbed thereto had been formed. The resolution of the arranged fine particle pattern materials 7 to 9 were found to be 9 m 8 m and 9 m respectively as calculated in terms of width.

The arranged fine particle pattern materials 7 to 9 were each rubbed and washed in the same manner as in Example 4 and then observed under electron microscope. As a result the same sharp pattern as observed before washing was confirmed demonstrating that the pattern form cannot be damaged by cleaning and the adhesion of particles is strong.

The particulate AlOwas measured for zeta potential in the same manner as in Example 4. The result was 77 mV demonstrating that the AlOhas a positive charge.

Examples 10 to 15 will be given below as examples of the conductive pattern forming method and conductive pattern material of the invention but the invention is not construed as being limited thereto.

A glass substrate produced by Nippon Sheet Glass Co. Ltd. was dipped in piranha solution 1 1 by volume mixture of sulfuric acid and 30 hydrogen peroxide overnight and then cleaned with purified water. The substrate thus treated was put in a separable flask in which the air within had been replaced by nitrogen and then dipped in a dehydrated toluene solution of 12.5 wt of Compound A for 1 hour. The substrate was withdrawn from the solution and then washed sequentially with toluene acetone and purified water. Thus a substrate C1 was obtained.

0.5 g of the hydrophilic polymer P was dissolved in a mixture of 4.0 g of purified water and 2.0 g of acetonitrile to prepare a graft forming layer coating solution. The graft forming layer coating solution thus prepared was then coated over the substrate C1 using a spin coater. In some detail the spin coater was operated at 300 rpm for 5 seconds and then at 1 000 rpm for 20 seconds. The substrate C1 having a graft forming layer coating solution spread thereover was then dried at 100 C. for 2 minutes. The thickness of the graft forming layer thus dried was 2 m.

Using a Type UVX 02516S1LP01 exposing machine produced by USHIO INC. the substrate having a graft forming layer coating solution spread thereover was then exposed to light for 1 minute with a Type NC 1 pattern mask produced by TOPPAN PRINTING CO. LTD. fixed to the substrate with a clip in such an arrangement that it came in close contact therewith. The substrate thus exposed was freed of the mask and then thoroughly washed with purified water.

Thus a pattern C1 a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated was formed.

The pattern C1 thus obtained was observed under atomic force microscope AFM Nanopics 1000 produced by Seiko Instruments Inc. DFM cantilever used . As a result the pattern C1 was confirmed to have a pattern a region where a graft polymer is generated having a line having a width of 8 m and a gap having a width of 8 m alternatingly arranged thereon.

The substrate having the pattern C1 formed thereon was dipped in a 15 wt aqueous solution of silver nitrate produced by Wako Pure Chemical Industries Ltd. for 12 hours and then washed with distilled water. Thereafter the substrate was dipped in 100 ml of distilled water to which 30 ml of 0.2 mold sodium tetrahydroborate was then added dropwise so that the silver ion adsorbed to the substrate was reduced. As a result a uniform silver layer metal particle layer was formed on the surface of the pattern C1. The silver layer thus formed had a thickness of 0.1 m. In this manner a conductive pattern material 1 having a silver particle layer formed thereon was obtained.

The surface of the conductive pattern material 1 was then observed under electron microscope. As a result it was confirmed that a good conductive pattern having a line having a width of 8 m and a gap having a width of 8 m alternatingly arranged thereon had been formed.

A glass substrate produced by Nippon Sheet Glass Co. Ltd. surface resistance 10 sq model No. 49J183 vacuum metallized with ITO was subjected to ultrasonic cleaning sequentially with isopropyl alcohol acetone methanol and purified water for 5 minutes or more respectively and then dried by blowing nitrogen thereagainst. The substrate thus treated was put in a separable flask in which the air within had been replaced by nitrogen and then dipped in a dehydrated toluene solution of 12.5 wt of Compound A for 1 hour to overnight. The substrate was withdrawn from the solution and then washed sequentially with toluene acetone and purified water. Thus a substrate C2 was obtained.

A graft forming layer coating solution was spread over the substrate C2 and then dried in the same manner as in Example 10. The graft forming layer thus dried had a thickness of 2 m.

The substrate was subjected to patternwise exposure with a pattern mask in the same manner as in Example 10. The substrate thus exposed was freed of mask and then thoroughly washed with purified water.

Thus a pattern C2 a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated was formed.

The pattern C2 thus obtained was observed under atomic force microscope AFM Nanopics 1000 produced by Seiko Instruments Inc. DFM cantilever used . As a result the pattern C2 was confirmed to have a pattern having a line having a width of 8 m and a gap having a width of 8 m alternatingly arranged thereon.

The substrate having the pattern C2 formed thereon was treated in the same manner as in Example 10. As a result a uniform silver layer metal particle layer was formed on the surface of the pattern C2. The silver layer thus formed had a thickness of 0.1 m. In this manner a conductive pattern material 2 having a silver particle layer formed thereon was obtained.

The surface of the conductive pattern material 2 was then observed under electron microscope. As a result it was confirmed that a good conductive pattern having a line having a width of 8 m and a gap having a width of 8 m alternatingly arranged thereon had been formed.

PET biaxially stretched polyethylene terephthalate film having a thickness of 188 m which had been corona treated on one side thereof was cut into a size of 5 cm 5 cm. The substrate was put in a separable flask in which the air within had been replaced by nitrogen and then dipped in a dehydrated toluene solution of 12.5 wt of Compound A for 1 hour to overnight. The substrate was withdrawn from the solution and then washed sequentially with toluene acetone and purified water. Thus a substrate C3 was obtained.

1.0 ml of a 20 wt aqueous solution of acrylic acid was dropped onto the surface of the substrate C3. A sheet of quartz glass was put on the PET substrate substrate C3 so that the aqueous solution of acrylic acid was disposed interposed between the sheet of quartz and the PET substrate.

The substrate was subjected to patternwise exposure with a pattern mask in the same manner as in Example 10. The substrate thus exposed was freed of mask and then thoroughly washed with purified water.

Thus a pattern C3 a region where a graft polymer is generated and a region where a graft polymer is not generated was formed.

The pattern C3 thus obtained was observed under atomic force microscope AFM Nanopics 1000 produced by Seiko Instruments Inc. DFM cantilever used . As a result the pattern C3 was confirmed to have a pattern having a line having a width of 7 m and a gap having a width of 7 m alternatingly arranged thereon.

The substrate having the pattern C3 formed thereon was treated in the same manner as in Example 1. As a result a uniform silver layer metal particle layer was formed on the surface of the pattern C3. The silver layer thus formed had a thickness of 0.1 m. In this manner a conductive pattern material 3 having a silver particle layer formed thereon was obtained.

The surface of the conductive pattern material 3 was then observed under electron microscope. As a result it was confirmed that a good conductive pattern having a line having a width of 8 m and a gap having a width of 8 m alternatingly arranged thereon had been formed.

The conductive pattern materials 1 2 and 3 having a silver particle layer formed thereon thus obtained were each then measured for surface conductivity at the area on which the conductive pattern had been formed by a four probe method using LORESTA FP produced by Mitsubishi Chemical Corporation . The following results were obtained.

The conductive pattern materials 1 2 and 3 having a silver particle layer formed thereon thus obtained were each then evaluated for layer adhesion by a checkerboard tape method according to JIS 5400. These conductive pattern materials were each subjected to tape peeling test against checkerboard cuts made thereon. As a result none of the conductive pattern materials 1 2 and 3 showed peeling of checkers demonstrating that they have a good adhesion between the substrate and the thin metal layer.

The conductive pattern materials 1 2 and 3 having a silver particle layer formed thereon thus obtained were each rubbed reciprocally 30 times with a cloth BEMCOT produced by Asahi Kasei Corporation wet with water. The conductive pattern materials thus rubbed were each then visually observed for surface conditions. As a result none of the conductive pattern materials 1 2 and 3 showed no peeling of metal particle layer. The samples thus rubbed were each then evaluated for layer adhesion by a checkerboard tape method in the same manner as mentioned above. As a result none of the conductive pattern materials 1 2 and 3 showed peeling of checkers demonstrating that they showed no deterioration of adhesion between the metal particle layer and the substrate and still exhibited an excellent durability even after rubbed.

The same substrate having the patterns C1 to C3 formed thereon as obtained in Examples 10 to 12 were each dipped in a 0.1 wt aqueous solution of palladium nitrate produced by Wako Pure Chemical Industries Ltd. for 1 hour and then washed with distilled water. Thereafter these substrates were each dipped in an electroless plating bath having the following formulation for 20 minutes to prepare conductive pattern materials 4 to 6.

The surface of the conductive pattern materials 4 to 6 were then observed under optical microscope OPTI PHOTO 2 produced by Nikon Corporation . The following results were confirmed.

The conductive pattern material 4 Example 13 was confirmed to have a good pattern having a line having a width of 8 m and a gap having a width of 8 m alternatively arranged thereon. The conductive pattern material 5 Example 14 was confirmed to have a good pattern having a line having a width of 9 m and a gap having a width of 9 m alternatively arranged thereon. The conductive pattern material 6 Example 15 was confined to have a good pattern having a line having a width of 9 m and a gap having a width of 9 m alternatively arranged thereon.

The conductive pattern materials 4 to 6 thus obtained were each then measured for surface conductivity at the conductive patterned portion on which the thin copper layer had been formed in the same manner as in Example 10. The following results were obtained.

The conductive pattern materials 4 to 6 having a thin copper layer formed thereon were each then evaluated for layer adhesion in the same manner as in Examples 10 to 12. These conductive pattern materials were each subjected to tape peeling test against checkerboard cuts made thereon As a result none of the conductive pattern materials 4 to 6 showed peeling of checkers demonstrating that they have a good adhesion between the substrate and the conductive pattern.

According to the invention a pattern forming method is provided which can easily form a graft polymer pattern having a high resolution on the surface of a solid.

According to the invention an arranged fine particle pattern forming method is provided which can be used to form a pattern having a great area and is capable of arranging patternwise fine particles in a desired high resolution range with a simple procedure. In accordance with this arranged fine particle pattern forming method patternwise integrated fine particles can be so strongly attached to the substrate that they cannot be peeled off the substrate even when the substrate is rubbed or otherwise mechanically treated.

According to the invention a conductive pattern forming method is provided which is capable of forming a fine pattern having a high resolution and conductivity. The obtained conductive pattern material has a fine pattern having a high resolution and conductivity formed thereon and thus can find a wide application.

According to the invention a conductive pattern forming method and conductive pattern material are provided which are suitable for the preparation of a material required for the formation of an arbitrary fine pattern having a high conductivity and resolution such as fine electric wiring and electromagnetic wave shield.

According to the invention a conductive pattern forming method is provided which is capable of forming a finely patterned metal particle dispersed layer having an excellent adhesion and durability and a high resolution comprising finely divided metal particles dispersed at a high density therein with a high productivity at a simple process. The obtained conductive pattern material has the aforementioned properties.

