---

title: High bandwidth delivery and internet access for airborne passengers
abstract: A method and a communications system in which a request for data transmitted by an airborne transmitter over a low-bandwidth air-to-ground communication system uplink and received by a ground-based receiver. The requested data is then transmitted over a high-bandwidth communication system downlink, such as a DBS satellite system downlink, preferably using an MPEG-2 compression technique, and received by an airborne receiver located on the same aircraft as the airborne transmitter. The received request for data is transmitted to a data network that contains the requested data, such as the Internet or a private data network, using circuit-switched techniques. According to the invention, the requested data includes one of video information, audio information and textual information.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=RE040476&OS=RE040476&RS=RE040476
owner: AT&T Mobility II, LLC
number: RE040476
owner_city: Atlanta
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051206
---
The present invention relates to the field of telecommunications. More particularly the present invention relates to a method and to a system for communicating between an airborne data terminal and a ground based computer network.

The ability for passengers on a commercial airline flight to make phone calls is well known. Initially such airborne telephone calls utilized an analog technology that was similar to that used by an airborne radio station broadcasting a modulated voice signal over a designated frequency to a ground based station. The ground station interfaced with a Public Switched Telephony Network PSTN to complete the call. The analog approach suffers from problems associated with signal degradation and requires a relatively large bandwidth for carrying a voice band signal.

An all digital air to ground telephony network service was introduced in 1993 in which voice signals are carried by an ISDN link on an aircraft to a radio link. Modern digital transmission and speech processing techniques are used on the voice signals before an airborne radio transmitter transmits an encoded digital voice signal to the ground where the voice signal is routed to the PSTN. The digital approach delivers a clearer voice quality than the analog approach and allows evolving speech encoding techniques to carry more simultaneous voice calls over available communication channels.

At the time the all digital air to ground service was introduced the only data service envisioned was facsimile and data modem type calls to be made to ground based stations or terminals. To accommodate existing facsimile and data modems that might be used on an aircraft for sending facsimile documents or for retrieving e mail messages a voice encoder on the aircraft used for voice calls is bypassed with a proper rate adaptation so that modem signals are send over the radio link. Still this type of connection is considered to be a circuit switched voice call that is each dialup consumes one standard voice channel. As a result the tariff for a conventional airborne data service call is the same as the tariff for a standard voice call because the procedure for setting up the two types of calls is the same and the bandwidth that is consumed by a conventional airborne data call is the same as the bandwidth consumed by a standard voice call. Further the types of data services that are conveniently available through conventional airborne data service calls are severely limited because of the limited bandwidth available for a conventional airborne data call. For example conventional airborne data services do not provide a bandwidth that is sufficient for supporting for example access to the Internet in which graphics audio video textual and multimedia content are available.

What is needed in a way to provide an integrated voice data service to airborne passengers that can mix various data services such as accessing the Internet or placing a voice call and thereby utilize the limited air channels available to airborne passengers more efficiently.

The present invention provides a method and a communications system that provides an integrated voice data service to airborne passengers that can mix various data services such as accessing the Internet or placing a voice call and thereby efficiently utilizing the air channels available to airborne passengers.

The advantages of the present invention are provided by a method and a communications system in which a request for data transmitted by an airborne transmitter over a low bandwidth air to ground communication system uplink and received by a ground based receiver. The requested data is then transmitted over a high bandwidth communication system downlink such as a DBS satellite system downlink preferably using an MPEG 2 compression technique and received by an airborne receiver located on the same aircraft as the airborne transmitter. The received request for data is transmitted to a data network that contains the requested data such as the Internet or a private data network using circuit switched techniques. The requests from all active data users are multiplexed on the same circuit switched channel thus conserving the bandwidth for normal voice channels. According to the invention the requested data includes one of video information audio information and textual information.

The present invention provides a method and a system providing twoway data communications between an airborne data terminal station such as a personal computer PC or a laptop computer and a ground based data network such as the Internet using a packet data switching technology. As a result the present invention utilizes available air to ground bandwidth more efficiently than conventional airborne data telecommunications systems because the same air to ground channel is used for multiplexing data packets from different concurrent user data sessions.

The data transport mechanism provides interfaces to and includes various data pipes that are both internal and external to the aircraft. The internal data pipes link passengers and aircraft personnel to a data server. According to the invention the internal data pipes can be any of an existing Cable Distribution System CDS using an Integrated Services Digital Network ISDN a Local Area Network LAN an Ethernet or a Fiber Distributed Data Interface FDDI network and or an Asynchronous Transmission Mode ATM network for distributing video voice audio and textual data signals to a display screen located for example on the back of passenger seats. Preferably an ATM internal data pipe uses an embedded open standard Operating System such as JAVA.

The external pipes can be various wireless pipes or air links in a ground based station or gateway or to a satellite system. According to the invention the different external pipes that can be used with the present invention can be an existing terrestrial link system such as the North American Terrestrial System NATS or the European Terrestrial Flight Telephone System TFTS a direct air link to a terrestrial gateway a link to a Low Earth Orbit LEO and or a Medium Earth Orbit MEO satellite system and or a link to one of the emerging broadband Satellite based systems such as the Digital Broadcast Satellite DBS or Teledesic systems.

In system includes a plurality of airborne data terminals each of which are connected to a data server by an internal data pipe such as an Ethernet in a well known manner. Data terminals can be data terminals a b and c that are used by flight crew and personnel and data terminals e f and g that are used by passengers. For example data terminal a is located on the flight deck of the aircraft while data terminals b and c are located elsewhere in the aircraft and are used by a maintenance crew and or members of the flight crew not located on the flight deck. Data terminals d e and f are dedicated data terminals provided on board the aircraft for the convenience of passengers and or can be portable or laptop computers provided by passengers.

Data server acts as an intelligent airborne gateway and performs multiplexing and necessary call control functions. More specifically data server provides three general functions 1 controlling various data transport interfaces 2 multiplexing routing and priority queuing functions for data packets and 3 updating and maintaining various databases depending on the application as an off line process and for providing a uniform user interface capability API to client applications. Examples of off line processes provided by data server are a HyperText Transport Protocol HTTP process that provides an interface for Web browsing and an Aircraft Condition Monitoring System ACMS process for collecting aircraft flight data for OA M purposes.

Data server preferably includes a network interface circuit NIC a router a database and at least one and preferably a plurality of data transport interface circuits . Network interface circuit connects data server to internal data pipe in a well known manner and provides data packets received from data pipe to router . Router uses a routing table that is stored in routing table database for directing data packets received from terminals a f and voice packets from telephones not shown to an appropriate data transport interface circuit based on a requested data service for subsequent transmission to a particular bearer service. The components forming data server can be physically enclosed within one housing or enclosure or can be physically located in separate housings that are distributed around the aircraft depending on the technology used the applications and the physical constraints of the aircraft.

In gate link interface circuit provides well known interface functions for an air link through an antenna directly to a ground based gateway . Gateway is connected to data network such as the Internet. Similarly Satellite Interface Circuit SIC provides well known interface functions for an air link through an antenna to a satellite network such as an LEO or MEO satellite system. Satellite network is connected to data network through a ground station a that is a part of network . Exemplary satellite networks suitable for satellite network include several LEO MEO systems that are designed primarily for voice service such as the Iridium Globalstar ICO and Odyssey systems. The data service provided by these exemplary satellite systems is supported only as a supplementary service having a bit rate between 1.2 to 9.6 Kbps using voice band modem signaling similar to the conventional two way data services available from the NATS TFTS and SATCOM.

NATS interface circuit provides well known interface functions for an air link through an Aircraft Communication Unit ACU NATS unit and an antenna to a gateway of an NATS type system such as AT T s NATS network. NATS type system is connected to data network using a packet data transport mechanism. The AT T s NATS network includes approximately 150 ground stations covering the entire continental United States and parts of the Canada and Mexico. All NATS ground stations are interconnected to a switching center located in New Jersey from where voice traffic is routed to a PSTN. The NATS ground stations are also interconnected through a frame relay network to data centers or gateways where the data packets are routed to a private data network or to public data network such as the Internet. Using a modern protocol such as MPP combined with PPTP or L2TP the NATS network supports an aggregated dynamic bandwidth of up to 290 Kbps in a channel block of 29 channels subject to channel availability.

DBS decoder interface circuit provides well known interface functions for an air link through an antenna to a DBS satellite system . DBS satellite system is connected to data network . The broadband satellite systems such as the Geo synchronous Earth Orbit GEO Digital Broadcast Satellite DBS are envisioned as providing a one way data service as the primary service. DBS technology uses an MPEG 2 digital compression system for sending a plurality of channels of digitized video signals through one transponder. The MPEG 2 digital compression system can be used for multiplexing any digital signal including a packet data signal and for intermixing a digital signal with a video signal for satellite broadcasting. From the point of view of the DBS system is concerned there is no difference whether a transported signal is a compressed video signal or a sequence of IP packets.

Antenna used on the aircraft must be a moving or a phased array antenna for maintaining a line of sight with a transmitting satellite because DBS system is a GEO satellite system. An antenna of this type is relatively more costly than a standard fixed antenna. For other satellite systems such as the Low Earth Orbit LEO satellites that are not geo synchronous the satellite system handles handoffs therefore eliminating the need for a moving type antenna for antenna .

To provide an interactive airborne data service such as e mail retrieval or Web browsing the present invention uses an NATS type packet data network such as the AT T NATS for an uplink data pipe and a DBS type system for a downlink data pipe. For a typical application the relative size or bandwidth requirements of the data request is small while the amount of data returned in response to the request is relatively large. The capability of the NATS link is sufficient for carrying a request for data but is insufficient for carrying the requested data. Alternatively the uplink data pipe can be through an LEO MEO satellite network with the downlink data pipe being through DBS type system .

In a user using a laptop computer on airplane that is connected to system sends an uplink data request for establishing a high speed data session through NATS system . The request is sent through a second gateway to a desired access management server . After a proper authentication process and channel assignment access management server sends a service initiation acknowledgement message to the laptop computer via NATS system and terrestrial gateway . The laptop computer receives the service initiation acknowledgement message via NATS interface circuit router and internal data pipe FIG. . The laptop computer sends a request to a particular website on Internet via NATS system . The desired website responds to the data request by sending the data requested to an access management server that is connected to a DBS system . The requested data is transmitted from a ground station a to DBS satellite b then to aircraft . The laptop computer receives the requested data from DBS interface circuit router and internal data pipe .

System utilizes the advantages of the data compression features of DBS system when downloading broadband data from a DBS satellite. An exemplary application that can be utilized by a flight crew is software downloading flight information updates etc. In Flight Entertainment IFE services offered by an airline can receive real time video programs from a direct television type service or by allowing passengers to browse the Internet with ample bandwidth.

Presently the available DBS systems are broadcast only systems. When a two way DBS satellite link is available data server will treat such an uplink as another bearer service and uses the satellite broadband network for interconnecting aircraft to a ground based gateway. The bandwidth available with the two way broadband satellite systems supports applications such as video conferencing high quality video high speed Internet and virtual LAN to the aircraft. An added advantage of using any of satellite systems is that universal access is possible so that the same system can be used anywhere on earth. For this embodiment of the present invention the satellite network is connected to the mobile terminal on board the aircraft handling routing and handoffs needed for linking the mobile terminal on board the aircraft to a ground based gateway in a well known manner similar to that used by conventional cellular telephone system instead of a network of ground stations that connect the gateway. As long as an aircraft and a gateway can connect by way of a satellite network SVCs or PVCs can be set up between any pair of terminal stations. For example one aircraft can have an SVC to another aircraft as long as both aircraft are serviced by the satellite system. Similarly an aircraft can have an SVC to any gateway as long as both can be connected through the satellite system.

The API function of the present invention is provided by a collection of APIs or procedures having a standardized execution environment and can be executed by applications whether local or remote for allowing the configuration of call data routes monitoring and reporting of activities and messaging and presentation of data to users. An example of an API that can be used with the present invention are JAVA applets that can be executed by any JAVA capable Web browser for allowing a flight crew to view the latest gate link information or for ground control personnel to view the vital statistics of the aircraft in real time.

The API function of the present invention is the enabling tool for allowing quick introduction of new applications and or services for developing specific applications for call monitoring and control purposes and for incorporating new technologies without significant development effort. The APIs used with the present invention are highly modularized so that any combination of APIs can be incorporated into creating new applications without having impact on existing applications.

Preferably the present invention uses the TCP IP protocol as a networking protocol thus allowing interconnection to virtually any network. An additional advantage of the present invention is that the ability to access to the vast collection of TCP IP protocols tools and applications provides the present invention with the flexibility to meet the needs of future aircraft data services. The present invention is expandable by providing an infrastructure that is modularized and is designed to use Open System interfaces allowing new hardware and technologies to be incorporated with minimal development. Preferably the present invention uses COTS hardware and software.

