---

title: System and method for providing a variable refresh rate of an interferometric modulator display
abstract: Embodiments includes methods and systems for updating display devices at a variable refresh rate. One embodiment includes a method of updating an image displayed on a display device. The method includes setting an indicator to a first state that indicates that image data has been received subsequent to a previous update of a display device and periodically updating at least a portion of the display device to display the image. The updating is deferred for at least one period when the indicator is in a state other than the first state. In another embodiment, updates of the display are substantially asynchronous and occur as the processor writes data to one or more shift registers. When a shift register is filled, for example, having received data for a row within the display, the data in the shift register is written to the display. Other embodiments include methods of manufacturing such devices.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08878825&OS=08878825&RS=08878825
owner: Qualcomm MEMS Technologies, Inc.
number: 08878825
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050708
---
This application claims the benefit of and incorporates by reference in its entirety U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 613 526 filed Sep. 27 2004.

Microelectromechanical systems MEMS include micro mechanical elements actuators and electronics. Micromechanical elements may be created using deposition etching and or other micromachining processes that etch away parts of substrates and or deposited material layers or that add layers to form electrical and electromechanical devices. One type of MEMS device is called an interferometric modulator. As used herein the term interferometric modulator or interferometric light modulator refers to a device that selectively absorbs and or reflects light using the principles of optical interference. In certain embodiments an interferometric modulator may comprise a pair of conductive plates one or both of which may be transparent and or reflective in whole or part and capable of relative motion upon application of an appropriate electrical signal. In a particular embodiment one plate may comprise a stationary layer deposited on a substrate and the other plate may comprise a metallic membrane separated from the stationary layer by an air gap. As described herein in more detail the position of one plate in relation to another can change the optical interference of light incident on the interferometric modulator. Such devices have a wide range of applications and it would be beneficial in the art to utilize and or modify the characteristics of these types of devices so that their features can be exploited in improving existing products and creating new products that have not yet been developed.

The system method and devices of the invention each have several aspects no single one of which is solely responsible for its desirable attributes. Without limiting the scope of this invention its more prominent features will now be discussed briefly. After considering this discussion and particularly after reading the section entitled Detailed Description of Certain Embodiments one will understand how the features of this invention provide advantages that include for example reduced power consumption of a display by reducing the refresh rate of the display.

One embodiment includes a method of updating an image displayed on a display device. The method includes receiving image data. The method further includes setting an indicator to a first state that indicates that the image data has been received subsequent to a previous update of a display device. The method further includes periodically updating at least a portion of the display device to display the image. The updating is deferred for at least one period when the indicator is in a state other than the first state.

Another embodiment includes a device for driving a bistable display device. The device includes a frame buffer configured to receive data indicative of an image. The device further includes an output circuit configured to generate a signal for updating a display device to display the image. The device further includes a memory operably connected to the frame buffer and configured to indicate whether the frame buffer has received data subsequent to updating of the display. The device further includes a controller configured to control based on a content of the memory when the output circuit generates the signal.

Another embodiment includes an electronic device. The devices includes a display device. The device further includes a frame buffer configured to receive image data. The device further includes a driver circuit configured to periodically generate a signal for updating the display device to display the image data. The device further includes a memory operably connected to the frame buffer and configured to indicate whether the frame buffer has received data subsequent to updating of the display. The circuit is configured to generate the signal only when the memory indicates whether the frame buffer has received data subsequent to updating of the display.

Another embodiment includes a method of making a device for driving a bistable display device. The method includes forming a frame buffer configured to receive data indicative of an image. The method further includes forming an output circuit configured to generate a signal for updating a display device to display the image. The method further includes forming a memory operably connected to the frame buffer and configured to indicate whether the frame buffer has received data subsequent to updating of the display. The method further includes forming a controller configured to control based on a content of the memory when the output circuit generates the signal. The method further includes electrically connecting the frame buffer to each of the memory and the output circuit. The method further includes electrically connecting the controller to each of the memory and the output circuit.

Another embodiment includes a device for driving a bistable display device. The device includes means for receiving and storing data indicative of an image means for generating a signal for updating a display device to display the image means for indicating whether the means for receiving and storing has received data subsequent to updating of the display and means for controlling based on a content of the memory when the means for generating generates the signal.

Another embodiment includes a device for asynchronously driving a bistable display device. The device includes a circuit configured to asynchronously receive a line of data indicative of a portion of an image. The device further includes an output circuit configured to update a display device to display the portion of the image. The circuit is configured to provide the line of data to the output circuit upon receiving the line of data.

Another embodiment includes a device for asynchronously driving a bistable display device. The device includes means for asynchronously receiving a line of data indicative of a portion of an image and means for generating a signal to update a display device to display the portion of the image. The means for asynchronously receiving comprises means for providing the line of data to the means for generating upon receiving the line of data.

Another embodiment includes a method of manufacturing a device for asynchronously driving a bistable display device. The method includes forming a circuit configured to asynchronously receive a line of data indicative of a portion of an image. The method further includes forming an output circuit configured to update a display device to display the portion of the image. The method further includes electrically connecting the circuit to the output circuit. The circuit is configured to provide the line of data to the output circuit upon receiving the line of data.

The following detailed description is directed to certain specific embodiments of the invention. However the invention can be embodied in a multitude of different ways. In this description reference is made to the drawings wherein like parts are designated with like numerals throughout. As will be apparent from the following description the embodiments may be implemented in any device that is configured to display an image whether in motion e.g. video or stationary e.g. still image and whether textual or pictorial. More particularly it is contemplated that the embodiments may be implemented in or associated with a variety of electronic devices such as but not limited to mobile telephones wireless devices personal data assistants PDAs hand held or portable computers GPS receivers navigators cameras MP3 players camcorders game consoles wrist watches clocks calculators television monitors flat panel displays computer monitors auto displays e.g. odometer display etc. cockpit controls and or displays display of camera views e.g. display of a rear view camera in a vehicle electronic photographs electronic billboards or signs projectors architectural structures packaging and aesthetic structures e.g. display of images on a piece of jewelry . MEMS devices of similar structure to those described herein can also be used in non display applications such as in electronic switching devices.

Embodiments include systems and methods of updating a display at a rate that is related to the rate that data is written to the display rather than at a generally higher rate that is not directly related to the rate that data is written to the display. For example in one embodiment a flag memory is configured to indicate whether a display frame buffer has received new data subsequent to the last update of the display. In one such embodiment a controller polls a flag memory at a specified rate to determine whether to defer updating of the display or a portion of the display because the frame buffer has not received new data since the last update to the display. In another embodiment updates of the display are substantially asynchronous and occur as the processor writes data to one or more shift registers. When a shift register is filled for example having received data for a row within the display the data in the shift register is written to the display.

One interferometric modulator display embodiment comprising an interferometric MEMS display element is illustrated in . In these devices the pixels are in either a bright or dark state. In the bright on or open state the display element reflects a large portion of incident visible light to a user. When in the dark off or closed state the display element reflects little incident visible light to the user. Depending on the embodiment the light reflectance properties of the on and off states may be reversed. MEMS pixels can be configured to reflect predominantly at selected colors allowing for a color display in addition to black and white.

The depicted portion of the pixel array in includes two adjacent interferometric modulators and . In the interferometric modulator on the left a movable reflective layer is illustrated in a relaxed position at a predetermined distance from an optical stack which includes a partially reflective layer. In the interferometric modulator on the right the movable reflective layer is illustrated in an actuated position adjacent to the optical stack

The optical stacks and collectively referred to as optical stack as referenced herein typically comprise of several fused layers which can include an electrode layer such as indium tin oxide ITO a partially reflective layer such as chromium and a transparent dielectric. The optical stack is thus electrically conductive partially transparent and partially reflective and may be fabricated for example by depositing one or more of the above layers onto a transparent substrate . In some embodiments the layers are patterned into parallel strips and may form row electrodes in a display device as described further below. The movable reflective layers may be formed as a series of parallel strips of a deposited metal layer or layers orthogonal to the row electrodes of deposited on top of posts and an intervening sacrificial material deposited between the posts . When the sacrificial material is etched away the movable reflective layers are separated from the optical stacks by a defined gap . A highly conductive and reflective material such as aluminum may be used for the reflective layers and these strips may form column electrodes in a display device.

With no applied voltage the cavity remains between the movable reflective layer and optical stack with the movable reflective layer in a mechanically relaxed state as illustrated by the pixel in . However when a potential difference is applied to a selected row and column the capacitor formed at the intersection of the row and column electrodes at the corresponding pixel becomes charged and electrostatic forces pull the electrodes together. If the voltage is high enough the movable reflective layer is deformed and is forced against the optical stack . A dielectric layer not illustrated in this Figure within the optical stack may prevent shorting and control the separation distance between layers and as illustrated by pixel on the right in . The behavior is the same regardless of the polarity of the applied potential difference. In this way row column actuation that can control the reflective vs. non reflective pixel states is analogous in many ways to that used in conventional LCD and other display technologies.

In one embodiment the processor is also configured to communicate with an array driver . In one embodiment the array driver includes a row driver circuit and a column driver circuit that provide signals to a panel or display array display . The cross section of the array illustrated in is shown by the lines in . For MEMS interferometric modulators the row column actuation protocol may take advantage of a hysteresis property of these devices illustrated in . It may require for example a 10 volt potential difference to cause a movable layer to deform from the relaxed state to the actuated state. However when the voltage is reduced from that value the movable layer maintains its state as the voltage drops back below 10 volts. In the exemplary embodiment of the movable layer does not relax completely until the voltage drops below 2 volts. There is thus a range of voltage about 3 to 7 V in the example illustrated in where there exists a window of applied voltage within which the device is stable in either the relaxed or actuated state. This is referred to herein as the hysteresis window or stability window. For a display array having the hysteresis characteristics of the row column actuation protocol can be designed such that during row strobing pixels in the strobed row that are to be actuated are exposed to a voltage difference of about 10 volts and pixels that are to be relaxed are exposed to a voltage difference of close to zero volts. After the strobe the pixels are exposed to a steady state voltage difference of about 5 volts such that they remain in whatever state the row strobe put them in. After being written each pixel sees a potential difference within the stability window of 3 7 volts in this example. This feature makes the pixel design illustrated in stable under the same applied voltage conditions in either an actuated or relaxed pre existing state. Since each pixel of the interferometric modulator whether in the actuated or relaxed state is essentially a capacitor formed by the fixed and moving reflective layers this stable state can be held at a voltage within the hysteresis window with almost no power dissipation. Essentially no current flows into the pixel if the applied potential is fixed.

In typical applications a display frame may be created by asserting the set of column electrodes in accordance with the desired set of actuated pixels in the first row. A row pulse is then applied to the row 1 electrode actuating the pixels corresponding to the asserted column lines. The asserted set of column electrodes is then changed to correspond to the desired set of actuated pixels in the second row. A pulse is then applied to the row 2 electrode actuating the appropriate pixels in row 2 in accordance with the asserted column electrodes. The row 1 pixels are unaffected by the row 2 pulse and remain in the state they were set to during the row 1 pulse. This may be repeated for the entire series of rows in a sequential fashion to produce the frame. Generally the frames are refreshed and or updated with new display data by continually repeating this process at some desired number of frames per second. A wide variety of protocols for driving row and column electrodes of pixel arrays to produce display frames are also well known and may be used in conjunction with the present invention.

In the frame pixels 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 2 and 3 3 are actuated. To accomplish this during a line time for row 1 columns 1 and 2 are set to 5 volts and column 3 is set to 5 volts. This does not change the state of any pixels because all the pixels remain in the 3 7 volt stability window. Row 1 is then strobed with a pulse that goes from 0 up to 5 volts and back to zero. This actuates the 1 1 and 1 2 pixels and relaxes the 1 3 pixel. No other pixels in the array are affected. To set row 2 as desired column 2 is set to 5 volts and columns 1 and 3 are set to 5 volts. The same strobe applied to row 2 will then actuate pixel 2 2 and relax pixels 2 1 and 2 3 . Again no other pixels of the array are affected. Row 3 is similarly set by setting columns 2 and 3 to 5 volts and column 1 to 5 volts. The row 3 strobe sets the row 3 pixels as shown in . After writing the frame the row potentials are zero and the column potentials can remain at either 5 or 5 volts and the display is then stable in the arrangement of . It will be appreciated that the same procedure can be employed for arrays of dozens or hundreds of rows and columns. It will also be appreciated that the timing sequence and levels of voltages used to perform row and column actuation can be varied widely within the general principles outlined above and the above example is exemplary only and any actuation voltage method can be used with the systems and methods described herein.

The display device includes a housing a display an antenna a speaker an input device and a microphone . The housing is generally formed from any of a variety of manufacturing processes as are well known to those of skill in the art including injection molding and vacuum forming. In addition the housing may be made from any of a variety of materials including but not limited to plastic metal glass rubber and ceramic or a combination thereof. In one embodiment the housing includes removable portions not shown that may be interchanged with other removable portions of different color or containing different logos pictures or symbols.

The display of exemplary display device may be any of a variety of displays including a bi stable display as described herein. In other embodiments the display includes a flat panel display such as plasma EL OLED STN LCD or TFT LCD as described above or a non flat panel display such as a CRT or other tube device as is well known to those of skill in the art. However for purposes of describing the present embodiment the display includes an interferometric modulator display as described herein.

The components of one embodiment of exemplary display device are schematically illustrated in . The illustrated exemplary display device includes a housing and can include additional components at least partially enclosed therein. For example in one embodiment the exemplary display device includes a network interface that includes an antenna which is coupled to a transceiver . The transceiver is connected to the processor which is connected to conditioning hardware . The conditioning hardware may be configured to condition a signal e.g. filter a signal . The conditioning hardware is connected to a speaker and a microphone . The processor is also connected to an input device and a driver controller . The driver controller is coupled to a frame buffer and to the array driver which in turn is coupled to a display array . A power supply provides power to all components as required by the particular exemplary display device design.

The network interface includes the antenna and the transceiver so that the exemplary display device can communicate with one ore more devices over a network. In one embodiment the network interface may also have some processing capabilities to relieve requirements of the processor . The antenna is any antenna known to those of skill in the art for transmitting and receiving signals. In one embodiment the antenna transmits and receives RF signals according to the IEEE 802.11 standard including IEEE 802.11 a b or g . In another embodiment the antenna transmits and receives RF signals according to the BLUETOOTH standard. In the case of a cellular telephone the antenna is designed to receive CDMA GSM AMPS or other known signals that are used to communicate within a wireless cell phone network. The transceiver pre processes the signals received from the antenna so that they may be received by and further manipulated by the processor . The transceiver also processes signals received from the processor so that they may be transmitted from the exemplary display device via the antenna .

In an alternative embodiment the transceiver can be replaced by a receiver. In yet another alternative embodiment network interface can be replaced by an image source which can store or generate image data to be sent to the processor . For example the image source can be a digital video disc DVD or a hard disc drive that contains image data or a software module that generates image data.

Processor generally controls the overall operation of the exemplary display device . The processor receives data such as compressed image data from the network interface or an image source and processes the data into raw image data or into a format that is readily processed into raw image data. The processor then sends the processed data to the driver controller or to frame buffer for storage. Raw data typically refers to the information that identifies the image characteristics at each location within an image. For example such image characteristics can include color saturation and gray scale level.

In one embodiment the processor includes a microcontroller CPU or logic unit to control operation of the exemplary display device . Conditioning hardware generally includes amplifiers and filters for transmitting signals to the speaker and for receiving signals from the microphone . Conditioning hardware may be discrete components within the exemplary display device or may be incorporated within the processor or other components.

The driver controller takes the raw image data generated by the processor either directly from the processor or from the frame buffer and reformats the raw image data appropriately for high speed transmission to the array driver . Specifically the driver controller reformats the raw image data into a data flow having a raster like format such that it has a time order suitable for scanning across the display array . Then the driver controller sends the formatted information to the array driver . Although a driver controller such as a LCD controller is often associated with the system processor as a stand alone Integrated Circuit IC such controllers may be implemented in many ways. They may be embedded in the processor as hardware embedded in the processor as software or fully integrated in hardware with the array driver .

Typically the array driver receives the formatted information from the driver controller and reformats the video data into a parallel set of waveforms that are applied many times per second to the hundreds and sometimes thousands of leads coming from the display s x y matrix of pixels.

In one embodiment the driver controller array driver and display array are appropriate for any of the types of displays described herein. For example in one embodiment driver controller is a conventional display controller or a bi stable display controller e.g. an interferometric modulator controller . In another embodiment array driver is a conventional driver or a bi stable display driver e.g. an interferometric modulator display . In one embodiment a driver controller is integrated with the array driver . Such an embodiment is common in highly integrated systems such as cellular phones watches and other small area displays. In yet another embodiment display array is a typical display array or a bi stable display array e.g. a display including an array of interferometric modulators .

The input device allows a user to control the operation of the exemplary display device . In one embodiment input device includes a keypad such as a QWERTY keyboard or a telephone keypad a button a switch a touch sensitive screen a pressure or heat sensitive membrane. In one embodiment the microphone is an input device for the exemplary display device . When the microphone is used to input data to the device voice commands may be provided by a user for controlling operations of the exemplary display device .

Power supply can include a variety of energy storage devices as are well known in the art. For example in one embodiment power supply is a rechargeable battery such as a nickel cadmium battery or a lithium ion battery. In another embodiment power supply is a renewable energy source a capacitor or a solar cell including a plastic solar cell and solar cell paint. In another embodiment power supply is configured to receive power from a wall outlet.

In some implementations control programmability resides as described above in a driver controller which can be located in several places in the electronic display system. In some cases control programmability resides in the array driver . Those of skill in the art will recognize that the above described optimization may be implemented in any number of hardware and or software components and in various configurations.

The details of the structure of interferometric modulators that operate in accordance with the principles set forth above may vary widely. For example illustrate five different embodiments of the movable reflective layer and its supporting structures. is a cross section of the embodiment of where a strip of metal material is deposited on orthogonally extending supports . In the moveable reflective layer is attached to supports at the corners only on tethers . In the moveable reflective layer is suspended from a deformable layer which may comprise a flexible metal. The deformable layer connects directly or indirectly to the substrate around the perimeter of the deformable layer . These connections are herein referred to as support posts. The embodiment illustrated in has support post plugs upon which the deformable layer rests. The movable reflective layer remains suspended over the cavity as in but the deformable layer does not form the support posts by filling holes between the deformable layer and the optical stack . Rather the support posts are formed of a planarization material which is used to form support post plugs . The embodiment illustrated in is based on the embodiment shown in but may also be adapted to work with any of the embodiments illustrated in as well as additional embodiments not shown. In the embodiment shown in an extra layer of metal or other conductive material has been used to form a bus structure . This allows signal routing along the back of the interferometric modulators eliminating a number of electrodes that may otherwise have had to be formed on the substrate .

In embodiments such as those shown in the interferometric modulators function as direct view devices in which images are viewed from the front side of the transparent substrate the side opposite to that upon which the modulator is arranged. In these embodiments the reflective layer optically shields some portions of the interferometric modulator on the side of the reflective layer opposite the substrate including the deformable layer and the bus structure . This allows the shielded areas to be configured and operated upon without negatively affecting the image quality. This separable modulator architecture allows the structural design and materials used for the electromechanical aspects and the optical aspects of the modulator to be selected and to function independently of each other. Moreover the embodiments shown in have additional benefits deriving from the decoupling of the optical properties of the reflective layer from its mechanical properties which are carried out by the deformable layer . This allows the structural design and materials used for the reflective layer to be optimized with respect to the optical properties and the structural design and materials used for the deformable layer to be optimized with respect to desired mechanical properties.

In one embodiment the driver controller provides data for driving the array to the array driver at a specified refresh rate which may be dependent on characteristics of the display array being addressed. For example STN displays are refreshed typically at 70 Hz or higher irrespective of the content update rate. In this case the driver controller writes the contents of the frame buffer to the individual pixels of the display to form a viewable image 70 times each second.

Generally this refresh rate is faster than the rate at which new content is received from the processor . The refresh rate of such a system is typically a compromise between a number of factors. For example displays such as cathode ray tubes CRT or non TFT based liquid crystal displays LCD typically do not have any type of pixel memory. Each pixel of the display can correctly display data written to it for only a brief period of time. In a CRT this period is typically dependent on the properties of phosphors making up the pixel and the sensitivity of the human visual system to flickering images. In a TFT LCD this period is typically dependent upon image relaxation due to migration of ionic impurities in the liquid crystal material. In an STN LCD the display refresh rate is typically greater than Hz70 Hz irrespective of the content update rate to maintain acceptable image quality. In a CRT the display refresh rate is typically equal to or greater than 60 Hz

In a bi stable display device such as interferometric modulators such periodic refreshing to maintain the current display state may not be necessary. However even for bi stable displays the display refresh rate may be selected to be faster than the maximum anticipated content update rate. For example consider a mobile phone device where 90 of the time the display content is that of a clock or timer changing at 1 Hz and 10 of the time the display is used to present video at 30 Hz. Unless a means of communicating the anticipated content update rate to the driver controller is included the driver controller generally refreshes the display continuously at the video rate of 30 Hz. This results in unnecessary power dissipation for 90 of the time as the display is refreshed at 30 Hz instead of 1 Hz. In some applications for example when the system is run on battery power power considerations can be important. Generally the higher the refresh rate the more power that is consumed by the display and the controller. In one embodiment the driver controller reduces power consumption by providing a display refresh rate that varies with the content update rate. In particular in one embodiment the display array includes interferometric modulators that maintain display state and thus the output of the display so long as a bias voltage is applied to the interferometric elements. Thus such a display array does not need to be periodically refreshed to maintain the displayed image. Embodiments can desirably leverage this property to provide electronic devices having lower power consumption by decreasing the refresh rate under selected conditions.

In the exemplary device the processor is electrically connected to the frame buffer via a bus . The bus may be any suitable type of data bus capable of communicating image data from the processor to the frame buffer . In one embodiment the bus includes a group of address lines that identify one or more addresses within the frame buffer and a group of data lines over which image data is written to the identified address. In one embodiment a single set of lines is time multiplexed between identifying an address and providing data to be written to that address. In one embodiment the bus includes a write enable line that determines whether an access to the frame buffer is a write or a read. A flag memory is connected to the bus and configured to be set to a particular state when the frame buffer receives data over the bus .

In operation the processor writes new display data to the frame buffer at a rate defined as the content update rate. The display controller polls the state of the flag memory at a polling rate that can be faster than essentially equal to or slower than the maximum refresh rate of the display controller or the display array . In one embodiment the display controller polls by reading data from the flag memory and comparing that data to a first state that indicates whether new data has been written to the frame buffer . In one embodiment the display controller performs one read compare of the flag memory for each polling event. In another embodiment at each polling event the display controller performs multiple read compare operations based on the flag memory for example by repeating a loop for a predetermined time or predetermined number of read compare operations. In one embodiment the display controller may poll after writing a frame of data. In one embodiment the display controller may perform the read compare operations at a predetermined rate such as 100 Hz until the frame buffer receives data. In one embodiment the controller repeatedly performs the read compare operations at a rate dependent upon availability of the display controller until the flag memory indicates that data has been received. In yet another embodiment the flag memory or frame buffer may be configured to generate an interrupt of the display controller when new data is received.

In one embodiment a timing circuit or oscillator provides a timing signal to a driver controller . The timing signal in concert with circuitry or software within the driver controller establishes the polling rate of the driver controller . At intervals defined by the polling rate and gated by the flag memory the driver controller reads data from the frame buffer and writes the data to the corresponding row and pixel of the display array via an output circuit such as the array driver . In one embodiment the driver controller defers updating the display until the next polling period if the frame buffer has not received data since the last update of the display. In one embodiment the driver controller is configured to receive polling rate information from the processor and configure its internal circuitry or software to function with the oscillator accordingly. In another embodiment the driver controller can operate using a fixed polling rate. In one embodiment the polling rate of the driver controller is set by an operating system of the processor . In one such embodiment the polling rate is provided to the operating system by an application program.

In one embodiment the flag memory is connected to the bus . In another embodiment the frame buffer includes the flag memory . In yet another embodiment the flag memory is provided in separate discrete components. The flag register may include a memory circuit or one or more registers configured to store a data value. In one embodiment when data is communicated over the bus to the frame buffer the data value of the flag memory is set to an indicative value whenever the write enable line of the bus is set to enable writes. In another embodiment the flag memory is set in response to the address or data signals themselves. In yet another embodiment the flag memory is set by a circuit in the frame buffer . The flag memory can be configured to be set to a first such indicative value e.g. 1 that indicates that data has been written to the frame buffer or a second indicative value e.g. 0 that indicates that no data has been written to the frame buffer subsequent to the last resetting of the flag memory to the second indicative value. Typically this resetting of the flag memory to the second indicative value will be coincident with an update of the display array . In one embodiment the flag memory is configured to store a set of values. For example in one embodiment the flag memory includes sufficient storage capacity to store one indicative value for a set of rows or columns. In one embodiment the flag memory includes sufficient storage capacity to store one indicative value for each row or column. In one embodiment the flag memory includes address decoding circuitry that receives the address of data off the bus when a write is enabled and sets the value of a corresponding location in the flag memory to indicate that a particular portion of the frame buffer corresponding to the address information has been updated.

In one embodiment the driver controller is configured to poll the flag memory for an update at a frequency that is higher than the maximum anticipated content update rate. If the driver controller reads the first indicative value from the flag memory i.e. the frame buffer has been updated the driver controller writes the second indicative value e.g. 0 to the register then starts the refresh cycle by writing the contents of the frame buffer to the display array . At the end of the update the driver controller again begins polling the flag memory at a predetermined frequency. If during its polling the driver controller reads the second value from the register the driver controller does not refresh the display array from the frame buffer . This enables dynamic adjustment of the display refresh rate based on the content update rate.

In one embodiment the flag memory can include an array of values each corresponding to a set of rows in the frame buffer . When any of the set of rows is updated the corresponding array value is set to the first value e.g. 1. In such an embodiment the driver controller checks the array of elements at a periodic rate. In one embodiment the driver controller checks the array of elements according to the scan order of rows of the display array . If one of the rows has been updated i.e. the corresponding array element contains the first value the driver controller resets the array element value and proceeds with the update of the corresponding rows of the display. If none of the rows corresponding to an array element value has been updated the driver controller skips the update to those rows.

It is to be recognized that other embodiments can include different levels of granularity with a corresponding increase or decrease in the size of the array of values in the flag memory . In one embodiment the array of values in the flag memory corresponds to a set of columns. In other embodiments the set of rows or columns includes only a single row or column i.e. an array element is provided by the flag memory for each row or column in the frame buffer. In yet another embodiment the flag memory includes an array element for each pixel in the display.

In one embodiment the frame buffer includes memory for storing the contents of the entire display array . In another embodiment the frame buffer receives block updates for the display and provides memory for storing just the block updates to the display and not the entire display. The memory to store the updates can be in the form of a queue a ring buffer or any other suitable buffer data structure such as are known in the art.

Moving to the block the driver controller waits for the next polling event which may be at the start of the next display cycle . In one embodiment the polling event includes a signal generated by the combined action of oscillator and the associated software or hardware within display controller . This polling event signal stimulates the driver controller to check the flag memory . Next at a a block the driver controller determines whether the flag memory has been set to a first state indicating that new data has been written to the frame buffer subsequent to the last update of the display array . If the flag memory indicates that no new data has been written to the display the method returns to the block and waits for the next display time. If the flag memory indicates that new data has been written to the display subsequent to the last display update the method proceeds to a block in which the driver controller clears e.g. sets the memory to a second state that indicates that data has not been received since the last update the flag memory . Next at block the driver controller provides the frame buffer data to the display via the array driver .

Thus the display array is desirably updated at a rate that is dependent upon the content of the display data e.g. the frequency of change of that content and not merely at a fixed rate that is set by the maximum anticipated content update rate. This greatly reduces the power consumption of the display panel and the controller.

In one embodiment a lower or higher display polling rate can be set by software running on the processor. This is communicated to the driver controller via the MPU interface. Commonly used MPU interface standards may be used to support communication between the MPU and the driver controller . For example video player software can set the display polling rate higher when playing video then return the display polling rate to its previous setting when complete. Game software can vary the display polling rate depending on the state of the game. Thus the display polling rate can be varied to minimize power consumption. In such embodiments the software can be aware that the display can have its polling rate varied in this manner. In one embodiment an operating system in the electronic device connected to the display array provides an application programming interface API for setting the polling rate. In one embodiment having the API the polling rate for a selection portion of the display array can be set to a value that is different from the polling rate of other portions of the display. In other embodiments the operating system of the processor can set a polling rate based on the type of software running operating system services that the software uses or other heuristic data to select a polling rate. In one embodiment a software module can be configured to monitor updates to the display data and adaptively select a display rate based on the frequency of updates. Thus the polling rate can be desirably matched to the rate of change of the display data and due to the nature of the interferometric display e.g. the ability to maintain a bi stable state with application of a low voltage it is possible to maintain the image without need for frequent refreshing of the display to maintain an unchanged image.

Typically a driver controller operates in conformance with industry defined standards so that the processor can be used with a variety of different display technologies such as LCD from different manufacturers. Redesign of a processor and the controller MPU interface to a new display interface is typically a resource intensive and expensive change. The use of a flag memory enables the use of a standard MPU interface between the processor and the frame buffer without any modifications to the processor. Thus in one embodiment the bus conforms to a specified interface standard such as an industry standard. In another embodiment the bus is configured to permit the driver controller and the display array to emulate the display interface of LCD displays. Thus an existing interferometric or other bi stable display can be fabricated using the driver controller and the display array without needing to change the design of other system components such as the processor . The use of the method by the driver controller can thus also be transparent to the processor and software executed by the processor so that no changes need be made to the processor or software executing on the processor in order to support the varying polling rate.

In one embodiment the processor serially writes image data to a shift register corresponding to a portion of the display array for example a shift register may represent only the memory required for a single row of the display array . In one embodiment the processor provides the data asynchronously over the bus . For example the processor may provide the image data to the shift register as the processor generates the image data. When the shift register fills the shift register outputs the display data to the display array via the array driver which strobes the corresponding row or rows while converting the image data to column voltage signals.

In view of the above one will appreciate that embodiments of the invention overcome many of the problems in the art by providing a driver controller that dynamically adjusts the display refresh rate to match the content update rate and consuming lower power when static images and video is being displayed.

While the above detailed description has shown described and pointed out novel features of the invention as applied to various embodiments it will be understood that various omissions substitutions and changes in the form and details of the device or process illustrated may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit of the invention. As will be recognized the present invention may be embodied within a form that does not provide all of the features and benefits set forth herein as some features may be used or practiced separately from others.

