---

title: Multi-lineage progenitor cells
abstract: Fetal blood multi-lineage progenitor cells that are capable of a wide spectrum of transdifferentiation are described.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07622108&OS=07622108&RS=07622108
owner: BioE, Inc.
number: 07622108
owner_city: St. Paul
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050822
---
This application is a continuation in part and claims benefit under 35 U.S.C. 120 of U.S. application Ser. No. 11 110 299 filed Apr. 20 2005 which claims benefit under 35 U.S.C. 119 e of U.S. Application No. 60 564 687 filed on Apr. 23 2004 both of which are incorporated by reference herein in their entirety.

The invention relates to multi lineage progenitor cells MLPC from human blood and more particularly to MLPC with the potential to differentiate into multiple tissue lineages and use of such cells for regenerative therapies.

Progenitor cells capable of hematopoietic reconstitution after myeloablative therapy have been identified in a number of sources including the bone marrow umbilical cord and placental blood and in the peripheral blood of subjects treated with stem cell mobilizing doses of granulocyte colony stimulation factor. These cells often referred to as hematopoietic stem cells HSC are identified by the presence of cell surface glycoproteins such as CD34 and CD133. HSC represent a very small percentage of the total population of cells given as part of a bone marrow transplant and are considered to be the life saving therapeutic portion of this treatment responsible for the restoration of the blood forming capacity of patients given myeloablative doses of chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Stem cell therapies via bone marrow transplantation have become a standard treatment for a number of intractable leukemias and genetic blood disorders.

Recent studies have suggested the presence of a more primitive cell population in the bone marrow capable of self renewal as well as differentiation into a number of different tissue types other than blood cells. These multi potential cells were discovered as a minor component in the CD34 plastic adherent cell population of adult bone marrow and are variously referred to as mesenchymal stem cells MSC Pittenger et al. 284 143 147 1999 or multi potent adult progenitor cells MAPC cells Furcht L. T. et al. U.S. patent publication 20040107453 A1 . MSC cells do not have a single specific identifying marker but have been shown to be positive for a number of markers including CD29 CD90 CD105 and CD73 and negative for other markers including CD14 CD3 and CD34. Various groups have reported to differentiate MSC cells into myocytes neurons pancreatic beta cells liver cells bone cells and connective tissue. Another group Wernet et al. U.S. patent publication 20020164794 A1 has described an unrestricted somatic stem cell USSC with multi potential capacity that is derived from a CD45 CD34 population within cord blood.

The invention is based on the identification of a rare undifferentiated cell population from human fetal blood that is capable of self renewal and has the potential to differentiate into cells representing each of the three embryonic germ layers. These fetal blood derived cells are referred to as multi lineage progenitor cells MLPC . As described herein fetal blood MLPC are distinguished from bone marrow derived MSC HSC and USSC on the basis of their immunophenotypic characteristics gene expression profile morphology and distinct growth pattern. The invention provides methods for developing monotypic clonal cell lines from individual cells. The invention also provides methods for cryopreserving MLPC e.g. for cord blood banking and methods of using MLPC in regenerative therapies.

In one aspect the invention features a purified population of human fetal blood e.g. cord blood MLPC wherein the MLPC are positive for CD9 and CD45. The MLPC can display a leukocyte morphology. The MLPC can be further positive for SSEA 4 or CD34 as well as CD133 CD41 CD44 CD105 CD29 CD73 CD90 stem cell factor SSEA 3 and CD13. The MLPC can be negative for CD15 CD38 glycophorin A CD2 CD3 CD8 CD19 CD20 CD22 CD5 CD7 CD10 CD14 CD4 HLA DR CD16 CD33 and CD61. The MLPC can attain a fibroblast like morphology over time in culture. The MLPC also can adhere to a plastic surface when cultured. The MLPC are capable of differentiating into cells from all three embryonic germ layers including for example cells having an osteocytic phenotype cells having an adipocytic phenotype cells having a neural stem cell phenotype cells having a myocytic phenotype cells having an endothelial phenotype cells having a hepatocytic phenotype and cells having a pancreatic phenotype. The MLPC can include an exogenous nucleic acid e.g. an exogenous nucleic acid encoding a polypeptide .

In another aspect the invention features a purified population of human fetal blood e.g. cord blood MLPC wherein the MLPC are positive for CD9 negative for CD45 negative for CD34 and negative for SSEA 4. The MLPC can display a fibroblast morphology. The MLPC can be further positive for CD13 CD29 CD44 CD73 CD90 and CD105 and can be further negative for CD2 CD3 CD4 CD5 CD7 CD8 CD10 CD14 CD15 CD16 CD19 CD20 CD22 CD33 CD36 CD38 CD41 CD61 CD62E CD133 glycophorin A stem cell factor SSEA 3 and HLA DR. The MLPC can adhere to a plastic surface when cultured. The MLPC are capable of differentiating into cells from all three embryonic germ layers including for example cells having an osteocytic phenotype cells having an adipocytic phenotype cells having a neural stem cell phenotype cells having a myocytic phenotype cells having an endothelial phenotype cells having a hepatocytic phenotype and cells having a pancreatic phenotype. The MLPC can include an exogenous nucleic acid e.g. an exogenous nucleic acid encoding a polypeptide .

The invention also features a clonal line of human fetal blood e.g. cord blood MLPC wherein the MLPC are positive for CD9 negative for CD45 negative for CD34 and negative for SSEA 4. The MLPC can display a fibroblast morphology. The MLPC can be further positive for CD13 CD29 CD44 CD73 CD90 and CD105 and can be further negative for CD2 CD3 CD4 CD5 CD7 CD8 CD10 CD 14 CD15 CD16 CD19 CD20 CD22 CD33 CD36 CD38 CD41 CD61 CD62E CD133 glycophorin A stem cell factor SSEA 3 and HLA DR. The MLPC can adhere to a plastic surface when cultured. The MLPC are capable of differentiating into cells from all three embryonic germ layers including for example cells having an osteocytic phenotype cells having an adipocytic phenotype cells having a neural stem cell phenotype cells having a myocytic phenotype cells having an endothelial phenotype cells having a hepatocytic phenotype and cells having a pancreatic phenotype. The MLPC can include an exogenous nucleic acid e.g. an exogenous nucleic acid encoding a polypeptide . In some embodiments the clonal line has undergone at least 5 doublings e.g. at least 8 at least 10 at least 15 or at least 25 doublings in culture.

The invention also features a method for purifying a population of MLPC from human fetal blood. The method includes contacting a human fetal blood sample e.g. cord blood with a composition that includes dextran anti glycophorin A antibody anti CD15 antibody and anti CD9 antibody allowing the sample to partition into an agglutinate and a supernatant phase recovering cells from the supernatant phase and purifying MLPC from the recovered cells by adherence to a solid substrate e.g. a plastic substrate wherein the MLPC are positive for CD9 and positive for CD45. The MLPC can be further positive for CD34 CD133 CD41 CD44 CD105 CD29 CD73 CD90 stem cell factor SSEA 3 SSEA 4 and CD13. The MLPC can be further negative for CD15 CD38 glycophorin A CD2 CD3 CD8 CD19 CD20 CD22 CD5 CD7 CD10 CD14 CD4 HLA DR CD16 CD33 and CD61. The method further can include testing the MLPC for CD9 or testing for CD9 CD29 CD45 CD73 and CD90.

The method further can include culturing the MLPC such that the MLPC obtain a fibroblast morphology wherein the MLPC after obtaining the fibroblast morphology are positive for CD9 negative for CD45 negative for CD34 and negative for SSEA 4. The MLPC after obtaining the fibroblast morphology can be further positive for CD13 CD29 CD44 CD73 CD90 and CD105. The MLPC after obtaining the fibroblast morphology can be further negative for CD2 CD3 CD4 CD5 CD7 CD8 CD10 CD14 CD15 CD16 CD19 CD20 CD22 CD33 CD36 CD38 CD41 CD61 CD62E CD133 glycophorin A stem cell factor SSEA 3 and HLA DR. The method further can include testing the MLPC for CD9 or testing for CD9 CD29 CD45 CD73 and CD90.

The invention also features a purified population of MLPC or undifferentiated progeny thereof wherein the MLPC have enhanced expression of mRNA for CXCR4 FLT3 and CD133 relative to a population of MSC. The MLPC further can have an enhanced expression of mRNA for TERT KIT and POU5F or enhanced expression of mRNA for CD34 relative to the population of MSC. The MLPC further can have an enhanced expression of mRNA for CD24 CD44 CD45 CD58 CD68 CD33 CD37 and CD38 relative to the population of MSC or further have an enhanced expression of the mRNA for ICAM2 ITGAX TFRC KIT IL6R IL7R ITGAM FLT3 PDGFRB SELE SELL TFRC ITGAL ITGB2 PECAM1 ITGA2B ITGA3 ITGA4 ITGA6 and ICAM1 relative to the population of MSC. The MLPC can be obtained from cord blood. The MLPC can be positive for CD9 negative for CD45 negative for CD34 and negative for SSEA 4. The MLPC can be capable of differentiating into cells from all three embryonic germ layers including for example cells having an osteocytic phenotype cells having an adipocytic phenotype cells having a neural stem cell phenotype cells having a myocytic phenotype cells having an endothelial phenotype cells having a hepatocytic phenotype and cells having a pancreatic phenotype. The MLPC can include an exogenous nucleic acid e.g. an exogenous nucleic acid encoding a polypeptide.

In another aspect the invention features a clonal line of human fetal blood MLPC and undifferentiated progeny thereof wherein the MLPC have enhanced expression of mRNA for CXCR4 FLT3 and CD133 relative to that of a population of MSC. The MLPC further can have an enhanced expression of the mRNA for TERT KIT and POU5F or enhanced expression of the mRNA for CD34 relative to the population of MSC. The MLPC further can have an enhanced expression of the mRNA for CD24 CD44 CD45 CD58 CD68 CD33 CD37 and CD38 relative to the population of MSC or further have an enhanced expression of mRNA for ICAM2 ITGAX TFRC KIT IL6R IL7R ITGAM FLT3 PDGFRB SELE SELL TFRC ITGAL ITGB2 PECAM1 ITGA2B ITGA3 ITGA4 ITGA6 and ICAM1 relative to the population of MSC. The MLPC can be positive for CD9 negative for CD45 negative for CD34 and negative for SSEA 4 and can be obtained from cord blood. The MLPC can include an exogenous nucleic acid e.g. a nucleic acid encoding a polypeptide. In some embodiments the clonal line has undergone at least 5 doublings e.g. at least 8 at least 10 at least 15 or at least 25 doublings in culture.

The invention also features differentiated progeny of a purified population of MLPC or of a clonal line of MLPC. The progeny can have an osteocytic phenotype an adipocytic phenotype a neural stem cell phenotype a myocytic phenotype an endothelial phenotype a hepatocytic phenotype or a pancreatic phenotype.

In another aspect the invention features a composition that includes a purified population of MLPC or a clonal line of MLPC and a culture medium. The composition further can include a cryopreservative. In one embodiment the cryopreservative is dimethylsulfoxide DMSO e.g. 1 to 10 DMSO . In another embodiment the cryopreservative is fetal bovine serum human serum or human serum albumin in combination with one or more of the following DMSO trehalose and dextran. For example the cryopreservative can be DMSO and trehalose or fetal bovine serum and DMSO.

In yet an another aspect the invention features an article of manufacture that includes a purified population of MLPC or a clonal line of MLPC. The purified population of MLPC or the clonal line can be housed within a container e.g. a vial or a bag . The container further can include a cryopreservative. The article of manufacture further can include a label indicating that the MLPC have enhanced expression of mRNA for CXCR4 FLT3 and CD133 relative to that of a population of MSC. In some embodiments the article of manufacture further includes a reagent for characterizing the population of MLPC or the clonal MLPC line. The reagent can be selected from the group consisting of a nucleic acid probe for detecting expression of CXCR4 a nucleic acid probe for detecting expression of FLT3 a nucleic acid probe for detecting expression of CD133 a nucleic acid probe for detecting expression of CD34 a nucleic acid probe for detecting expression of TERT a nucleic acid probe for detecting expression of KIT a nucleic acid probe for detecting expression of POU5F an antibody having specific binding affinity for CD9 an antibody having specific binding affinity for CD34 an antibody having specific binding affinity for CD45 and an antibody having specific binding affinity for SSEA 4.

The invention also features a method for purifying a population of MLPC from human fetal blood. The method includes contacting a human fetal blood sample e.g. cord blood with a composition that includes dextran anti glycophorin A antibody anti CD15 antibody and anti CD9 antibody allowing the sample to partition into an agglutinate and a supernatant phase recovering cells from the supernatant phase purifying MLPC from the recovered cells by adherence to a solid substrate e.g. a plastic substrate and culturing the MLPC such that the MLPC obtain a fibroblast morphology wherein the MLPC after obtaining the fibroblast morphology have enhanced expression of mRNA for CXCR4 FLT3 and CD133 relative to that of a population of MSC. The MLPC further can have an enhanced expression of mRNA for TERT KIT and POU5F relative to the population of MSC. In some embodiments the method further includes testing the MLPC for enhanced expression of mRNA for CXCR4 FLT3 and CD133 relative to the population of MSC. The method also can include testing for CD9 and or testing for CD29 CD45 CD73 and CD90.

In another aspect the invention features a method for cryopreserving MLPC. The method includes contacting a purified population of MLPC or clonal line of MLPC with a cryopreservative and freezing the purified population of MLPC or the clonal line. In one embodiment the cryopreservative is DMSO e.g. 1 to 10 DMSO . In another embodiment the cryopreservative is fetal bovine serum human serum or human serum albumin in combination with one or more of the following DMSO trehalose and dextran. For example the cryopreservative can be DMSO and trehalose or fetal bovine serum and DMSO. The purified population of MLPC or the clonal line can be suspended in the cryopreservative at a concentration between 1 10and 5 10cells mL. The purified population or clonal line can be frozen at a controlled rate e.g. the freezing rate is controlled electronically or by placement in an ethanol bath in the vapor phase of a liquid nitrogen cryogenic storage tank.

In yet another aspect the invention features a method of producing a population of differentiated cells. The method includes culturing a purified population of MLPC or a clonal line of MLPC with an agent effective to induce differentiation of the MLPC. The agent can include insulin glutamine dexamethasone indomethacin and 3 isobutyl 1 methyl xanthine dexamethasone glutamine ascorbate and glycerophosphate epithelial growth factor insulin fetuin dexamethasone and fibroblast growth factor basic fibroblast growth factor basic epidermal growth factor NSF 1 and retinoic acid heparin bovine brain extract epithelial growth factor and hydrocortisone or ascorbic acid hydrocortisone transferrin insulin epidermal growth factor hepatocyte growth factor fibroblast growth factor basic fibroblast growth factor 4 and stem cell factor.

The invention also features a method of characterizing a population of MLPC. The method includes providing a purified population of MLPC and assessing expression in the population of MLPC of one or more mRNAs selected from the group consisting of CXCR4 FLT3 CD133 ICAM2 ITGAX TFRC KIT IL6R IL7R ITGAM FLT3 PDGFRB SELE SELL TFRC ITGAL ITGB2 PECAM1 ITGA2B ITGA3 ITGA4 ITGA6 ICAM1 CD24 CD34 CD44 CD45 CD58 CD68 CD33 CD37 CD38 TERT KIT and POUF5. In some embodiments expression of mRNA for CXCR4 FLT3 and CD133 is assessed. In other embodiments expression of mRNA for TERT KIT and POU5F is assessed. In still other embodiments expression of mRNA for CD34 is assessed.

In another aspect the invention features a method for characterizing the immaturity of a population of MLPC. The method includes providing a purified population of MLPC and assessing expression of mRNA for CXCR4 FLT3 and CD133 in the population of MLPC wherein enhanced expression of CXCR4 FLT3 and CD133 relative to that of a population of MSC is indicative of an immature phenotype.

The invention also features a method of making a clonal line of MLPC. The method includes providing a population of MLPC culturing a single MLPC in a culture vessel lacking other cells until a plurality of progeny are produced and culturing the progeny to obtain the clonal line.

Unless otherwise defined all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which this invention belongs. Although methods and materials similar or equivalent to those described herein can be used to practice the invention suitable methods and materials are described below. All publications patent applications patents and other references mentioned herein are incorporated by reference in their entirety. In case of conflict the present specification including definitions will control. In addition the materials methods and examples are illustrative only and not intended to be limiting.

Other features and advantages of the invention will be apparent from the following detailed description and from the claims.

In general the invention provides purified populations of MLPC from human fetal blood e.g. umbilical cord blood cord blood placental blood or the blood from a fetus and clonal MLPC lines derived from individual MLPC. Fetal blood provides a source of cells that is more immature than adult bone marrow and has a higher percentage of cells bearing immature cell surface markers. Consequently there may be advantages in the expansion and differentiation capacity of the progenitor cells from fetal blood. As described herein MLPC have immunophenotypic characteristics and a gene expression profile distinct from bone marrow derived MSC s bone marrow derived HSC and umbilical cord blood derived HSC and USSC. The cells described herein have the capacity to self renew and differentiate into diverse tissue types similar to the bone marrow derived MSC and MAPC cells. MLPC can be used to develop cellular therapies and establish cryopreserved cell banks for future regenerative medicine procedures. MLPC also can be modified such that the cells can produce one or more polypeptides or other therapeutic compounds of interest.

MLPC can be isolated from fetal blood e.g. cord blood using the negative selection process and cell separation compositions disclosed in U.S. Patent Publication No. 2003 0027233 A1. Such cell compositions can include dextran and one or more antibodies against i.e. that have binding affinity for a cell surface antigen.

Dextran is a polysaccharide consisting of glucose units linked predominantly in alpha 1 to 6 mode. Dextran can cause stacking of erythrocytes i.e. rouleau formation and thereby facilitate the removal of erythroid cells from solution. Antibodies against cell surface antigens can facilitate the removal of blood cells from solution via homotypic agglutination i.e. agglutination of cells of the same cell type and or heterotypic agglutination i.e. agglutination of cells of different cell types .

For example a cell separation composition can include dextran and antibodies against glycophorin A CD15 and CD9. Cell separation compositions also can contain antibodies against other blood cell surface antigens including for example CD2 CD3 CD4 CD8 CD72 CD16 CD41a HLA Class I HLA DR CD29 CD11a CD11b CD11c CD19 CD20 CD23 CD39 CD40 CD43 CD44 CDw49d CD53 CD54 CD62L CD63 CD66 CD67 CD81 CD82 CD99 CD100 Leu 13 TPA 1 surface Ig and combinations thereof. Thus cell separation compositions can be formulated to selectively agglutinate particular types of blood cells.

Typically the concentration of anti glycophorin A antibodies in a cell separation composition ranges from 0.1 to 15 mg L e.g. 0.1 to 10 mg L 1 to 5 mg L or 1 mg L . Anti glycophorin A antibodies can facilitate the removal of red cells from solution by at least two mechanisms. First anti glycophorin A antibodies can cause homotypic agglutination of erythrocytes since glycophorin A is the major surface glycoprotein on erythrocytes. In addition anti glycophorin A antibodies also can stabilize dextran mediated rouleau formation. Exemplary monoclonal anti glycophorin A antibodies include without limitation 107FMN Murine IgG1 isotype YTH89.1 Rat IgG2b isotype 2.2.2.E7 Murine IgM isotype BioE St. Paul Minn. and E4 Murine IgM isotype . See e.g. M. Vanderlaan et al. 20 1353 1983 Telen M. J. and Bolk T. A. 27 309 1987 and Outram S. et al. 12 651 1988 .

The concentration of anti CD 15 antibodies in a cell separation composition can range from 0.1 to 15 mg L e.g. 0.1 to 10 1 to 5 or 1 mg L . Anti CD15 antibodies can cause homotypic agglutination of granulocytes by crosslinking CD15 molecules that are present on the surface of granulocytes. Anti CD15 antibodies also can cause homotypic and heterotypic agglutination of granulocytes with monocytes NK cells and B cells by stimulating expression of adhesion molecules e.g. L selectin and beta 2 integrin on the surface of granulocytes that interact with adhesion molecules on monocytes NK cells and B cells. Heterotypic agglutination of these cell types can facilitate the removal of these cells from solution along with red cell components. Exemplary monoclonal anti CD15 antibodies include without limitation AHN1.1 Murine IgM isotype FMC 10 Murine IgM isotype BU 28 Murine IgM isotype MEM 157 Murine IgM isotype MEM 158 Murine IgM isotype 324.3.B9 Murine IgM isotype BioE St. Paul Minn. and MEM 167 Murine IgM isotype . See e.g. 1989 1984 1995 Solter D. et al. 75 5565 1978 Kannagi R. et al. 257 14865 1982 Magnani J. L. et al. 233 501 1984 Eggens I. et al. 264 9476 1989 .

The concentration of anti CD9 antibodies in a cell separation composition can range from 0.1 to 15 0.1 to 10 1 to 5 or 1 mg L. Anti CD9 antibodies can cause homotypic agglutination of platelets. Anti CD9 antibodies also can cause heterotypic agglutination of granulocytes and monocytes via platelets that have adhered to the surface of granulocytes and monocytes. CD9 antibodies can promote the expression of platelet p selectin CD62P CD41 61 CD31 and CD36 which facilitates the binding of platelets to leukocyte cell surfaces. Thus anti CD9 antibodies can promote multiple cell cell linkages and thereby facilitate agglutination and removal from solution. Exemplary monoclonal anti CD9 antibodies include without limitation MEM 61 Murine IgG1 isotype MEM 62 Murine IgG1 isotype MEM 192 Murine IgM isotype FMC 8 Murine IgG2a isotype SN4 Murine IgG1 isotype 8.10.E7 Murine IgM isotype BioE St. Paul Minn. and BU 16 Murine IgG2a isotype . See e.g. 1995 1984 Von dem Bourne A. E. G. Kr. and Moderman P. N. 1989 In ed. W. Knapp et al pp. 989 92 Oxford University Press Oxford Jennings L. K. et al. In ed. S. F. Schlossmann et al. pp. 1249 51 Oxford University Press Oxford 1995 Lanza F. et al. 266 10638 1991 Wright et al. 15 588 1994 Rubinstein E. et al. 21 10 1995 .

In some embodiments a cell separation composition contains antibodies against CD41 which can selectively agglutinate platelets. In some embodiments a cell separation composition contains antibodies against CD3 which can selectively agglutinate T cells. In some embodiments a cell separation composition contains antibodies against CD2 which can selectively agglutinate T cells and NK cells. In some embodiments a cell separation composition contains antibodies against CD72 which can selectively agglutinate B cells. In some embodiments a cell separation composition contains antibodies against CD16 which can selectively agglutinate NK cells and neutrophilic granulocytes. The concentration of each of these antibodies can range from 0.01 to 15 mg L. Exemplary anti CD41 antibodies include without limitation PLT 1 Murine IgM isotype CN19 Murine IgGisotype and 8.7.C3 Murine IgG1 isotype . Non limiting examples of anti CD3 antibodies include OKT3 Murine IgG HIT3a Murine IgG2a isotype SK7 Murine IgG and BC3 Murine IgG . Non limiting examples of anti CD2 antibodies include 7A9 Murine IgM isotype T11 Murine IgGisotype and Leu5b Murine IgGIsotype . Non limiting examples of anti CD72 antibodies include BU 40 Murine IgGisotype and BU 41 Murine IgGisotype . Non limiting examples of anti CD16 antibodies include 3G8 Murine IgG .

As mentioned above cell separation compositions can be formulated to selectively agglutinate particular blood cells. As an example a cell separation composition containing antibodies against glycophorin A CD15 and CD9 can facilitate the agglutination of erythrocytes granulocytes NK cells B cells and platelets. T cells NK cells and rare precursor cells such as MLPC then can be recovered from solution. If the formulation also contained an antibody against CD3 T cells also could be agglutinated and NK cells and rare precursors such as MLPC could be recovered from solution.

Cell separation compositions can contain antibodies against surface antigens of other types of cells e.g. cell surface proteins of tumor cells . Those of skill in the art can use routine methods to prepare antibodies against cell surface antigens of blood and other cells from humans and other mammals including for example non human primates rodents e.g. mice rats hamsters rabbits and guinea pigs swine bovines and equines.

Typically antibodies used in the composition are monoclonal antibodies which are homogeneous populations of antibodies to a particular epitope contained within an antigen. Suitable monoclonal antibodies are commercially available or can be prepared using standard hybridoma technology. In particular monoclonal antibodies can be obtained by techniques that provide for the production of antibody molecules by continuous cell lines in culture including the technique described by Kohler G. et al. 1975 256 495 the human B cell hybridoma technique Kosbor et al. 4 72 1983 Cole et al. 80 2026 1983 and the EBV hybridoma technique Cole et al. Monoclonal Antibodies and Cancer Therapy Alan R. Liss Inc. pp. 77 96 1983 .

Antibodies can be of any immunoglobulin class including IgG IgM IgE IgA IgD and any subclass thereof. Antibodies of the IgG and IgM isotypes are particularly useful in cell separation compositions of the invention. Pentameric IgM antibodies contain more antigen binding sites than IgG antibodies and can in some cases e.g. anti glycophorin A and anti CD15 be particularly useful for cell separation reagents. In other cases e.g. anti CD9 antibodies antibodies of the IgG isotype are particularly useful for stimulating homotypic and or heterotypic agglutination.

Antibodies against cell surface antigens can be provided in liquid phase i.e. soluble . Liquid phase antibodies typically are provided in a cell separation composition at a concentration between about 0.1 and about 15 mg l e.g. between 0.25 to 10 0.25 to 1 0.5 to 2 1 to 2 4 to 8 5 to 10 mg l .

Antibodies against cell surface antigens also can be provided in association with a solid phase i.e. substrate bound . Antibodies against different cell surface antigens can be covalently linked to a solid phase to promote crosslinking of cell surface molecules and activation of cell surface adhesion molecules. The use of substrate bound antibodies can facilitate cell separation e.g. by virtue of the mass that the particles contribute to agglutinated cells or by virtue of properties useful for purification .

In some embodiments the solid phase with which a substrate bound antibody is associated is particulate. In some embodiments an antibody is bound to a latex microparticle such as a paramagnetic bead e.g. via biotin avidin linkage covalent linkage to COO groups on polystyrene beads or covalent linkage to NHgroups on modified beads . In some embodiments an antibody is bound to an acid etched glass particle e.g. via biotin avidin linkage . In some embodiments an antibody is bound to an aggregated polypeptide such as aggregated bovine serum albumin e.g. via biotin avidin linkage or covalent linkage to polypeptide COO groups or NHgroups . In some embodiments an antibody is covalently linked to a polysaccharide such as high molecular weight e.g. 1 000 000 M dextran sulfate. In some embodiments biotinylated antibodies are linked to avidin particles creating tetrameric complexes having four antibody molecules per avidin molecule. In some embodiments antibodies are bound to biotinylated agarose gel particles One Cell Systems Cambridge Mass. U.S.A. via biotin avidin biotinylated antibody linkages. Such particles typically are about 300 500 microns in size and can be created in a sonicating water bath or in a rapidly mixed water bath.

Cell substrate particles i.e. particles including cells and substrate bound antibodies can sediment from solution as an agglutinate. Cell substrate particles also can be removed from solution by for example an applied magnetic field as when the particle is a paramagnetic bead. Substrate bound antibodies typically are provided in a cell separation composition at a concentration between about 0.1 and about 50.0 10particles l e.g. between 0.25 to 10.0 10 1 to 20.0 10 2 to 10.0 10 0.5 to 2 10 2 to 5 10 5 to 10 10 and 10 to 30 10particles l where particles refers to solid phase particles having antibodies bound thereto.

Cell separation compositions also can contain divalent cations e.g. Caand Mg . Divalent cations can be provided for example by a balanced salt solution e.g. Hank s balanced salt solution . Caions reportedly are important for selectin mediated and integrin mediated cell cell adherence.

Cell separation compositions also can contain an anticoagulant such as heparin. Heparin can prevent clotting and non specific cell loss associated with clotting in a high calcium environment. Heparin also promotes platelet clumping. Clumped platelets can adhere to granulocytes and monocytes and thereby enhance heterotypic agglutination more so than single platelets. Heparin can be supplied as a heparin salt e.g. sodium heparin lithium heparin or potassium heparin .

MLPC can be purified from human fetal blood using a cell separation composition described above. As used herein purified means that at least 90 e.g. 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 or 99 of the cells within the population are MLPC. As used herein MLPC refers to fetal blood cells that are positive for CD9 and typically display a constellation of other markers such as CD13 CD73 and CD105. MLPC population refers to the primary culture obtained from the human fetal blood and uncloned progeny thereof. Clonal line refers to a cell line derived from a single cell. As used herein a cell line is a population of cells able to renew themselves for extended periods of times in vitro under appropriate culture conditions. The term line however does not indicate that the cells can be propagated indefinitely. Rather clonal lines described herein typically can undergo 75 to 100 doublings before senescing.

Typically an MLPC population is obtained by contacting a fetal blood sample with a cell separation composition described above and allowing the sample to partition into an agglutinate and a supernatant phase. For example the sample can be allowed to settle by gravity or by centrifugation. Preferably MLPC are purified from an umbilical cord blood sample that is less than 48 hours old e.g. less than 24 12 8 or 4 hours post partum . After agglutination unagglutinated cells can be recovered from the supernatant phase. For example cells in the supernatant phase can be recovered by centrifugation then washed with a saline solution and plated on a solid substrate e.g. a plastic culture device such as a chambered slide or culture flask using a standard growth medium with 10 serum e.g. DMEM with 10 serum RPMI 1640 with 10 serum or mesenchymal stem cell growth medium with 10 serum catalog PT 3001 Cambrex Walkersville Md. . MLPC attach to the surface of the solid substrate while other cells including T cells NK cells and CD34 HSC do not and can be removed with washing. The MLPC change from the leukocyte morphology to the fibroblastic morphology between 3 days and 2 weeks post initiation of culture after which the cells enter logarithmic growth phase and will continue growing logarithmically as long as cultures are maintained at cell concentrations of less than about 1.5 10cells cm.

Clonal lines can be established by harvesting the MLPC then diluting and re plating the cells on a multi well culture plate such that a single cell can be found in a well. Cells can be transferred to a larger culture flask after a concentration of 1 to 5 10cells 75 cmis reached. Cells can be maintained at a concentration between 1 10and 5 10cells 75 cmfor logarithmic growth.

MLPC can be assessed for viability proliferation potential and longevity using techniques known in the art. For example viability can be assessed using trypan blue exclusion assays fluorescein diacetate uptake assays or propidium iodide uptake assays. Proliferation can be assessed using thymidine uptake assays or MTT cell proliferation assays. Longevity can be assessed by determining the maximum number of population doublings of an extended culture.

MLPC can be immunophenotypically characterized using known techniques. For example the cell culture medium can be removed from the tissue culture device and the adherent cells washed with a balanced salt solution e.g. Hank s balanced salt solution and bovine serum albumin e.g. 2 BSA . Cells can be incubated with an antibody having binding affinity for a cell surface antigen such as CD9 CD45 CD13 C73 CD105 or any other cell surface antigen. The antibody can be detectably labeled e.g. fluorescently or enzymatically or can be detected using a secondary antibody that is detectably labeled. Alternatively the cell surface antigens on MLPC can be characterized using flow cytometry and fluorescently labeled antibodies.

As described herein the cell surface antigens present on MLPC can vary depending on the stage of culture. Early in culture when MLPC display a leukocyte like morphology MLPC are positive for CD9 and CD45 SSEA 4 stage specific embryonic antigen 4 CD34 as well as CD13 CD29 CD44 CD73 CD90 CD105 stem cell factor STRO 1 a cell surface antigen expressed by bone marrow stromal cells SSEA 3 galactosylgloboside and CD133 and are negative for CD15 CD38 glycophorin A CD235a and lineage markers CD2 CD3 CD4 CD5 CD7 CD8 CD10 CD11b CD16 CD19 CD20 CD21 CD22 CD33 CD36 CD41 CD61 CD62E CD72 HLA DR and CD102. After transition to the fibroblastic morphology MLPC remain positive for CD9 CD13 CD29 CD73 CD90 and CD105 and become negative for CD34 CD41 CD45 stem cell factor STRO 1 SSEA 3 SSEA 4 and CD133. At all times during in vitro culture the undifferentiated MLPC are negative for CD15 CD38 glycophorin A CD235a and lineage markers CD2 CD3 CD4 CD5 CD7 CD8 CD10 CD11b CD16 CD19 CD20 CD21 CD22 CD33 CD36 CD41 CD61 CD62E CD72 HLA DR and CD102.

Bone marrow derived MSC and MAPC as well as the cord blood derived USSC have been described as being derived from a CD45 CD34 cell population. MLPC are distinguished from those cell types as being a CD45 CD34 derived cell. Additionally the presence and persistence of CD9 on the fetal blood derived MLPC at all stages of maturation further distinguishes MLPC from MSC and MAPC which do not possess CD9 as a marker. CD9 is expressed as a marker on human embryonic stem cells. MLPC which share the hematopoietic markers CD45 CD133 CD90 and CD34 during their leukocyte morphology phase can be distinguished from HSC by their obligate plastic adherence and the presence of mesenchymal associated markers CD105 CD29 CD73 CD13 and embryonic associated markers SSEA 3 and SSEA 4. Additionally using currently available technology HSC are unable to be cultured in vitro without further differentiation while MLPC can be expanded for many generations without differentiation. MLPC also differ from MSC and USSC by their more gracile in vitro culture appearance thread like cytoplasmic projections and their preference for low density culture conditions for optimal growth.

MLPC also can be characterized based on the expression of one or more genes. Methods for detecting gene expression can include for example measuring levels of the mRNA or protein of interest e.g. by Northern blotting reverse transcriptase RT PCR microarray analysis Western blotting ELISA or immunohistochemical staining . As described in Example 12 the gene expression profile of MLPC is significantly different than other cell types. Microarray analysis indicated that the MLPC lines have an immature phenotype that differs from the phenotypes of for example CD133 HSC lineage negative cells Forrz et al. 22 1 100 108 2004 and MSC catalog PT 2501 Cambrex Walkersville Md. U.S. Pat. No. 5 486 359 which demonstrate a significant degree of commitment down several lineage pathways.

Comparison of the gene expression profile of MLPC and MSC demonstrates MSC are more committed to connective tissue pathways. There are 80 genes up regulated in MSC and 152 genes up regulated in MLPC. In particular the following genes were up regulated in MLPC when compared with MSC i.e. expression was decreased in MSC relative to MLPC ITGB2 ARHGAP9 CXCR4 INTEGRINB7 PECAM1 PRKCB1 PRKCB3 IL7R AIF1 CD45 EX10 11 PLCG2 CD37 PRKCB2 TCF21 RNF138 EAAT4 EPHA1 RPLP0 PTTG SERPINA12 ITGAX CD24 F11R RPL4 ICAM1 LMO2 HMGB2 CD38 RPL7A BMP3 PTHR2 S100B OSF SNCA GRIK1 HTR4 CHRM1 CDKN2D HNRPA1 IL6R MUSLAMR ICAM2 CSK ITGA6 MMP9 DNMT1 PAK1 IKKB TFRC MIDDLE CHI3L2 ITGA4 FGF20 NBR2 TNFRSF1B CEBPA3 CDO1 NFKB1 GATA2 PDGFRB ICSBP1 KCNE3 TNNC1 ITGA2B CCT8 LEFTA TH RPS24 HTR1F TREM1 CCNB2 SELL CD34 HMGIY COX7A2 SELE TNNT2 SEM2 CHEK1 CLCN5 F5 PRKCQ ITGAL NCAM2 ZNF257 MGC12518 ZNF92 ZNF43 ZNF273 FLJ90430 CDK1 RPL6 RPL24 IGHA1 IGHA2 M PUM2 GJA7 HTR7 PTHR1 MAPK14 MSI21 KCNJ3 CD133 SYP TFRC5PRIME TDGF1 TDGF32 FLT3 HPRT SEMA4D ITGAM KIAA01523 ZFP42 SOX20 FLJ21190 CPN2 POU2F2 CASP81 CLDN10 TREM2 TERT OLIG1 EGR2 CD44 EX3 5 CD33 CNTFR OPN COL9A12 ROBO4 HTR1D1 IKKA KIT NPPA PRKCH FGF4 CD68 NUMB NRG3 SALL2 NOP5 HNF4G FIBROMODULIN CD58 CALB1 GJB5 GJA5 POU5F1 GDF5 POU6F1 CD44 EX16 20 BCAN PTEN1 PTEN2 AGRIN ALB KCNQ4 DPPA5 EPHB2 TGFBR2 and ITGA3.

MLPC express a number of genes associated with sternness which refers to the ablility to self renew undifferentiated and ability to differentiate into a number of different cell types. Genes associated with stemness include the genes known to be over expressed in human human embryonic stem cells including for example POU5F October 4 TERT and ZFP42. For example 65 genes associated with protein synthesis are down regulated 18 genes linked with phosphate metabolism are down regulated 123 genes regulating proliferation and cell cycling are down regulated 12 different gene clusters associated with differentiation surface markers are down regulated e.g. genes associated with connective tissue including integrin alpha F laminin and collagen receptor ASPIC thrombospondins endothelium endothelin 1 and 2 precursors epidermal CRABP 2 and genes associated with adipocytes including for example the leptin receptor and 80 genes linked to nucleic acid binding and regulation of differentiation are up regulated. Thus the immaturity of a population of MLPC can be characterized based on the expression of one or more genes e.g. one or more of CXCR4 FLT3 TERT KIT POU5F or hematopoietic CD markers such as CD9 CD34 and CD133 .

MLPC can be cryopreserved by suspending the cells e.g. 5 10to 2 10cells mL in a cryopreservative such as dimethylsulfoxide DMSO typically 1 to 10 or in fetal bovine serum human serum or human serum albumin in combination with one or more of DMSO trehalose and dextran. For example 1 fetal bovine serum containing 10 DMSO 2 human serum containing 10 DMSO and 1 Dextran 3 human serum containing 1 DMSO and 5 trehalose or 4 20 human serum albumin 1 DMSO and 5 trehalose can be used to cryopreserve MLPC. After adding cryopreservative the cells can be frozen e.g. to 90 C. . In some embodiments the cells are frozen at a controlled rate e.g. controlled electronically or by suspending the cells in a bath of 70 ethanol and placed in the vapor phase of a liquid nitrogen storage tank. When the cells are chilled to 90 C. they can be placed in the liquid phase of the liquid nitrogen storage tank for long term storage. Cryopreservation can allow for long term storage of these cells for therapeutic use.

MLPC are capable of differentiating into a variety of cells including cells of each of the three embryonic germ layers i.e. endoderm ectoderm and mesoderm . As used herein capable of differentiating means that a given cell or its progeny can proceed to a differentiated phenotype under the appropriate culture conditions. For example MLPC can differentiate into cells having an osteocytic phenotype cells having an adipocytic phenotype cells having a neurocytic phenotype cells having a myocytic phenotype cells having an endothelial phenotype cells having a hepatocytic pancreatic precursor phenotype also known as an oval cell as well as other cell types. Differentiation can be induced using one or more differentiation agents including without limitation Ca an epidermal growth factor EGF a platelet derived growth factor PDGF a keratinocyte growth factor KGF a transforming growth factor TGF cytokines such as an interleukin an interferon or tumor necrosis factor retinoic acid transferrin hormones e.g. androgen estrogen insulin prolactin triiodothyronine hydrocortisone or dexamethasone sodium butyrate TPA DMSO NMF N methyl formamide DMF dimethylformamide or matrix elements such as collagen laminin heparan sulfate .

Determination that an MLPC has differentiated into a particular cell type can be assessed using known methods including measuring changes in morphology and cell surface markers e.g. by flow cytometry or immunohistochemistry examining morphology by light or confocal microscopy or by measuring changes in gene expression using techniques such as polymerase chain reaction PCR or gene expression profiling.

For example MLPC can be induced to differentiate into cells having an osteocytic phenotype using an induction medium e.g. Osteogenic Differentiation Medium catalog PT 3002 from Cambrex containing dexamethasone L glutamine ascorbate and glycerophosphate Jaiswal et al. 64 2 295 312 1997 . Cells having an osteocytic phenotype contain deposits of calcium crystals which can be visualized for example using Alizarin red stain.

MLPC can be induced to differentiate into cells having an adipocytic phenotype using an induction medium e.g. Adipogenic Differentiation Medium catalog PT 3004 from Cambrex containing insulin L glutamine dexamethasone indomethacin and 3 isobutyl 1 methyl xanthine. Cells having an adipocytic phenotype contain lipid filled liposomes that can be visualized with Oil Red stain. Such cells also contain trigycerides which fluoresce green with Nile Red stain Fowler and Greenspan 33 833 836 1985 .

MLPC can be induced to differentiate into cells having a myocytic phenotype using an induction medium e.g. SkGM catalog CC 3160 from Cambrex containing EGF insulin Fetuin dexamethasone and FGF basic Wernet et al. U.S. patent publication 20020164794 A1 . Cells having a myocytic phenotype express fast skeletal muscle myosin and alpha actinin.

MLPC can be induced to differentiate into cells having a neural stem cell phenotype neurospheres using an induction medium e.g. NPMM Neural Progenitor Maintenance medium catalog CC 3209 from Cambrex containing human FGF basic human EGF NSF 1 and FGF 4 and a culture device pre coated with poly D lysine and laminin e.g. from BD Biosciences Discovery Labware catalog 354688 . Once cells have been differentiated into neurospheres they can be further differentiated into motor neurons with the addition of brain derived neurotrophic factor BDNF and neurotrophin 3 NT 3 astrocytes with the addition of leukemia inhibitory factor LIF retinoic acid and ciliary neurotrophic factor and oligodendrocytes with the addition of 3 3 5 triiodo L thyronine T3 . Neurocytic differentiation can be confirmed by the expression of nestin class III beta tubulin tubulin 4 glial fibrillary acidic protein GFAP and galactocerebroside GalC . Neurospheres are positive for all such markers while some differentiated cell types are not. Differentiation into oligodendrocytes can be confirmed by positive staining for myelin basic protein MBP .

MLPC can be induced to differentiate into cells having an endothelial phenotype using an endothelial growth medium e.g. EGM MV catalog CC 3125 from Cambrex containing heparin bovine brain extract epithelial growth factor e.g. human recombinant epithelial growth factor and hydrocortisone. Endothelial differentiation can be confirmed by expression of E selectin CD62E ICAM 2 CD102 CD34 and STRO 1.

MLPC can be induced to differentiate into cells having a hepatocyte pancreatic precursor cell phenotype using an induction medium e.g. HCM hepatocyte culture medium catalog CC 3198 from Cambrex containing ascorbic acid hydrocortisone transferrin insulin EGF hepatocyte growth factor FGF basic fibroblast growth factor 4 and stem cell factor. Liver and pancreas cells share a common progenitor. Hepatocyte differentiation can be confirmed by expression of hepatocyte growth factor and human serum albumin. Pancreatic cell differentiation can be confirmed by production of insulin and pro insulin.

MLPC can be modified such that the cells can produce one or more polypeptides or other therapeutic compounds of interest. To modify the isolated cells such that a polypeptide or other therapeutic compound of interest is produced the appropriate exogenous nucleic acid must be delivered to the cells. In some embodiments the cells are transiently transfected which indicates that the exogenous nucleic acid is episomal i.e. not integrated into the chromosomal DNA . In other embodiments the cells are stably transfected i.e. the exogenous nucleic acid is integrated into the host cell s chromosomal DNA. The term exogenous as used herein with reference to a nucleic acid and a particular cell refers to any nucleic acid that does not originate from that particular cell as found in nature. In addition the term exogenous includes a naturally occurring nucleic acid. For example a nucleic acid encoding a polypeptide that is isolated from a human cell is an exogenous nucleic acid with respect to a second human cell once that nucleic acid is introduced into the second human cell. The exogenous nucleic acid that is delivered typically is part of a vector in which a regulatory element such as a promoter is operably linked to the nucleic acid of interest.

Cells can be engineered using a viral vector such as an adenovirus adeno associated virus AAV retrovirus lentivirus vaccinia virus measles viruses herpes viruses or bovine papilloma virus vector. See Kay et al. 1997 94 12744 12746 for a review of viral and non viral vectors. A vector also can be introduced using mechanical means such as liposomal or chemical mediated uptake of the DNA. For example a vector can be introduced into an MLPC by methods known in the art including for example transfection transformation transduction electroporation infection microinjection cell fusion DEAE dextran calcium phosphate precipitation liposomes LIPOFECTIN lysosome fusion synthetic cationic lipids use of a gene gun or a DNA vector transporter.

A vector can include a nucleic acid that encodes a selectable marker. Non limiting examples of selectable markers include puromycin adenosine deaminase ADA aminoglycoside phosphotransferase neo G418 APH dihydrofolate reductase DHFR hygromycin B phosphtransferase thymidine kinase TK and xanthin guanine phosphoribosyltransferase XGPRT . Such markers are useful for selecting stable transformants in culture.

MLPC also can have a targeted gene modification. Homologous recombination methods for introducing targeted gene modifications are known in the art. To create a homologous recombinant MLPC a homologous recombination vector can be prepared in which a gene of interest is flanked at its 5 and 3 ends by gene sequences that are endogenous to the genome of the targeted cell to allow for homologous recombination to occur between the gene of interest carried by the vector and the endogenous gene in the genome of the targeted cell. The additional flanking nucleic acid sequences are of sufficient length for successful homologous recombination with the endogenous gene in the genome of the targeted cell. Typically several kilobases of flanking DNA both at the 5 and 3 ends are included in the vector. Methods for constructing homologous recombination vectors and homologous recombinant animals from recombinant stem cells are commonly known in the art see e.g. Thomas and Capecchi 198751 503 Bradley 19912 823 29 and PCT Publication Nos. WO 90 11354 WO 91 01140 and WO 93 04169.

The MLPC can be used in enzyme replacement therapy to treat specific diseases or conditions including but not limited to lysosomal storage diseases such as Tay Sachs Niemann Pick Fabry s Gaucher s Hunter s and Hurler s syndromes as well as other gangliosidoses mucopolysaccharidoses and glycogenoses.

In other embodiments the cells can be used as carriers in gene therapy to correct inborn errors of metabolism adrenoleukodystrophy cystic fibrosis glycogen storage disease hypothyroidism sickle cell anemia Pearson syndrome Pompe s disease phenylketonuria PKIJ porphyrias maple syrup urine disease homocystinuria mucoplysaccharide nosis chronic granulomatous disease and tyrosinemia and Tay Sachs disease or to treat cancer tumors or other pathological conditions.

MLPC can be used to repair damage of tissues and organs resulting from disease. In such an embodiment a patient can be administered a population of MLPC to regenerate or restore tissues or organs which have been damaged as a consequence of disease. For example a population of MLPC can be administered to a patient to enhance the immune system following chemotherapy or radiation or to repair heart tissue following myocardial infarction.

The cells also can be used in tissue regeneration or replacement therapies or protocols including but not limited to treatment of corneal epithelial defects cartilage repair facial dermabrasion mucosal membranes tympanic membranes intestinal linings neurological structures e.g. retina auditory neurons in basilar membrane olfactory neurons in olfactory epithelium burn and wound repair for traumatic injuries of the skin or for reconstruction of other damaged or diseased organs or tissues.

MLPC also can be used in therapeutic transplantation protocols e.g. to augment or replace stem or progenitor cells of the liver pancreas kidney lung nervous system muscular system bone bone marrow thymus spleen mucosal tissue gonads or hair.

The invention also features compositions and articles of manufacture containing purified populations of MLPC or clonal lines of MLPC. In some embodiments the purified population of MLPC or clonal line is housed within a container e.g. a vial or bag . In some embodiments the clonal lines have undergone at least 3 doublings in culture e.g. at least 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 or 50 doublings . In other embodiments a culture medium e.g. MSCGM medium is included in the composition or article of manufacture. In still other embodiments the composition or article of manufacture can include one or more cryopreservatives or pharmaceutically acceptable carriers. For example a composition can include serum and DMSO a mixture of serum DMSO and trehalose or a mixture of human serum albumin DMSO and trehalose.

Purified populations of MLPC or clonal MLPC lines can be combined with packaging material and sold as a kit. The packaging material included in a kit typically contains instructions or a label describing how the purified populations of MLPC or clonal lines can be grown differentiated or used. A label also can indicate that the MLPC have enhanced expression of for example CXCR4 FLT3 or CD133 relative to a population of MSC. Components and methods for producing such kits are well known.

An article of manufacture or kit also can include one or more reagents for characterizing a population of MLPC or a clonal MLPC line. For example a reagent can be a nucleic acid probe or primer for detecting expression of a gene such as CXCR4 FLT3 CD133 CD34 TERT KIT POU5F ICAM2 ITGAX TFRC KIT IL6R IL7R ITGAM FLT3 PDGFRB SELE SELL TFRC ITGAL ITGB2 PECAM1 ITGA2B ITGA3 ITGA4 ITGA6 ICAM1 CD24 CD44 CD45 CD58 CD68 CD33 CD37 or CD38. Such a nucleic acid probe or primer can be labeled e.g. fluorescently or with a radioisotope to facilitate detection. A reagent also can be an antibody having specific binding affinity for a cell surface marker such as CD9 CD45 SSEA 4 CD34 CD13 CD29 CD41 CD44 CD73 CD90 CD105 stem cell factor STRO 1 SSEA 3 CD133 CD15 CD38 glycophorin A CD235a CD2 CD3 CD4 CD5 CD7 CD8 CD10 CD11b CD13 CD16 CD19 CD20 CD21 CD22 CD29 CD33 CD36 CD41 CD61 CD62E CD72 CD73 CD90 HLA DR CD102 or CD105. An antibody can be detectably labeled e.g. fluorescently or enzymatically .

The invention is further described in the following examples which do not limit the scope of the invention described in the claims.

This example describes the general method by which cells were separated using the cell separation reagents described below. Equal volumes of a cell separation reagent see Table 1 and an acid citrate dextrose ACD CPDA citrate phosphate dextrose adenine or heparinized umbilical cord blood sample were combined 25 ml each in a sterile closed container e.g. a 50 ml conical tube . Samples containing white blood cell counts greater than 20 10cells ml were combined one part blood with two parts cell separation reagent. Tubes were gently mixed on a rocker platform for 20 to 45 minutes at room temperature. Tubes were stood upright in a rack for 30 to 50 minutes to permit agglutinated cells to partition away from unagglutinated cells which remained in solution. A pipette was used to recover unagglutinated cells from the supernatant without disturbing the agglutinate. Recovered cells were washed in 25 ml PBS and centrifuged at 500 g for 7 minutes. The cell pellet was resuspended in 4 ml PBS 2 human serum albumin.

Cells also were recovered from the agglutinate using a hypotonic lysing solution containing EDTA and ethylene glycol bis 2 aminoethylether N N N N tetraacetic acid EGTA . Agglutinated cells were treated with 25 ml VitaLyse BioE St. Paul Minn. and vortexed. After 10 minutes cells were centrifuged at 500 g for 7 minutes and the supernatant was removed. Cells were resuspended in 4 ml PBS.

Recoveries of erythrocytes leukocytes lymphocytes monocytes granulocytes T cells B cells NK cells hematopoietic stem cells and non hematopoietic stem cells were determined by standard flow cytometry and immunophenotyping. Prior to flow cytometry leukocyte recovery i.e. white blood cell count was determined using a Coulter Onyx Hematology Analyzer. Cell types were identified and enumerated by combining hematology analysis with flow cytometry analysis identifying cells on the basis of light scattering properties and staining by labeled antibodies.

As shown in Table 2 99.9 of erythrocytes were removed 99.8 monocytes and granulocytes 74 of B cells 64.9 of NK cells and 99.4 of the platelets were removed from the cord blood.

The cell separation reagent of Table 3 was used to isolate MLPC from the non agglutinated supernatant phase. See for a schematic of the purification.

MLPC cultures were fed periodically by removal of the complete MSCGM and addition of fresh complete MSCGM . Cell were maintained at concentrations of 1 10 1 10cells 75 cmby this method. When cell cultures reached a concentration of 8 10 1 10cells 75 cm cells were cryopreserved using 10 DMSO and 90 serum or expanded into new flasks. Cells were recovered from the adherent cultures by removal of the complete MSCGM and replacement with PBS 0.1 EGTA. Cells were incubated for 15 60 minutes at 37 C. then collected from the flask and washed in complete MSCGM . Cells were then replated at 1 10cells mL. Cultures that were allowed to achieve confluency where found to have diminished capacity for both proliferation and differentiation. Subsequent to this finding cultures were not allowed to achieve higher densities than 1 10cells 75 cm.

Cord blood derived MLPC isolated and cultured according to Examples 1 and 2 were cultured in standard MSCGM until confluency. Depending on the donor MLPC cultures achieved confluency in 2 8 weeks. The morphology of these cells during growth and cultural maturation is shown in .

In the early stage shown in the cells are dividing very slowly and resemble circulating leukocytes but with dendritic cytoplasmic extensions. Many cells still exhibit the small round cell morphology that these cells would exhibit in circulation. As culture continues the leukocyte like cells start to change their morphology from the leukocyte like appearance to a flatter darker more fibroblast like appearance see . When cells are dividing they round up divide and then reattach to the culture vessel surface and spread out again. This slowly continues until the cells fill the available surface. shows the morphology of cell cultures during logarithmic growth. shows the morphology of a fully confluent culture of MLPC. With the exception of the two cells in active division seen in the lower left corner of the picture all of the cells have a fibroblast like morphology.

In summary early during culture cells appeared small and round but had cytoplasmic projections both finger like and highly elongate projections which help distinguish them from the other blood cells. Shortly after the initiation of the culture the cells began to spread and flatten taking on a morphology consistent with fibroblasts. Eventually upon confluency the cells grew in largely parallel orientation. Repeated growth of cultures to confluency resulted in their having diminished proliferation and differentiating capacity.

In order to determine the surface markers present on MLPC freshly isolated cells were plated in 16 well chamber slides and grown to confluency. At various times during the culture from 3 days post plating to post confluency cells were harvested and stained for the following markers CD45 FITC BD Pharmingen CD34 PE BD Pharmingen CD4 PE BioE CD8 PE BioE anti HLA DR PE BioE CD41 PE BioE CD9 PE Ancell CD105 PE Ancell CD29 PE Coulter CD73 PE BD Pharmingen CD90 PE BD Pharmingen anti hu Stem Cell Factor FITC R D Systems CD14 PE BD Pharmingen CD 15 FITC Ancell CD38 PE BD Pharmingen CD2 PE BD Pharmingen CD3 FITC BD Pharmingen CD5 PE BD Pharmingen CD7 PE BD Pharmingen CD16 PE BD Pharmingen CD20 FITC BD Pharmingen CD22 FITC BD Pharmingen CD19 PE BD Pharmingen CD33 PE BD Pharmingen CD10 FITC BD Pharmingen CD61 FITC BD Pharmingen CD133 PE R D Systems anti STRO 1 R D Systems and Goat anti mouse IgG H L PE BioE SSEA 3 R D Systems and goat anti rat IgG H L PE BioE SSEA 4 R D Systems and goat anti mouse IgG H L PE BioE . The cell surface markers also were assessed in bone marrow MSC Cambrex Walkersville Md. and cord blood HSC obtained from the non adherent cells described above .

Briefly cell culture medium was removed from the wells and the cells were washed 3 with Hank s Balanced Salt Solution 2 BSA. Cells were then stained with the antibodies for 20 minutes in the dark at room temperature. After incubation the cells were washed 3 with Hank s Balanced Salt Solution 2 BSA and the cells were directly observed for fluorescence by fluorescent microscopy. Results obtained comparing cord blood derived MLPC with bone marrow derived MSC s and cord blood derived hematopoietic stem cells HSC are outlined in Table 4.

After the second passage of MLPC cultures from Example 2 the cells were detached from the plastic surface of the culture vessel by substituting PBS containing 0.1 EGTA pH 7.3 for the cell culture medium. The cells were diluted to a concentration of 1.3 cells ml in complete MSCGM and distributed into a 96 well culture plate at a volume of 0.2 ml well resulting in an average distribution of approximately 1 cell 3 wells. After allowing the cells to attach to the plate by overnight incubation at 37 C. the plate was scored for actual distribution. Only the wells with 1 cell well were followed for growth. As the cells multiplied and achieved concentrations of 1 5 10cells 75 cm they were transferred to a larger culture vessel in order to maintain the cells at a concentration between 1 10and 5 10cells 75 cmto maintain logarithmic growth. Cells were cultured at 37 C. in a 5 COatmosphere.

At least 52 clonal cell lines have been established using this procedure and were designated UM081704 1 E2 UM081704 1 B6 UM081704 1 G11 UM081704 1 G9 UM081704 1 E9 UM081704 1 E11 UM081704 1 G8 UM081704 1 H3 UM081704 1 D6 UM081704 1 H11 UM081704 1 B4 UM081704 1 H4 UM081704 1 C2 UM081704 1 G1 UM081704 1 E10 UM081704 1 B7 UM081704 1 G4 UM081704 1 F12 UM081704 1 H1 UM081704 1 D3 UM081704 1 A2 UM081704 1 B11 UM081704 1 D5 UM081704 1 E4 UM081704 1 C10 UM081704 1 A5 UM081704 1 E8 UM081704 1 C12 UM081704 1 E5 UM081704 1 A12 UM081704 1 C5 UM081704 1 A4 UM081704 1 A3 MH091404 2 1 1.G10 UM093004 1 A3 UM093004 1 B7 UM093004 1 F2 UM093004 1 A12 UM093004 1 G11 UM093004 1 G4 UM093004 1 B12 UM093004 2 A6 UM093004 2 A9 UM093004 2 B9 UM093004 2 C5 UM093004 2 D12 UM093004 2 H3 UM093004 2 H11 UM093004 2 H4 UM093004 2 A5 UM093004 2 C3 and UM093004 2 C10. The surface markers of clonal cell line UM081704 1 E8 were assessed according to the procedure outlined in Example 4 and found to be the same as the mature MLPC having fibroblast morphology as shown in Table 4.

A population of MLPC and clonal cell line UM081704 1 E8 each were cultured in complete MSCGM and grown under logarithmic growth conditions outlined above. Cells were harvested by treatment with PBS 0.1 EGTA and replated at 5 10to 2 10 ml in complete MSCGM . The cells were allowed to adhere overnight and then the medium was replaced with Osteogenic Differentiation Medium catalog PT 3002 Cambrex consisting of complete MSCGM supplemented with dexamethasone L glutamine ascorbate and glycerophosphate. Cells were cultured at 37 C. in a 5 COatmosphere and fed every 3 4 days for 2 3 weeks. Deposition of calcium crystals was demonstrated by using a modification of the Alizarin red procedure and observing red staining of calcium mineralization by phase contrast and fluorescent microscopy.

A population of MLPC and clonal cell line UM081704 1 E8 each were plated in complete MSCGM at a concentration of 1 10to 2 10cells mL medium and cultured at 37 C. in a 5 COatmosphere. Cells were allowed to re adhere to the culture plate and were fed every 3 4 days until the cultures reached confluency. At 100 confluency cells were differentiated by culture in Adipogenesis differentiation medium catalog PT 3004 Cambrex consisting of complete MSCGM supplemented with hu insulin L glutamine dexamethasone indomethacin and 3 isobutyl 1 methyl xanthine for at least 14 days.

To assess differentiation the cells were stained with Oil Red stain specific for lipid. Confluent cultures of MLPC display a fibroblast like morphology and do not display any evidence of liposome development as assessed by Oil Red staining. In contrast MLPC differentiated with Adipogenic medium for 3 weeks exhibit liposomes that are characteristic of adipocytes i.e. bright white vessels in cytoplasm and that stain red with the Oil Red stain. MLPC differentiated with Adipogenic medium also fluoresce green with Nile Red stain specific for trigycerides. Undifferentiated cells retain their fibroblast like morphology and do not stain.

MLPC both a population and clonal cell line UM081704 1 E8 were plated in complete MSCGM at a concentration of 1.9 10cells well within a 4 chamber fibronectin pre coated slide and allowed to attach to the plate for 24 48 hr at 37 C. in a 5 COatmosphere. Medium was removed and replaced with 10 M 5 azacytidine catalog A1287 Sigma Chemical Co. and incubated for 24 hours. Cells were washed twice with PBS and fed with SkGM Skeletal Muscle Cell Medium catalog CC 3160 Cambrex containing recombinant human epidermal growth factor huEGF human insulin Fetuin dexamethasone and recombinant human basic fibroblast growth factor 100 ng mL huFGF basic catalog F0291 Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. . Cells were fed every 2 3 days for approximately 21 days. Control wells were fed with MSCGM while experimental wells were fed with SkGM as described above .

Cultures were harvested 7 days post initiation of myocytic culture. Culture supernatant was removed and cells were fixed for 2 hours with 2 buffered formalin. Cells were permeabilized with PermaCyte BioE St. Paul Minn. and stained with mouse monoclonal antibody specific for human fast skeletal myosin MY 32 catalog ab7784 Abcam Cambridge Mass. or mouse monoclonal antibody specific for alpha actinin BM 75.2 catalog ab11008 Abcam . Cells were incubated with the primary antibody for 20 minutes washed with PBS and counter stained with goat anti mouse IgG H L PE BioE St. Paul Minn. . The myocytic culture contained fast skeletal muscle myosin and alpha actinin which is indicative of the transdifferentiation of MLPC to skeletal muscle cells.

Bone marrow derived hMSC Cambrex cord blood MLPC and MLPC clonal cell line were grown under logarithmic growth conditions described above. Cells were harvested as described above and replated at 0.8 10cells per chamber in 4 chamber slides that were pre coated with poly D lysine and laminin BD Biosciences Discovery Labware catalog 354688 in 0.5 mL of NPMM catalog CC 3209 Cambrex containing huFGF basic huEGF brain derived neurotrophic factor neural survival factor 1 fibroblast growth factor 4 20 ng mL and 200 mM GlutaMax I Supplement catalog 35050 061 Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . The medium was changed every 2 3 days for 21 days. Neurospheres developed after 4 to 20 days. Transformation of MLPC to neural lineage was confirmed by positive staining for nestin monoclonal anti human nestin antibody MAB1259 clone 196908 R D Systems class III beta tubulin tubulin b 4 monoclonal anti neuron specific class III beta tubulin antibody MAB 1195 Clone TuJ 1 R D Systems glial fibrillary acidic protein GFAP monoclonal anti human GFAP HG2b GF5 clone GF5 Advanced immunochemical Inc. and galactocerebroside GalC mouse anti human GalC monoclonal antibody MAB342 clone mGalC Chemicon .

Cells were further differentiated into neurons by the addition of 10 ng mL BDNF catalog B3795 Sigma Chemical Co. and 10 ng mL NT3 catalog N1905 Sigma Chemical Co. to the neural progenitor maintenance medium and further culturing for 10 14 days. Neurospheres were further differentiated into astrocytes by the addition of 10M retinoic acid catalog R2625 Sigma Chemical Co. 10 ng mL LIF catalog L5158 Sigma Chemical Co. and 10 ng mL CNTF catalog C3710 Sigma Chemical Co. to the neural progenitor maintenance medium and further culturing for 10 14 days. Neurospheres were further differentiated into oligodendrocytes by the addition of 10M T3 catalog T5516 Sigma Chemical Co. to the neural progenitor maintenance medium and further culturing for 10 14 days. Differentiation to oligodendrocytes was confirmed by positive staining for myelin basic protein MBP monoclonal anti MBP catalog ab8764 clone B505 Abcam .

MLPC were plated at 1.9 10cells per well within a 4 chamber slide 2 cm . Cells were fed with 1 ml of endothelial growth medium microvasculature EGM MV catalog CC 3125 Cambrex containing heparin bovine brain extract human recombinant epithelial growth factor and hydrocortisone. The cells were fed by changing the medium every 2 3 days for approximately 21 days. Morphological changes occurred within 7 10 days. Differentiation of MLPC s to endothelial lineage was assessed by staining for CD62E E selectin mouse anti human CD62E monoclonal antibody catalog 551145 clone 68 5H11 BD Pharmingen and CD102 ICAM 2 monoclonal anti human ICAM 2 MAB244 clone 86911 R D Systems CD34 BD Pharmingen and STRO 1 R D Systems . Control MLPC cultures grown in MSCGM for 14 days were negative for CD62E staining and CD102 CD34 and STRO 1 while differentiated cultures were positive for both CD62E CD102 CD34 and STRO 1.

MLPC were plated at a concentration of 1 10cells cmin vitro in HCM medium catalog CC 3198 Cambrex containing ascorbic acid hydrocortisone transferrin insulin huEGF recombinant human hepatocyte growth factor 40 ng mL huFGF basic 20 ng mL recombinant human fibroblast growth factor 4 20 ng mL and stem cell factor 40 ng mL . Cells were cultured for 29 or more days to induce differentiation to precursor cells of both hepatocytes and pancreatic cells lineage. MLPC changed from a fibroblast morphology to a hepatocyte morphology expressed cell surface receptors for Hepatocyte Growth Factor and produced both human serum albumin a cellular product of hepatocytes and insulin a cellular product of pancreatic islet cells both confirmed by intracellular antibody staining on day 30.

In order to determine the relationship between MLPC and various other cell types at various stages of lineage commitment the relative expression of 942 genes associated with stemness and differentiating capacity was assessed by high definition microarray. The phenotype of MLPC E8 clone passage 8 see Example 5 was compared to human umbilical cord mononuclear cells MNC PrepaCyte MLPC isolated cord blood cells CD133 positively selected cord blood progenitor cells lineage negative cord blood cells and bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells MSC Cambrex Walkersville Md. . The MNC were isolated by density gradient centrifugation method on Ficoll. Cells were mature terminally differentiated lymphocytes and monocytes with some minor contamination with platelets and granulocytes. The PrepaCyte isolated cells were human umbilical cord blood cells isolated by PrepaCyte MLPC method. Cells were mainly lymphocytes hematopoietic stem cells and MLPC with some minor contamination with monocytes granulocytes and platelets. CD133 selected cells were human umbilical cord blood cells separated by Ficoll density gradient separation then positively selected using anti CD133 coated paramagnetic particles Miltenyi . These cells are consistent with hematopoietic stem cells. Lineage Negative cells were isolated from human umbilical cord blood cells by Ficoll density gradient separation then negatively selected by depletion with anti CD45 anti CD7 and anti glycophorin A coated paramagnetic particles. These cells have been demonstrated to have some multi lineage differentiating capacity. See Forrz et al. 22 1 100 108 2004 . MSC were purchased from Cambrex catalog PT 2501 .

Methods Total RNA was extracted from each cell population using the Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit Qiagen Valencia Calif. . Complementary DNAs cDNA were derived from the total RNA samples and the cDNA labeled with Cy3 MLPC or Cy5 other cell types according to the PIQOR Instruction Manual. The labeled samples then were hybridized to the PIQOR 942 gene Stem Cell Human Antisense Microarray platform Miltenyi Biotec according to the PIQOR Instruction Manual. Thus a total of five hybridizations were done MLPC and PrepaCyte cells designated hybridization B MLPC and MNC designated hybridization C MLPC and CD133 selected cells designated hybridization D MLPC and MSC designated hybridization E and MLPC and LinNeg cells designated hybridization F . After hybridization the intensity of the Cy3 and Cy5 labels was assessed on each microarray. Comparative over expression of genes in MLPC resulted in a green spot over expression of genes in the comparative cell group resulted in a red spot. Equal expression resulted in a yellow spot. The ratio of green to red fluorescence allowed the determination of over or under expression. Analysis of the microarrays was performed by the Memorec division of Miltenyi Biotec in a blinded analysis.

Genes that did not reach an at least 1.4 fold differential expression in at least one experiment were excluded from further analyses. The resulting dataset included 631 genes that were 1.4 fold up or down regulated between MLPC and any one or more of the other five cell groups see shaded text refers to over expression of the gene in the comparative cell group bold text refers to over expression of genes in MLPC the values represent the ratio of the signal intensity for the comparative cell group to the signal intensity of the MLPC i.e. for uniq ID 43 signal intensity of B signal intensity of MLPC is 0.68 . To identify the discriminatory genes genes were selected that had their maximum expression value in hybridizations B C D E or F. Genes were removed where the maximum expression was just due to a less pronounced down regulation relative to the other experiments. The difference between the highest and the second best expression value was determined for each gene and used as an indicated for its suitability to separate between the different conditions. A corresponding procedure was performed to identify the down regulated genes most suitable for the discrimination of the different cell populations.

Pathway and signal network analysis delineated numerous biological pathways characterizing MLPCs unique features. During this procedure each group was screened for significant enrichment of genes belonging to a common pathway or sharing other biological properties.

Sixty five 65 genes were up regulated in the PrepaCyte cells relative to the MLPC PF4 PF4V1 CLDN5 IL7R CHI3L2 CD38 RBL2 MAD1 INTEGRINB7 CD7 DRD3 HIST1H2AC PBXIP1 ITGAL FKHR CDKN2B RPL13A MMRN KCNQ22 MFHI BMP6 ABCC8 MUSLAMR ALCAM CDKN1B ANGPT2 RPL24 FLJ10884 ICAM2 FOXG1A FOXG1B PLCG1 ERBB2 DAB1 RPL6 RPLP0 MMP21 22 23 RPL4 RPL7A SMAD2 RPS24 ATM CDO1 SELE SELL GRIK1 VEGFB KCNQ4 TGFBR1 TFP1 KIAA01523 COL4A5 MAP 2 FAST1 TBX3 PRKCH HNF4A SEMA3C TEAD1 NFKB2 COL4A6 HNF4G DPPA5 LEFTA FGF20 OSF RPSA and ITGA2B. Among the 65 genes 8 were annotated as ribosomal subunits RPLP0 genno. 19690 RPL6 genno. 22801 RPS24 genno. 27255 RPL24 genno. 28658 RPL13A genno. 31144 RPL4 genno. 32719 RPSA genno. 3929 and RPL7A genno. 7951 . This enrichment may point to an enhancement of protein synthesis relative to the MLPC and also shows that the PrepaCyte cells are a heterogeneous group of cells many of which are mature.

Fifty five 55 genes were down regulated relative to MLPC including PROX1 DLK1 CRABP1 HNF3G CSPG21 TIMP2 CD44 EX10 12 ANPEP ZNF117 IFNGR1 COL4A31 ATF4 LAMB3 ELAVL4 IFNGR2 CTNNA1 CDC25C S100A11 CRABP2 MMP11 PAFAH1B1 MTHFD2 BRACHYURY BMPRIA KCNA4 TUBA TTR ACVR2B KCNJ6 ADH4 VLDLR GAPD RACK17 MCAM HNF3B TNFR1 JAM2 IL3RA FGF1 VGR3 ORP150 SNA12 GPC4 KIF4A TC10 PIGF RAC1 CYP3A4 THBD CHEK2 VEGF 1 AMBP TCF3 KCNQ5 DDX21 and LAPTM4B. Thus MLPC and PrepaCyte cells have different profiles.

MLPC and MNC also have different profiles. One hundred and eight 108 genes were up regulated in the MNC including PROX1 KCNJ15 IL1R2 SNCA HBZ F7 MYL4 CDKN2D BMPR1B TCF21 RXRA CLCN5 SOX6 SLC2A1 TAL1 CLCN3 SALL2 POU6F1 IGHA1 IGHA2 MAT1A EGR2 HDAC2 FGFR3 TREM1 MAP3K3 PRKCZ PUM2 BMP4 PTEN1 PTEN2 KCNQ3 SYP CD44 EX8 10 IL4R ACVRL1 CDC25B ODC1 SLC16A1 PGH2 EDNRA TRK C CDH5 COL10A1 PIK3CG NEUROG1 AKT2 ITGA3 CXCR4 DLX2 IL6R KCNJ1 SLIT 1 IKKA GDF5 ITGB3 CASP81 FIBROMODULIN AGRIN TENASCINX KIT CD44 EX7 9 TERT ZFP42 MS121 ACVR2B CDC421 POU5F1 CPN2 RARA1 TNFSF4 ROBO4 SEM2 CLDN1 TDGF1 TDGF32 PRKCQ COL9A12 ELAVL4 EPHB2 ELOVL6 PAK1 SOX20 BRACHYURY NOTCH1 LRRN1 SEMA4D ARL8 HGF PRKCB2 BMP3 WNT10B BCRP NKX2 2 FGFR2 HAND1 PLAUR CSK PDGFRB COL18A11 CCNG2 ITGA3 5PRIME CD45 EX10 11 PTHR1 SEMAL MAPK3 TNNT2 NBR2 APC3 PTHLH and HTR6. Table 5 lists the 23 genes identified as belonging to a particular pathway or family A refers to a kinase and B refers to phosphate metabolism .

Eighteen genes were identified as belonging to the family of protein kinases ACVR2B ACVRL1 BMPR1B EPHB2 PRKCZ PRKCQ MAPK3 AKT2 PPKCB PAK1 MAP3K3 CSK KIT PDGFRB IKKA FGFR2 NTRK3 and FGFR3 . Five genes CD45 PIK3CG PTEN1 PTEN2 CDC25B and TDGF1 TDGF3 were identified as being involved in phosphate metabolism in general e.g. as phosphatases. The PIQOR probes PTEN1 PTEN2 or TDGF1 TDGF3 are specific for two different highly similar genes each. Among these kinases growth factor receptors like e.g. FGFR2 FGFR3 PDGFRB KIT and NTRK3 and two activin receptors ACVR2B and ACVRL1 can be found.

The following genes were down regulated in MNC relative to MLPC ID1 EDN1 CALU UPA CDK4 CTNNB1 NME2 SERPINH1 SERPINH2 PSMA3 HSPA41 TIMP1 FGF21 KRT14 RTN4 LAMG1 HSPA9 PCK2 IGFBP2 GFAP1 ANXA2 EPRS EED ITGA5 OB2 COL4A5 CRM1 HSPC150 PAX5 IDH1 KRAS2A KRAS2B TUBB1 TUBB5 ATF2 MMP6 NMYC EGFR SHORT FGF19 PEG1 MEST CEBPG KRT18 GRIA1 CACNA1B BAMACAN CITED2 FKHL16 SDF2 CRYL1 MGST1 MMRN VCAM1 FBXL13 IGF1 LAMB1 TFCOUP1 CCCAP KIR2.4 KCNJ8 BUB1B GPS13PRIME PSMA2 VEGFB FGF7 RAMP1 BMP11 SST IL1R1 PAI2 ENG NGN3 OTX2 SMAD2 COL9A11 NPM1 TUBB4 ID2 SNRPF RAMP3 CD164 COL14A1 BUB3 KS DPYSL3 RARG1 FLN1 KCNK2 CLCN4 INTEGRINB5 SEMA3C MAD2L2 VAP A KPNA2 KCNK5 TEAD1 PTN VTN AKT MTHFD1 GGH KIAA01521 MYH7 OSP WNT5A ITGB1 DTYMK CLDN6 FGF5 GADi1 MAPK6 DLX1 CD47 BRIX FABE L30 FAB1 SMS VEGC NFATCB1 DAB1 GATA6 SELPLG CTNNA2 ISL1 ENO2 and EIF4A1.

The following genes were up regulated in CD133 cells relative to MLPC ELAVL2 FZD3 TFRC3PRIME HSPC150 CDK4 TFRC MIDDLE KCNH2 NOP5 SNRPF BUB1B CLDN10 MAD2L1 PTTG MTHFD1 CNTF ZFP911 CRM1 HMGB2 LMO2 BAMACAN DTYMK FLT3 TK1 CEBPA 3 MGST1 EED E21G3 HTR7 KPNA2 DNMT1 FGF19 MAD2L2 HMGIY FGF16 MAP3K5 MYB PLCB4 L30 NMYC LIN 28 FABE HNRPA1 BUB3 ENOS C200RF1 GGH PSMA3 PPAT FLJ21190 CCNB2 SELPLG CDK1 CDC25C HSPA41 HOXA2 CHEK2 MAWBP ANKRD171 OB2 CCNE2 CCT8 NPM1 GAL DLX1 BRIX SMS CHEK1 TUBB1 TUBB5 GATA5 TUBA EAAT21 CD133 NPPA FBXL13 HPRT KCNJ8 IGHA1 IGHA2 M RBL1 NGN3 RNF138 RAMP3 KIF4A ITGA6 PSMA2 ALB FGF4 KCNJ9 BEX2 BEX1 ILlRI GPS13PRIME KCNJ3 NCAM2 LDHB IMPDH2 P53 TNFSF11 CRYL1 ZNF257 MGC12518 ZNF92 ZNF43 ZNF273 FLJ90430 GRIA1 KIAA1573 SST CLCN4 VAP A TFRC5PRIME LAPTM4B SCARB1 ZNF117 ICSBP1 HNF3G DLK1 CD164 NME2 NFKB1 COL9A11 KIAA01521 CNTFR EAAT4 BCAN EGFR SHORT PAI2 HSPA9 BUB1 SOX2 PPP2R1B1 TCF4 ATF4 TRK B LIF and NRG3. Table 6 lists 42 genes identified as belonging to a particular pathway or family. In Table 6 A refers to cell cycle DNA repair DNA metabolism as determined by Memorec s annotation system ME B refers to M phase as determined by gene ontology GO C refers to cell cycle as determined by GO F refers to regulation of mitosis as determined by GO H refers to mitotic cell cycle as determined by GO I refers to cell cycle checkpoint as determined by GO L refers to nucleotide synthesis as determined by GO P refers to nucleotide nucleoside metabolism as determined by GO and S refers to microtubule cytoskeleton as determined by GO.

Many of the genes up regulated in the CD133 cells belong to different protein families that are involved in cell cycle regulation indicating that the CD133 cell population was in strong proliferation before harvesting. Among the up regulated genes are cyclin dependent kinases CDK2 and CDK4 checkpoint proteins CHEK1 BUB1 MAD2L1 BUB1B BUB3 and MAD2L2 cyclins CCNB2 and CCNE2 enzymes involved in nucleotide metabolism NME2 HPRT DTYMK IMPDH2 MTHFD1 PPAT and DNMT1 P53 and proteins involved in re modelling of the cytoskeleton BAMACAN C200RF1 VAP A PPP2R1B1 NPM1 KIF4A TUBA HUMAN and TUBB1 TUBB5 HUMAN .

The following genes were down regulated in CD133 cells relative to MLPC CDKN1A MAPK13 ALCAM CHI3L1 BMP6 VIM COL15A1 COL7A1 LAMA2 CD44 EX8 10 CD9 IL6 THROMBOSPONDIN1 S100A10 CDKN2A1 STX1A TPA EDNRA CEBPB LAMA3 MAP 2 ACTB IL4R SMAD7 COL1A1 BDNF INHBA RXRA MAPK3 WISP3 M6PR CCNG2 ITGA12 PLCG1 MYL4 VEGFD ABCC8 COL4A1 CD44 EX13 15 SLIT 1 LAMA4 CLDN1 KCNK4 KRT8 LXR ALPHA INTEGRINA8 KCNK1 COL11A1 GBP2 CDH5 CTGF PAI1 NT5 CD7 TRK C FN1 REPEAT B ACVR1 ITGB3 SLC2A1 PDGFRA RHOA SOX9 MAT1A GCK THY1 DRD3 IGHA1 IGHA2 PRRX1 AGGRECAN1 MMP2 IL6ST COL16A1 HAND1 FOXG1A FOXG1B ASCL1 FN1 HB EGF SMAD5 BMP11 MMP12 INTEGRINB6 and CD44 EX7 9. Table 7 lists the 38 genes identified as belonging to a particular pathway or family. In Table 7 B refers to extracellular matrix as determined by ME C refers to LAM G DOMAIN as determined by PS D refers to cell adhesion as determined by GO and E refers to structural protein as determined by ME.

Many extracellular matrix genes were down regulated in the CD133 cells including collagens COL11A1 COL15A1 COL16A1 COL1A1 COL4A1 and COL7A1 laminins LAMA2 LAMA3 and LAMA4 and integrins ITGA12 ITGA8 ITGB3 ITGB6 . Interestingly this subset of genes overlaps with those up regulated in the MSC cells see below .

The following genes were up regulated in MSC cells relative to MLPC ACTC ACTA2 SEMA3B COL16A1 LUMICAN COL12A1 COL8A1 COL5A2 FGF7 COL1A2 INHBA DCN1 TPM1 THROMBOSPONDIN5 TIMP3 ITGB8 THROMBOSPONDIN2 BDNF LAMA2 INTEGRINB5 SERPINH1 SERPINH2 COL6A21 COL6A1 FKHL16 LAMA1 LAMG1 GATA4 COL1A1 KRT14 CTGF HESR1 FN1 PAI1 NCAD FLN1 COL4A1 PRKCM INTEGRINA7 TNC CXCL12 NFKB3 MCAM BMP11 CALU VLDLR PRRX1 IL6 SMAD7 ACTG2 PRDC ID3 LAMA4 FN1 REPEAT B DPYSL3 RARG1 EN1 ANXA2 INTEGRINB6 ITGA12 FZD4 VEGC WNT3 IGFBP2 EDN1 PEG1 MEST LAMB1 THROMBOSPONDIN1 ITGB1 COL7A1 FGF21 CDKN1A RTN4 WNT5A FN1 REPEAT A KRT18 MAPK6 EGFR LONG IGF21 COL11A1 HERMES SNAI1 ATF2 VEGFD ITGA5 NGFB HJ1 EDN2 HNF3B SOX9 DLX5 HSCDGF MMP2 FN1 EIIIA CRABP2 COL15A1 GPC4 THY1 COL14A1 TUBB4 CTNNA1 FZD12 COL4A31 WISP3 GATA6 HIF1A SMAD5 CDKN2A1 BMP15 ISL1 EBCTF NRG1 PCK2 M6PR EAAT1 RARB21 ALPL RXRG MMP13 CLDN6 TFCOUP1 AGGRECAN1 MMP19 EDN3 ENO2 BFGFR1 KRT17 ASCL1 BMPR1A VEGF2 KCNK2 ASPIC1 JAM2 DNMT3B SNAI2 TC10 PIGF KS MMP11 ENG FGF6 LEPR EPHB4 CEBPG TCF3 EPRS NTF3 VTN MYH11 VEGF1 TTR PLCE KRT8 CDH1 CNP KCNQ5 INTEGRINA8 SDF2 FGF5 TIMP1 RELN TPA PTN FGF1 SMAD3 IL6ST ACRP PMX2B IGF1R KRAS2A KRAS2B BMP11 IGF1 KCNK1 SMAD1 ORP150 NFATCB1 LXR ALPHA ACVR1 KCNK4 PAFAHIB1 RACK17 BMP7 DDX21 SEMA4C DJ924G13.1 VCAM1 CTNNA2 ADH4 RHOA ACVR2 FABI TRF1 LAMB3 CCCAP MAPT EMX 2 ACTB AKT VGR3 CYP3A4 STX1A CITED2 PDGB PDGFRA LAMA5 GAPD RYUDOCAN SHH AMBP and GFAP1. The MSC had a high amount of strongly up regulated genes. Table 8 lists the genes identified as belonging to a particular pathway or family. In Table 8 A refers to extracellular matrix as determined by GO C refers to structural protein as determined by ME GO D refers to extracellular matrix as determined by ME E refers to extracellular region as determined by GO I refers to histogenesis as determined by GO J refers to collagen as determined by ME K refers to laminin as determined by ME L refers to adherens junction as determined by the Kegg pathway KE and R refers to hormone growth factor secreted factor as determined by ME.

Characteristic for the MSC population is the high enrichment of genes whose protein products are located within the extracellular matrix e.g. keratins KRT18 KRT8 KRT14 KRT17 collagens COL1A1 COL11A1 COL12A1 COL14A1 COL15A1 COL16A1 COL4A1 COL6A1 COL7A1 COL8A1 COL1A2 COL5A2 COL6A21 and COL4A31 laminins LAMA1 LAMA2 LAMA4 LAMA5 LAMB1 LAMB3 and LAMG1 integrins ITGA7 ITGA8 ITGB5 ITGB6 ITGB8 ITGA12 ITGA5 matrix metalloproteases BMP11 MMP1 MMP13 MMP2 and MMP19 and their inhibitors TIMP1 TIMP3 . Furthermore a conspicuous enrichment of growth factors BMP15 NTF3 BDNF PDGB VEGF1 VEGFD VEGF2 INHBA VEGC BMP7 BMP11 PTN IL6 BMP11 HSCDGF NRG1 IGF1 FGFI FGF5 FGF6 FGF7 IGF21 NGFB and FGF21 and growth factor receptors ACVR2 BMPR1A IL6ST PDGFRA BFGFR1 HUMAN EGFR LONG IGF1R M6PR HUMAN LEPR and VGR3 was observed.

The following genes were down regulated in the MSC relative to the MLPC ITGB2 ARHGAP9 CXCR4 INTEGRINB7 PECAM1 PRKCB1 PRKCB3 IL7R AIF1 CD45 EX10 11 PLCG2 CD37 PRKCB2 TCF21 RNF138 EAAT4 EPHA1 RPLP0 PTTG SERPINA12 ITGAX CD24 F11R RPL4 ICAM1 LMO2 HMGB2 CD38 RPL7A BMP3 PTHR2 S100B OSF SNCA GRIK1 HTR4 CHRM1 CDKN2D HNRPA1 IL6R MUSLAMR ICAM2 CSK ITGA6 MMP9 DNMT1 PAK1 IKKB TFRC MIDDLE CHI3L2 ITGA4 FGF20 NBR2 TNFRSF1B CEBPA3 CDO1 NFKB1 GATA2 PDGFRB ICSBP1 KCNE3 TNNC1 ITGA2B CCT8 LEFTA TH RPS24 HTR1F TREM1 CCNB2 SELL CD34 HMGIY COX7A2 SELE TNNT2 SEM2 CHEK1 CLCN5 F5 PRKCQ ITGAL NCAM2 ZNF257 MGC12518 ZNF92 ZNF43 ZNF273 FLJ90430 CDK1 RPL6 RPL24 IGHA1 IGHA2 M PUM2 GJA7 HTR7 PTHR1 MAPK14 MSI21 KCNJ3 CD133 SYP TFRC5PRIME TDGF1 TDGF32 FLT3 HPRT SEMA4D ITGAM KIAA01523 ZFP42 SOX20 FLJ21190 CPN2 POU2F2 CASP81 CLDN10 TREM2 TERT OLIG1 EGR2 CD44 EX3 5 CD33 CNTFR OPN COL9A12 ROBO4 HTR1D1 IKKA KIT NPPA PRKCH FGF4 CD68 NUMB NRG3 SALL2 NOP5 HNF4G FIBROMODULIN CD58 CALB1 GJB5 GJA5 POU5F1 GDF5 POU6F1 CD44 EX16 20 BCAN PTEN1 PTEN2 AGRIN ALB KCNQ4 DPPA5 EPHB2 TGFBR2 and ITGA3. Table 9 lists the genes identified as belonging to a particular pathway or family. In Table 9 A refers to CD as determined by ME B refers to ribonucleoprotein complex as determined by GO C refers to ligand surface marker as determined by ME D refers to ribosome as determined by ME GO KE J refers to external side of plasma membrane as determined by GO and K refers to calcium signaling pathway as determined by KE.

A significant portion of the genes 33 out of 82 down regulated in MSC belongs to the group of CD surface markers CD44 EX16 20 HUMAN CD44 EX3 5 HUMAN SEMA4D CD45 EX10 11 TNFRSF1B CD133 ICAM2 ITGAX TFRC5PRIME KIT IL6R IL7R ITGAM FLT3 PDGFRB CD58 HUMAN SELE SELL CD68 TFRC MIDDLE ITGAL ITGB2 CD24 PECAM1 CD33 CD34 CD37 CD38 ITGA2B ITGA3 ITGA4 ITGA6 and ICAM1 . Nearly the same set of ribosomal proteins up regulated in the PrepaCyte cells is down regulated in the MSC RPLP0 RPL6 RPS24 RPL24 RPL4 RPSA and RPL7A .

Based on the profile of up and down regulated genes relative to MLPC MSC are more committed towards the mesenchymal pathways particularly bone and cartilage as shown by strong up regulation of keratins collagens integrins matrix metalloproteases growth factors and receptors. Markers of particular interest that are down regulated in the MSC relative to MLPC are CXCR4 FLT3 TERT hematopoietic CD markers such as CD133 and CD34 KIT and embryonic stem cell marker POU5F October 4 . See also which illustrate the differences in expression between MLPC and MSC of different groups of genes e.g. adhesion molecules growth factors and receptors genes involved in cell cycle proliferation and anti apoptosis transcription factors translation regulators connective tissue cartilage and bone extracellular matrix endothelium hematopoiesis and the immune response neural genes hepatic genes muscle smooth muscle and cardiac genes genes involved in cell cell communication stem cell markers hematopoietic and mesenchymal epidermal genes adipocytic genes pancreatic genes and genes involved in development morphogenesis .

The following genes were up regulated in LinNeg cells relative to MLPC OPN IL3RA CD68 CTNNB1 CALB1 PPARG VGR1 GJB5 HB EGF ITGA4 UPA HDC GCK FABP4 APOE PAX5 TRK A THBD TH TREM2 KAI1 LIFRA HTR4 KCNA7 IDH1 KITLG CD58 MMP6 MMP12 COL18A12 GDNF MAPK13 GAD11 LAMA3 MMP9 CDH4 F11R ID2 TACE HTR1D1 CACNA1B KCNA4 PTHR2 S100B CD47 CD44 EX13 15 GJA5 ANPEP CD44 EX16 20 CD44 EX11 13 EIF4A1 KCNJ6 MYH7 TIMP2 NEUROD1 KIR2.4 HNF3A MAPK14 HTR1F CD24 GATA2 COX7A2 CD44 EX10 12 CYPA KCNK5 CLCN7 MTHFD2 CD34 CD44 EX3 5 and CRABP1. Table 10 lists the genes identified as belonging to a particular pathway or family. In Table 10 A refers to CD cluster of differentiation as determined by ME B refers to external side of plasma membrane as determined by GO and C refers to tube morphogenesis as determined by GO.

Among the 70 genes up regulated in the Lineage Negative cells are twelve different CD cluster of differentiation surface markers including CD44 represented by five non overlapping PIQOR probes each specific for different adjacent exons and thus detecting various transcript variants of the CD44 gene. Most of the surface markers CD13 CD34 CD44 CD47 CD49D CD58 and CD141 are known to be expressed predominantly on epithelial and endothelial cells.

The following genes were down regulated in the Lineage Negative cells relative to MLPC RXRG CCNE2 CDC25B MEF 2C ERBB2 CLCN3 EBCTF SOX2 CRIP1 HERMES TAL1 NFKB3 TPM1 NEUROG1 MAD1 FZD4 TNFSF11 E2IG3 RARA1 GABRA1 SMAD3 HDAC2 FN1 EIIIA IL1R2 HGF RARB21 ELAVL2 BMP4 SERPINF1 EDN3 TCF4 ACTG2 GATA4 ACTA2 CDKN1B THROMBOSPONDIN2 CNP LAMA1 MAP3K3 BFGFR1 EPHB4 NCAD FZD12 NRG1 EGFRLONG ACRP ASPIC1 SNAI1 DJ924G13.1 TFP1 HIF1A JUNB RPL13A VEGF2 TBX3 SLC16A1 HESR1 ITGB8 INTEGRINA7 ATM P53 EN1 TRK B SMAD1 FLJ10884 TNC PGH2 HSCDGF JUN FN1 REPEAT A NKX2 2 GATA5 CXCL12 ALPL PMX2B TIMP3 TENASCINX PBXIP1 MMP21 22 23 and DCN1. Table 11 lists the genes identified as belonging to a particular pathway or family. In Table 11 A refers to transcription factor activity as determined by GO B refers to transcription factor as determined by ME and C refers to tube nucleic acid binding as determined by GO.

Surprisingly among the 80 genes down regulated 30 are involved in nucleic acid binding GO 0003676 and or exhibit transcription factor activity GO 0003700 ME transcription factor GATA4 HUMAN CRIP1 ELAVL2 PMX2B EN1 NKX2 2 HDAC2 SOX2 RARA1 HUMAN GATA5 DJ924G13.1 SNAI1 JUN JUNB NFKB3 HIFLA NEUROG1 TAL1 TCF4 EBCTF HESR1 MEF 2C TBX3 RARB21 SMAD3 HUMAN RXRG SMAD1 ATM P53 and HERMES . Increased expression of TBX3 and SOX2 in MLPC relative to the LinNeg cells is of particular interest.

Table 12 provides the expression pattern of defined surface markers of each of the cell populations relative to MLPC. Shaded cells refer to a decrease in expression of the particular marker relative to MLPC whereas an up arrow indicates that expression was increased in that cell population relative to the MLPC.

Overall MLPCs demonstrate a high degree of sternness and quiescence down regulation of 65 genes associated with active protein synthesis i.e. ribosomal subunits 18 genes linked with phosphate metabolism e.g. kinases and phosphatases 123 genes regulating proliferation and cell cycling e.g. cyclins cyclin dependent kinases and checkpoint proteins . MLPCs exhibited a very high degree of differentiation multipotentiality as seen in the down regulation of 12 different clusters of genes associated with differentiation surface marker genes e.g. epithelium and endothelium and up regulation of 80 genes involved in nucleic acid binding and transcription factors that regulate differentiation of tissues from all three germinal layers. Additionally 10 genes associated with maintenance of sternness in embryonic stem cells were overexpressed in MLPC compared to the other cell groups. In particular MSCs were shown to over express genes associated with connective and stromal tissue and were strongly committed to that lineage by array analysis.

The karyotype of MLPC clone UM081704 1 E8 Example 5 was assessed at 20 doublings and 80 doublings and compared with the karyotype of MSC Cambrex normal MNC and the KG 1 cell line a myeloid leukemia line. MNCs were the reference cell for the other karyotypes. MLPC have a normal karyotype with complete stability through 80 doublings. No deletions translocations or suspicious single nucleotide polymorphisms were observed. MSC had deletions and potential epigenic changes after 20 doublings. KG 1 cells as expected in their role as a positive neoplastic control had major deletions and substitutions.

While the invention has been described in conjunction with the foregoing detailed description and examples the foregoing description and examples are intended to illustrate and not to limit the scope of the invention which is defined by the scope of the appended claims. Other aspects advantages and modifications are within the scope of the claims.

