---

title: Push-to-talk event notification
abstract: A method and system for notifying a push-to-talk enabled user of an event. The method includes the steps of: receiving event data to be provided to a user; determining a push-to-talk configuration including carrier information for the user; and based on the push-to-talk configuration, providing the event data and user identification information to a carrier identified in the carrier information. The system may include an aggregation service controller; a text to speech converter; a user PTT connection mapping database; an online service interface; and a PTT service provider interface.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07756539&OS=07756539&RS=07756539
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07756539
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050527
---
The present invention is directed to providing individuals with mobile access to events generated by online services via push to talk devices.

People increasingly rely on electronic messaging and notification services to communicate and manage information. Online service providers such as MSN Yahoo and AOL allow individuals having accounts with their service to receive and send email store contact and calendar information communicate through instant messaging services and receive and generate reminders for events. The increasingly mobile nature of users and the diverse nature of mobile devices makes providing mobile users with access to online services and other electronically stored information difficult.

Mobile devices can include personal digital assistants PDAs laptop computers cellular phones or other wireless devices such as smart phones. Wireless devices including some PDA s and cellular phones can access information from online service providers or other host systems. Normally such devices require specific application programs or a World Wide Web interface to gain access to the online service information of the user. The Web interface provided by such mobile devices is often much more limited than a standard desktop computer Web browser. Online web services have difficulty reaching service subscribers who are not using a desktop computer since web applications for online service provides do not operate well on the limited web interface of mobile devices. Many online service providers build data connectivity interfaces to cellular networks and develop client side applications for mobile devices. However the effort of deploying data connectivity based clients onto mobile devices is difficult due to slow penetration of smart phones many users reluctance to use non voice features of their phone and the difficulty of porting web service enabled client applications to mobile devices due to variety of mobile devices operating systems and programming environments.

Reminder messages can also be sent through messenger services such as MSN Messenger Yahoo Messenger and AOL messenger. However reminders sent through these services must be accessible to the messenger service provider. Each of the aforementioned providers generally has access only to users who have enabled accounts with a corresponding service provider who stores content for the user. Hence a user who stores information with one service must use that services corresponding messenger service to provide reminders through this mechanism.

While some online services have experimented with providing audio based interfaces such interfaces are generally slow and difficult for users to interact with. They use voice recognition technology to allow users to respond to audio prompts allowing the user to for example have email read to them after phoning into the service.

Push to talk commonly abbreviated as PTT is a method of conversing on half duplex communication lines by pushing a button in order to send voice communication from one s device and releasing the button to receive voice communication. While PTT is a feature that is available on certain cellular phone models the feature has expanded to use in messenger and voice over IP applications. Indeed the feature can conceivably be enabled on any communications network.

In the mobile environment PTT allows a mobile phone to function as a digital two way radio in push to talk operation. Currently PTT users must to belong to the same mobile operator s carrier s network. Current providers include Nextel Communications Verizon Wireless and Sprint PCS in the United States. Each service uses a different technology. Nextel uses Integrated Digital Enhanced Network iDEN technology which combines communications and telephony systems in a single device. Verizon s service runs over a CDMA 1xRTT high speed data network and is based on voice over IP.

The PTT market both for wireless and non wireless communications is growing. A means for providing access to user information via PTT would be useful.

The present invention roughly described pertains to using web technology and text to voice conversion mechanisms to provide online service content in an audio format directly to PTT enabled mobile devices of PTT subscribers. In one embodiment the invention is a method for notifying a user of an event. The method includes the steps of receiving event data to be provided to a user determining a push to talk configuration including carrier information for the user and based on the push to talk configuration providing the event data and user identification information to a carrier identified in the carrier information

In an alternative embodiment the invention includes a notification event server. The notification event server may include an aggregation service controller a text to speech converter a user PTT connection mapping database a online service interface and a PTT service provider interface.

In another embodiment the invention is a method for providing an online service. The method may include the steps of providing a online service interface to receive event data to be provided to a user maintaining a push to talk configuration including carrier information for the user and upon receiving an event and based on the push to talk configuration outputting the event data and user identification information to a carrier identified in the carrier information.

The present invention can be accomplished using hardware software or a combination of both hardware and software. The software used for the present invention is stored on one or more processor readable storage media including hard disk drives CD ROMs DVDs optical disks floppy disks tape drives RAM ROM or other suitable storage devices. In alternative embodiments some or all of the software can be replaced by dedicated hardware including custom integrated circuits gate arrays FPGAs PLDs and special purpose computers.

These and other objects and advantages of the present invention will appear more clearly from the following description in which the preferred embodiment of the invention has been set forth in conjunction with the drawings.

The invention uses web technology and text to voice conversion mechanisms to provide online service content in an audio format directly to PTT enabled mobile devices of PTT subscribers. PTT provides a unique user centric mechanism for reaching users in a convenient fashion since it does not require complex user interaction with the device to access information. In one embodiment an online service subscriber can register PTT subscription information with an online service as a contact point for the subscriber. When the online service seeks to contact the subscriber with a notification event such as a reminder it will ensure the notification is in an audio format converting text to voice if necessary and send a PTT notification to the subscriber. The subscriber will be notified of the event through a PTT enabled device and upon activating the device the message will be played to the subscriber. By taking advantage of existing PTT infrastructure the online service provider does not have to integrate with various devices and manufacturers rather only the entry point into the network. As many phones today have PTT capabilities the notification service can be made broadly available and using a voice driven interface reduces the complexity of online service usage over a phone. The invention finds further applicability when used with other electronic services such as when integrated with mail servers or when online service information is provided directly from PTT carriers.

Aggregation processor will receive the notification event and if necessary perform a text speech conversion. The aggregation processor determines which PTT carrier the user subscribes to and how to contact the user via the PTT carrier. The contact information can be the user s phone number or other identifier which is utilized by the carrier API to identify the user within the carrier s PTT network. Once the PTT aggregation processor has determined where the user is the event in a voiced format will be provided to the carrier application programming interface API . In this context the term API refers to any carrier provided access point for a push to talk system and may comprise hardware software network interfaces and a command set to allow third parties to access the carrier s PTT system. Carrier API can be any interface provided by the PTT carrier network provider which allows the message to be transferred via the carrier s network to the user . Once provided to the interface the PPT carrier transmits the notification event to the user via the carrier s protocol. The PTT aggregation processor may comprise any of the embodiments of the processor device shown in .

In a further aspect of the present invention the configuration information may contain filtering information to identify which notification events are to be provided to the user via the PTT service. This identifying or filtering information can take the form of user names or groups of usernames for which instant messages are to be delivered or blocked email addresses allowed or blocked message key word filtering event type filtering event time filtering or the like. For example the user may identify that a certain user or group of users emails be delivered immediately to the PTT service while all others are blocked. The user may further wish to configure notification event transmission between 10 p.m. and 8 a.m. The user may want to receive messages from third parties such as sports scores or other information and may configure the system to allow such messages to be passed directly through the notification system to the user s PTT device.

The PTT configuration may contain additional filtering within the notification event information such as which parts of the information the user wishes to include in an alert. For example in an email the user may specify that the user only wishes to know who the message is from i.e. the from line and to be read the first line or multiple lines of the message up to a specified size limit. One of average skill in the art will recognize that any number of filtering options for notification events of various types is possible.

In the method begins when a user notification event is received from an online service provider at step . Once the event is received at step in one embodiment the method can begin directly at step to determine whether the user is PTT configured. In one embodiment of the method begins with step which is a check of the user s delivery preferences for the event. If the message is generated by an online service the service may wish to present the user with a number of options on how the user may be notified. A user having both a messenger service such as MSN messenger and the PTT service may configure preferences as to which service should have priority with respect to event delivery or to try both forms of delivery for a given event. The preferences set at step may be on a user wide level or specific to the type of event time of event source of event or any other filterable characteristic of the event. At step the method determines which delivery method is appropriate for the event.

If the preference for the event is for online delivery via messenger step determines whether the user is online and accessible via a messenger service. If the user is online at step the method may notify the user via the messenger service at step and end the process at step . Alternatively steps and may follow step as discussed below.

If the user is not online the method determines at step whether it should try delivering the event via the PTT service. The outcome of step will depend on whether the user configuration indicates a PTT configuration is available and whether a delivery attempt to the PTT service has been tried and failed as a result of for example the delivery sequence discussed below .

If the preference at step indicates a PTT delivery or if an online delivery fails and step indicates a retry the system determines at step whether the user is PTT configured. If the user is not PTT configured the method ends at step . If the user is PTT configured step determines whether the notification event should be delivered based on the user s configuration information. If the user has set filtering such that the notification event should be blocked the method ends at step . For example if the user has chosen to block all emails from a specific individual and receives an email from that individual this step will block delivery of the message to the PTT interface. It will be recognized that the filtering described in step can take place prior to generation of the notification event. That is the configuration information for the use may block the generation event at step eliminating the notification event generation.

If the user has a PTT configuration and the notification event should be delivered the online service provider connects to the aggregation server at step and delivers the content to the aggregation server. Once content has been delivered at step the process can optionally end at step . Optionally at step the online service provider can wait for confirmation that the user has accessed the event by selecting the PTT button on the user s PTT enabled device. At step the method will determine after a sufficient period of time whether the user has answered. If the user has answered the method may end at step . If the user has not answered a check of the user s PTT configuration settings will allow the method to determine whether or not to attempt to deliver the message again. In this case the user may configure the system never to retry or to retry at specific intervals and or a specific number of times. If the user has configured a retry attempt a timer may be initiated at step to determine the interval between retry attempts and upon expiration of the timer the method returns to step to attempt to deliver the message again. Step may further include implementing a counter to determine whether a sequential number of retry attempts has occurred and if so the determination at step may be in the negative. If the configuration indicates at step that no additional attempts to delivery should be made or once the user answers at step and the message is played to the user at step the web service may be notified at step . If no delivery can be made at step optionally at step the method determines whether it should attempt to deliver the message via a messenger service. Like step the determination at step will depend on whether the user configuration indicates a messaging configuration and whether a delivery attempt to the messaging service has been tried and failed as a result of for example the delivery sequence discussed above .

When a user receives notification of a PTT message the user will generally receive a beep or other sensory notification on the user s phone. The user can choose to accept the notification and listen to the message or the user can choose to ignore it. Based on the configuration described above the system will either retry to send the message or it will abandon the attempt to contact the user.

At step the aggregation processor can wait for confirmation from the carrier API that the user has answered the PTT call and the message has been played to the user at step . If the user has not answered or if the user has answered at step then at step the method can report this information to the online service step of . Following step the aggregation service process with respect to this particular message ends.

Messages in the outbound queues are provided to the carrier interface which transmits these messages via a network such as internet to a carrier specific PTT application programming interface such as interface . shows three specific carriers carrier carrier carrier each having a specific carrier PTT API and carrier specific PTT service with a carrier specific network connecting to individual users. The carrier specific API is a connector to the carrier s PTT service such as carrier PTT service . The PTT service carrier will determine the location and availability of the user and transmit the message via the carrier specific network such as carrier network to the user . It will be recognized that the aggregation server may have any number of different carrier interfaces and mapping database may contain information for any number of different carriers and carrier networks. It will be further recognized that the carrier networks and carrier services need not be wireless or cellular networks but may be any network enabled PTT service including for example messenger enabled PTT services for given users.

If a user chooses to respond to the message by for example pressing a communication button on the user s PTT enabled device the message is routed back via the carrier network to the respective inbound message queue and if possible to the originating online service. For example if a user is responding to an email the user s PTT enabled device can generate an inbound message on the device which may be converted to voice over IP or another standard audio format and returned to the online system for routing to the original the original email sender.

System allows users operating processing devices and to access email messenger and other data and forward outbound messages and messaging information to users within the domain of system and domains accessible via the internet . Users may connect to the system via any number of public or private networks including the Internet. The user database server stores information allowing users to authenticate themselves to system to access their email and internet messaging and to allow other servers in the system to direct mail and messages within the system to storage locations on storage units . Email server may comprise a web server which provides an email interface to a web browser which institutes a browser process on the user computer . Email server can render email data from the data storage units to a user using computer to access the email system . Likewise POP IMAP server can provide email data to a POP e mail client or an IMAP client on user computer . Messenger server can provide information directly to a messenger client or via a web internet messaging server to web based messenger clients operating in a browser process and web browser .

Inbound and outbound email messages from users on computers and are sent and received in system via the MTA . Email MTA generally uses SMTP to route mail via the internet to users at other internet accessible domains. E mail MTA is a front end server to which emails transmitted via the internet to system are directed and which forwarded messages from users of the messaging system to other users on the internet . It should be understood that a web based enterprise service provider environment a number of email MTAs will be present.

The user database server is a data store of user account and storage location information for each of the users having a user account or email address within system . The user information may include the PTT configuration information accessed via the user configuration interface by the user. Storage units are essentially large disk arrays storing user message information. The system may include additional components not shown here for the convenience in understanding the present invention.

In one embodiment an alert server interacts with the e mail MTA and messenger server to perform the event generation step of based on receipt of an email message or generation of a user event recorded by the user and stored in the user information or the receipt of a messenger message by messenger server . When the alert server generates the notification event it can connect with the messenger server to perform steps and of and the aggregation server to perform the balance of the method of as discussed above. In the embodiment of the online service interface present in aggregation server will talk directly to the messenger and alert server to receive data from the email server and messenger server and any other content servers which are present in the system and provide them via the carrier interface to the carrier APIs as shown in .

It should be recognized that any of the above embodiments need not be provided via a voice over cellular network. In addition it should be recognized that the online service provider is the initiator of the service. In one case the online service provider can provide the configuration interfaces to the user. In an alternative configuration the operator of the aggregation processor may be a separate entity from the online service provider and may provide interfaces to the online service provider to gather and maintain the contact information for the PTT service of the user. It will be further understood that the text to speech technology utilized herein is standard on many Microsoft Exchange servers currently.

The invention is operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

The invention may be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by a computer. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing the invention includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus.

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of the any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through an non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies. A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard and pointing device commonly referred to as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer although only a memory storage device has been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on memory device . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

The foregoing detailed description of the invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed. Many modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teaching. The described embodiments were chosen in order to best explain the principles of the invention and its practical application to thereby enable others skilled in the art to best utilize the invention in various embodiments and with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated. It is intended that the scope of the invention be defined by the claims appended hereto.

