---

title: Air-independent fuel combustion energy conversion
abstract: A metallic fuel mixture including solidic powders such as silicon, aluminum and magnesium together with an oxidant, and steam and hydrogen are fed into a combustor to undergo combustion therein. The combustor is positioned within a steam chamber enclosure filled with water as working fluid which is heated by the combustion. The heated water within the stream chamber enclosure is thereby converted into pressurized steam fed into a turbine for operation thereof to impart rotation to a shaft thereby propelling a sea vessel within which the steam chamber enclosure is housed. During such combustion, discharge from the combustor of a liquid by-product occurs as outflow through an exhaust funnel into a collector from which the by-product is processed for ejection into seawater without signature detection. The radiant energy generated by such combustion may be converted by photovoltaic cells within the steam chamber enclosure into electrical energy made available outside of the steam chamber enclosure, while some of the heat energy generated by the combustion within the combustor may also be converted by thermoelectric cells into electrical energy made available outside of the steam chamber enclosure.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07430866&OS=07430866&RS=07430866
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07430866
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051108
---
The present invention relates generally to combustion of fuel for generating propulsion energy within a seawater environment.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore.

Air independent fuel combustion systems for generating energy to propel a sea vessel within a seawater environment requires use of an oxidant within a combustor. Additionally an internal combustion engine and turbine associated with the combustor generally require an excessive supply of oxygen extracted from the oxidant for operational support. Furthermore the combustion product discharged from the combustor such as carbon dioxide CO may result in expulsion of a detectable signature from the seawater vessel being propelled.

Aluminum and magnesium powders form solidic powder mixtures utilized as combustible fuel with either air or water as oxidants. The aluminum type fuel mixture advantageously provides an excellent energy density as a result of the combustion. However its associated combustion discharge by product may form a slag responsible for agglomerating and clogging problems with respect to the exhaust port of the combustor. The magnesium type of fuel mixture is advantageously more readily combustible under a lower boiling point than the aluminum type but provides for a significantly lower energy density. It is therefore an important object of the present invention to utilize both of the advantages associated with aluminum and magnesium fuel mixtures while avoiding the latter referred to problems associated therewith in air independent combustion systems.

Pursuant to the present invention both aluminum Al and magnesium Mg are utilized to form with silicon Si an alloy such as MgAlSior a similar compound of a fuel mixture fed into a combustor with an oxidant. The combustor is enclosed within a steam chamber into which a working fluid such as water is injected. Combustion of the fuel mixture is initiated within the combustion chamber in response to inflow of steam or some other suitable oxidant so as to generate heat therein which elevates the temperature of the working fluid water to thereby supply pressurized steam into a turbine from which mechanical energy is rotationally delivered for propulsion of a sea vessel within seawater.

The combustor is connected by a funnel extending from the combustion chamber to a collector within which a liquid combustion by product such as a eutectic cordierite oxide MgAlSiO is received as a result of the combustion of the fuel mixture. Such by product oxide has a significantly lower melting point than other metal oxides. Under selective control the liquid combustion by product is solidified cooled and discharged from the collector without signature detectability into the seawater environment of the sea vessel without contamination thereof. The type of combustion discharge from the turbine also avoids signature detection.

The outer shell of the steam chamber of the combustor serves as a pressure vessel containing steam and may have mounted thereon photo voltaic cells through which radiant energy generated by the combustion is converted into electrical energy. Thermoelectric cells may also be mounted within a layered wall of the combustion chamber inside the stream chamber for consuming some of the combustion generated heat by conversion into electrical energy. A heat shield would protect the cells and or chamber wall from excess heat imposed by direct contact with the flame or abrasive damage associated with the combustion products. The electrical energy respectively converted by the photovoltaic and the thermoelectric cells is delivered therefrom for use outside the steam chamber.

Referring now to the drawing in detail illustrates an air independent type of fuel combustion energy conversion system through which sea vessel vehicles may be propelled within a seawater environment. Accordingly the system has a power turbine associated therewith from which a propulsion drive shaft extends to mechanically impart rotational energy to propellers of a propulsion unit associated with the sea vessel for example. The rotational energy output of the turbine to the shaft is derived from pressurized steam delivered through a steam line from a steam chamber enclosure . Low pressure steam is then discharged from the turbine through an exhaust line into a condenser as a result of combustion within the chamber enclosure . The pressurized steam supplied to the turbine from the chamber enclosure is derived from a working fluid such as water fed into the chamber enclosure through a working fluid infeed line from a source as diagrammed in . The working fluid or water received through the infeed line within the chamber enclosure is converted into pressurized steam which is fed into the turbine through the steam line while fuel mixture is supplied to the chamber enclosure through a fuel infeed line from a source of a metal fuel mixture together with an oxidant such as steam through an infeed line from a source of oxidant as diagrammed in . As a result of the combustion within the chamber enclosure a byproduct such as eutectic mineral cordierite liquid oxide mixture by product is formed having a lower melting point of 1467 C. relative to that of other metal oxides which is discharged from the chamber enclosure through a by product exhaust funnel into a by product collector . The by product liquid collected within the collector may be discharged therefrom under selective control through a by product discharge line . A processor cools the by product in the discharge line and converts it into a dischargeable form. The combustion by product mixture delivered from the chamber enclosure is thereby cooled and solidified into a convenient form such as spheres pellets or granular particles similar to sand by way of example. Steam and hydrogen formed as by products of combustion also exit from the chamber enclosure through a by product output line into a fuel cell as diagrammed in which also diagrams the possible delivery from the chamber enclosure of converted electrical energy from the processor outside of the system to an electrical energy storage device . The hydrogen by product may be optionally utilized within the fuel cell if oxygen or a suitable oxidant is available.

As shown in the outer shell of the steam chamber enclosure is internally coated with an electrically insulating protective lining such as silicon rubber to prevent chamber shell corrosion under high pressure hot temperature steam conditions within the steam chamber enclosure and to electrically isolate an optional radiant energy collector such as a photovoltaic array. A plurality of photovoltaic cells may be internally mounted on the internally coated outer shell of the steam chamber enclosure so as to convert radiant energy produced therein by the combustion directly into electrical energy delivered for use outside of the system from the energy storage as diagrammed in . The cells are likely to be a special type similar to those used in sun concentration systems. The insulation lining also serves as an adhesive for attachment of the solar cells .

As also shown in a fuel combustor connected to the funnel is positioned within the steam chamber enclosure to which the fuel infeed line the oxidant infeed line and the by product output line are connected. The fuel and oxidant when conducted respectively through the fuel infeed line and the oxidant infeed into the fuel combustor results in the high temperature radiant energy emitting combustion being performed therein producing the aforementioned by product discharge therefrom through the funnel and the by product outflow line . The heat generated by such combustion elevates the temperature of the working fluid within the steam chamber enclosure for pressurized heating of the working fluid water therein into the steam fed through the steam line into the turbine .

With continued reference to the combustor is of a double wall outer shell type having an outer shell layer spaced from an inner shell layer . Thermoelectric cells are sandwiched between the combustor shell layers and so as to convert some of the combustion heat directly into some of the electrical energy made available for consumption outside of the system from the storage . The inner layer is composed of a refractory material such as rhenium or tungsten which serves as a heat shield. Such consumption of some of the heat energy generated by combustion within the combustor accordingly lowers the temperature and pressure of the steam within the steam chamber enclosure for more practical operation of the turbine .

According to one embodiment of the present invention the fuel mixture fed into the system from the source through the infeed line is a metal alloy such as pre cordierite that consists of a mixture of silicon aluminum and magnesium having a formula such as MgAlSi. The combustion by product resulting from the combustion thereof has a significantly lower melting point of 1467 C. as compared to 1715 C. 2054 C. and 2826 C. respectively associated with combustion by product of silicon Si aluminum Al and magnesium Mg components of the fuel mixture delivered from the source . Operation of the combustor thereby results in discharge of a mineral cordierite combustion by product from the chamber enclosure through the funnel as a liquid rather than a solid with the aforementioned low melting point temperature so as to eliminate any slag agglomeration problem by initial handling of the by product as a liquid. Furthermore the aforementioned discharged by product is of a composition similar to that of the basalt oceanic crust in the seawater environment so as to avoid discharge of a detectable signature having an environmental impact.

According to another embodiment of the present invention the aforementioned fuel mixture from the source is replaced by a wire type of fuel that is relatively safe to handle and store such as a thin walled aluminum tube containing a mixture of silicon magnesium and possibly other additives stored on a spool. The latter referred to type of fuel is delivered to a port on the combustor inside of the chamber enclosure using a servo mechanism such as that utilized with a welding device.

Obviously other modifications and variations of the present invention may be possible in light of the foregoing teachings. It is therefore to be understood that within the scope of the appended claims the invention may be practiced otherwise than as specifically described.

