---

title: Apparatus and method for programming the recording of broadcast programs and delaying the recording end times when extension key words are detected
abstract: An apparatus and method for programming the recording of broadcast programs, for programming recording by setting the recording start time and the recording end time of a given program in the broadcast program information is provided, wherein the apparatus and method for programming the recording of broadcast programs, delays the recording end time of programmed broadcast program, when a broadcast program is present in which an extension keyword is detected by searching electronic program guide information acquired regarding broadcast programs to be programmed, and electronic program guide information acquired regarding programs scheduled to be broadcast on the same channel and the same date as and prior to the programmed broadcast program, for predetermined extension keywords indicating program extension or delay.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08135262&OS=08135262&RS=08135262
owner: Mitsubishi Electric Corporation
number: 08135262
owner_city: Tokyo
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050210
---
This invention relates to apparatus and methods for programming the recording of broadcast programs for programming and recording programs that are to be broadcast.

Conventionally when broadcast programs scheduled to be broadcast are programmed a user set up the channel the start time and the end time of a program for apparatus programming the recording of broadcast programs and the apparatus for programming the recording of broadcast programs has recorded the programs in line with the contents of the setting. In the meantime in real broadcasting e.g. a sports program such as a professional baseball game it has occurred that the broadcast time is often extended due to the game situation. As a result a situation has occurred in which when a program scheduled to be broadcast subsequent to an extended program remains as registered by maintaining the originally scheduled start time and end time thereof on an apparatus for programming the recording of broadcast programs part or the whole of the programmed broadcast program fails to be recorded due to the extension of the program. Therefore it has been proposed e.g. refer to Patent Document 1 that by searching electronic program guide information of a programming broadcast program or a program scheduled to be broadcast prior to the programming broadcast program for a maximum extension time the end time of the programming broadcast program recording is extended in accordance with when detected the maximum extension time.

However information being represented by character codes of the current electronic program guide information has rarely described maximum extension times thus causing failures of extending the recording end time with respect to most programs that are likely to be extended. As a result part or the whole of a program has been incapable of being recorded.

This invention has been made to solve the above described problems with conventional art. An object is to provide an apparatus and method for programming the recording of broadcast programs that prevents an occurrence of failures of part or the whole of programming broadcast programs by detecting a possible extension of a programming broadcast program and broadcast programs scheduled to be broadcast prior to the programming broadcast program and by then delaying when the program is judged to be extended the recording end time of the programming broadcast program.

An apparatus for programming the recording of broadcast programs related to the present invention comprises a receiving means for receiving broadcast programs a recording means for recording broadcast programs received by the receiving means a recording programming means for setting the recording start time and the recording end time of a given program in the broadcasting programs to program a recording a broadcast program information acquisition means for acquiring electronic program guide information an extension keyword search means for searching the electronic program guide information acquired about broadcast programs to be broadcast on the same channel and the same date as and prior to the programmed broadcast program for predetermined extension keywords indicating a broadcast program extension or delay and if as a result of search by the extension keyword search means broadcast programs in which the extension keyword is detected are present a delay means for delaying the recording end time of the programmed broadcast program.

Moreover a recording programming method related to the present invention being a recording programming method of setting in order to receive and record broadcast programs the recording start time and the recording end time of a given program in the broadcast programs to program a recording includes the steps of acquiring electronic program guide information searching the electronic program guide information acquired regarding broadcast programs to be broadcast on the same channel and the same date as and prior to the programmed broadcast program for predetermined extension keywords indicating a broadcast program extension or delay and delaying the recording end time of the broadcast program to be programmed if as a result of search in the extension keyword search step the extension keyword is found.

According to an apparatus or method of programming the recording of broadcast programs of this invention electronic program guide information acquired about programming broadcast programs and electronic program guide information acquired about broadcast programs scheduled to be broadcast on the same channel and the same date as and prior to the programmed broadcast program are searched for a predetermined extension keyword indicating program extension or delay since when a broadcast program is present in which an extension keyword is detected the recording end time of a programmed broadcast program is delayed even though a programmed broadcast program and a broadcast program scheduled to be broadcast prior to the programmed broadcast program each on the same channel are extended on their real broadcasting there are effects that a situation in which part or the whole of the programmed broadcast program fails to be recorded can be avoided.

In the TV tuner receives broadcast programs via the antenna . The TV tuner having a function of tuning in to a designated channel outputs tuned channel s video and audio signals to the A D converter. The A D converter converts into digital signals analog video signals and audio signals from the TV tuner . The MPEG encoder compresses in an MPEG format digitized video signals outputting bitstreams that are the compressed data. The HDD stores bitstreams outputted from the MPEG encoder. The HDD controller being a controller for controlling the HDD controls writing and reading operations of the bitstreams. The recording buffer is provided so that while writing bitstreams into the HDD the bitstreams outputted from the MPEG encoder are capable of being recorded without a lack of bitstreams.

The MPEG decoder decodes the bitstreams compressed in the MPEG format to convert into non compressed digital video signals. The readout buffer avoids occurrence of buffer underflow in decoding by reading and storing in advance bitstreams that the MPEG decoder requires. The OSD is a drawing device for superimposing text and image data onto MPEG decoded digital image signals. The D A converter converts digital video signals into analog video signals that the monitoring display can display.

The slicer extracts an EPG superimposed into VBIs vertical blanking intervals of broadcast wave. The remote control interface receives control signals from the remote control and transmits them to the CPU . The CPU controls of the recording programming apparatus in Embodiment 1 and also performs various data conversions. Moreover the CPU is connected with the volatile memory that allows data to be stored while power is supplied and the nonvolatile memory that allows data to be stored even while power is interrupted and reads out stored data at the next start up of the apparatus.

The encoder decoder control unit controls the MPEG encoder and the MPEG decoder . The system control unit performs the status control of the apparatus for programming the recording of the broadcast programs based on input operations from control buttons not shown provided on the apparatus main unit input operation from the remote control interface and on a status of the apparatus for programming the recording of the broadcast programs. The display system control unit displays status etc. on a display unit not shown provided on the apparatus main unit and on an exterior monitor via the OSD in response to the status of the apparatus for programming the recording of the broadcast programs. The recording programming unit first performs processing of video programming that a user has set next checks whether there has occurred duplication between information that has already programmed when new programming is made and information that is newly programmed and then stores the programming contents into the nonvolatile memory . In the EPG unit the EPG control unit takes control of the EPG data analysis the EPG data backup unit and the EPG database in response to EPG status such as EPG acquisition and EPG data display. The EPG data analysis unit analyzes the EPG data extracted by the slicer .

Specifically since the EPG data is transmitted as packetized into the VBI the analysis unit performs packet analysis for dividing the EPG data into units of packets and categorizing on a kinds of packets basis decryption for decrypting the EPG data that is conveyed as encrypted and decompression for decompressing the EPG data that has been compressed so as to reduce the volume of transmission data. The EPG data backup unit performs backup processing for saving the EPG data onto the HDD so as to display a broadcast program guide listing without reacquisition of the EPG data when the recording programming apparatus is powered off and then powered on again as well as writing onto the volatile memory data analyzed by the EPG data analysis unit. The EPG database provides the recording programming unit as being a superordinate module utilizing the EPG the system control unit and the display system control unit with various APIs application programming interfaces for referring to and utilizing the EPG data as well as organizes a variety of information items for example start time end time broadcast time period channel title detailed information program genre being included in the EPG data after having been analyzed by the EPG data analysis unit .

Next the operation of the apparatus for programming the recording of broadcast programs 1 will be described. First a case in which an apparatus for programming the recording of broadcast programs 1 performs recording of a broadcast program will be explained. It is assumed that programming data relating to a broadcast program planned to be recorded has already been set and stored into the nonvolatile memory . While an apparatus for programming the recording of broadcast programs being in standby typically when the recording start time e.g. three minutes prior to the recording start time of a programmed broadcast program approaches the system control unit starts which is set as timer start up in advance. Then the system control unit provides a start up instruction to each of modules all of the modules include the encoder decoder control unit the recording programming unit and the display system control unit etc and each of constituent elements all of the element inside the apparatus for programming the recording of broadcast programs including the MPEG encoder the MPEG decoder and the HDD etc and moreover to provide an instruction to the encoder decoder control unit so as to put the MPEG encoder into standby mode to wait for recording. When the recording start time arrives the broadcast waves received by the antenna are turned to the channel corresponding to the programmed broadcast program by the TV tuner tunes and its video and audio information will be captured. Furthermore the A D converter converts analog video signals into e.g. digital signals conforming to Code Rec etc. The MPEG encoder compresses in the MPEG format the digital video signals. Bitstreams outputted from the MPEG encoder are temporarily stored into the recording buffer and written in the order of being stored onto the HDD controlled by a HDD controller .

Next the playback operation of the recording programming apparatus will be described. A user manipulates the remote control or a control panel not shown on the apparatus main unit to display on e.g. the monitor unit a broadcast program table recorded in the HDD . The user selects by manipulating the remote control a reproduction desired program from the broadcast program table displayed on the display monitor and gives instructions to reproduce the program. These processings are executed by receiving radio or infrared signals transmitted from the remote control at the remote control interface and then sending the instructions to the CPU . The CPU reads out the playback requested program via the HDD controller storing the bitstreams into the readout buffer memory . The MPEG decoder reads out the bitstreams having been stored into the readout buffer and then performs MPEG decoding. Decoded digital video signals are combined with other text display data signals etc. and further the combined digital video signals are converted by the D A converter into analog signals which are outputted onto the exterior display monitor presenting the user with video images.

Next a method of acquiring EPG information by using the apparatus for programming the recording of broadcast programs will be described. Here a case will be explained in which the EPG data is sent as superimposed onto the VBIs of broadcast waves in a particular channel. The apparatus for programming the recording of broadcast programs equipped with only one TV tuner may in some cases be incapable of receiving EPG superimposed channels because the TV tuner is in use while broadcast programs are being recorded or viewed. Consequently the EPG information is assumed to be received only when the recording programming apparatus is apparently powered off e.g. when in the standby mode. Note that when an extra TV tuner is provided for exclusively receiving the EPG information or a method is adopted such that a plurality of TV tuners is switched over from one tuner to another on a timely basis the EPG data can be received even in a state in which the recording programming apparatus is powered on or in operation.

Since in Embodiment 1 only one tuner as the TV tuner is mounted the apparatus is assumed to receive being in standby signals. It is assumed that the apparatus for programming the receiving of broadcast programs has been in the standby mode and now the time when the EPG information is broadcast arrives. EPG superimposed waves are received by the antenna and tuned in to EPG superimposed channels by the TV tuner and the slicer extracts EPG data superimposed onto VBIs of video signals. The EPG data in Embodiment 1 is supposed to be that the data is transmitted being divided into minute packets and also each packet is attached with a packet ID for identifying what data the packet contains. In addition information contained in the packets can be encrypted as required so as to be incapable of being browsed or falsified easily. Moreover each packet is compressed to reduce the data volume thereof. With respect to the EPG data that has been processed as described above the EPG data analysis unit performs on a timely basis a packet analysis for classifying packet data on a kind of packets basis decryption for decrypting the encrypted EPG data and decompression for decompressing the EPG data that has been compressed and returning to the original EPG data before compression. The processing of the EPG data as described above is performed by the EPG data analysis unit being stored into the volatile memory .

The EPG data stored in the volatile memory is wiped out when the apparatus for programming the receiving of broadcast programs is powered off resulting in the volatile memory stored EPG data being unavailable at the time of next start up. Therefore the same EPG data stored in the volatile memory is stored as a backup into the HDD or the nonvolatile memory . The data backup is performed after the EPG data acquisition and the data analysis have been completed. In the meantime restoration is performed in which the backed up EPG data is written into the volatile memory at the next power on. It is the EPG data backup unit that backs up and restores the EPG data. When backing up the EPG data in the HDD or the nonvolatile memory the EPG data backup unit compresses and encrypts the data so as to reduce the EPG data volume and increase confidentiality protection for the data. Furthermore as processing in which the EPG data is returned from the HDD and the nonvolatile memory to the volatile memory the EPG data backup unit performs decompression of the compressed EPG data and decryption of the encrypted EPG data. The EPG data stored in the volatile memory is converted by the EPG database into a data format that is easier to use. In addition the EPG database provides by means of the API the contents of the converted EPG data to the recording programming unit the system control unit and the display system control being superordinate modules. This API includes a database construction API. And by called this construction API the EPG database loads the EPG data into the volatile memory .

Next displaying onto the screen the EPG data will be described. When a user desires to display a program guide listing utilizing EPG data the user presses EPG display buttons provided on the remote control . Then the remote control sends to the remote control interface signals for displaying the program guide listing and further the interface sends to the CPU a command for EPG displaying. In the CPU the system control unit interprets the command from the remote control and the remote control interface calls a database construction API prepared by the EPG database and builds the EPG database. As a matter of course when the EPG database has already been created the construction API need not be called. By making use of the EPG database created in this way the display system control unit collects the program information corresponding to designated dates times and channels creates a screen image on the OSD and displays it on the display monitor . A display screen example of the electronic program guide table utilized EPG information is shown in . In this display example broadcast times are indicated vertically in the electronic program guide listing and program channels laterally. Each program is disposed so as to occupy an area corresponding to channel and time zone to be broadcast. Programs outside the display area can be displayed inside the display area by manipulating the up down right left key on the remote control.

Next a method of reserving a desired program from an electronic program guide listing displayed on the screen will be described. In a user can select a desired recoding programming broadcast program by manipulating the remote control up down right left key. When a desired program has been selected by the remote control pressing the decision key makes the screen jump to a programming broadcast program listing screen refer to and then the selected program be additionally displayed in an empty space of the programming broadcast program listing screen. The programming broadcast program listing screen displays in a tabular form programming recording programs programmed broadcast programs are indicated as a table thereby giving an advantage of being easy to check. Moreover setting information on a programming broadcast program e.g. the recording start time and the end time thereof can be changed on the programming broadcast program listing screen. That is by selecting the programming broadcast program by the remote control and pressing the decision key the screen can enter a mode enabling modification of setting values relevant to the programming broadcast program. Along with the fact that the programming broadcast program information having been added onto the programming broadcast program listing screen is stored into the nonvolatile memory the start timer of the system control unit is set to the start time so that the recording programming apparatus starts up a few minutes e.g. three minutes before the recording start time of a program having the earliest recording start time among the programmed broadcast programs. This allows the apparatus to be automatically powered on to start recording even though it has been turned off. The operation of the recording is as has been described previously.

Next before describing a method of recording a broadcast program to be extended a setting method of extending a broadcast program recording will be explained. As one of the setting items on the basic setting screen refer to of the programming apparatus a setting item about the extension recording function that is a function to change by detecting programs to be extended or delayed the recording end time i.e. in an item of extension recording is provided. From this item whether or not the extension recording is performed as well as how long the recording needs to be extended when the extension recording is performed i.e. the extension time period per extension keyword detected program can be set. When No is selected in the extension recording items the extension recording will not be performed. In the extension recording items when broadcast programs are detected in which their broadcasting is likely to be extended or delayed while Yes 30 minutes is selected the video recoding is performed with the recording end time delayed by 30 minutes every detected program. When programs are detected in which the broadcasting is likely to be extended or delayed while with 60 minutes is selected the video recoding is performed with the recording end time delayed by 60 minutes every detected program. In Embodiment 1 although time period to be extended is made selectable among the preset times the time period may be made selectable as a time to be extended. In this way when extension time period is made selectable the extension time period can be selected in response to user s preference when a user desires to avoid needless recording a shorter time period is selected and when the user desires to avoid failure of recording a longer time period is selected .

Next a recording method of recognizing that the broadcast time of a programmed broadcast program is extended or delayed so that the recording end time is changed will be described. The method of programming the broadcast programs is the same as that of programming a desired program from an electronic program guide listing refer to as has been described previously. The difference respect in that the likelihood of broadcasting extension is judged during a period after a broadcast program to be programmed has been selected until the programming broadcast program table is displayed and the recording end time of the programmed broadcast program is changed accordingly when broadcasting the program is extended or delayed. The method of recording by changing its end time will be described by using the flowchart shown in . When the programming of program is executed Step S the recording programming unit having a function of reserving programs sets to zero Step S which is the number of the extension programs and checks Step S whether or not EPG information having program guide information is present. When there is no EPG data available the processing is completed Step S . In the case where the EPG data is available the programming unit searches for programs that are scheduled to be broadcast on the same channel and the same date as and prior to the programmed broadcast program Step S and when a target program is found acquires the program related broadcast information Step S . With respect to character information in the acquired information EPG programs detailed information such as program titles program contents and performers the programming unit searches for extension keywords indicating that one or a plurality of preset programs be extended or delayed Step . As a result of the extension keyword search if predetermined extension keywords are found i.e. if a consecutive predetermined extension phrase or a combination of non consecutive two or more predetermined phrases is detected the program is regarded as a program likely to be extended Step thus resulting in the number of extension programs likely to be extended the number of the extension programs being increased by one Step S . As stated above when finishing the extension keyword search of one program the presence absence of the next program is searched for Step and subsequently the aforementioned extension keywords are searched for. The keyword search from Step S through Step S is executed repeatedly until the search of all the corresponding programs is completed. Upon completion of searching all of the corresponding programs the processing exits from the loop. If the number of extension programs is found Step S the programming unit computes the total extension time period obtained by multiplying the preset extension time period by the number of extension programs Step delays the recording end time by only the total extension time period computed and writes into the nonvolatile memory the modified recording end time Step . The subsequent operation is the same as that described in the method of reserving a desired program by means of the aforementioned electronic program guide information.

Next a method of detecting a program extension will be demonstrated by giving an example of a specific detection extension keyword. The assumption is made that a talk show scheduled to be broadcast at 21 00 February 1 Sunday as shown in is recorded. This talk show broadcasting is assumed to start at 21 00 and end at 22 00. In the case of recording this program as usual a recording start time is set to 21 00 and an end time thereof to 22 00. Here the extension recording function is assumed to be effectively set up and the extension time period to be set to 30 minutes. In addition as extension keywords for searching for program extension search e.g. Extension and Until the end of the game are assumed to be set. In the meantime the assumption is made that search targets are detailed information including description of program titles program contents performers etc. as EPG text data.

Here when a talk show is selected by a user on the remote control an algorithm as shown in described above operates selects programs to be broadcast prior to the talk show and executes search for extension keywords of the program information. During this processing a search of a professional baseball game to be broadcast at 19 00 is executed as well for the above discussed extension keyword. According to program information obtained from the EPG this professional baseball game scheduled to be broadcast at 19 o clock is entitled Professional Baseball Game XXX vs. YYY and provided with detailed program information of Ballpark ABCXYZ Color commentator XXXXX Play by play announcer YYYZZZ to be broadcast until the end of the game . When this title and its detailed information are searched for the aforementioned extension keywords Extension or Until the end of the game judgment is made that the keywords meet To be broadcast until the end of the game so that there is a program whose broadcasting is extended or delayed. Accordingly the recording end time of 22 00 will be reset to 22 30 delayed by 30 minutes corresponding to this program extension.

Furthermore in the case of recording Friday drama as shown in as well detailed information about previously broadcasting professional baseball game ZZZ vs. XXX including YYY Ballpark Color commentator XXZZXX Play by play announcer YYZYY Extension may be occurred. can be detected in a similar way allowing the recording end time to be modified from 22 00 to 22 30.

As discussed above in the apparatus for programming the recording of broadcast programs configured as in Embodiment 1 the recording end time of a programmed broadcast program can be changed by detecting an extension keyword indicating a program whose broadcasting is to be extended or delayed in the result an occurrence in which part or the whole of the programmed broadcast program fails to be recorded can be avoided.

Additionally since a means for detecting a program whose broadcasting is extended or delayed detects those from character strings of the program information particular formats and transmission means are unnecessary in order to detect that broadcasting a program is extended or delayed.

With reference to a time period to be extended from the program recording end time since the extension time period is preset it is unnecessary to detect any time period to be extended or recording end time to be modified. That is because it is unnecessary to detect the extension time period and the recording end time to be modified but it is only necessary to detect the probability of the program extension or delay accuracy of detecting a broadcast program being extended or a program being delayed is enhanced.

Still furthermore by detecting broadcast programs that are extended or delayed and the number of the programs so as to compute a total extension time period by multiplying the number of the programs by the preset extension time period the recording end time can be delayed by only this computed total extension time period so that this can cope with cases as well in which broadcasting a plurality of programs are extended or delayed.

It should be noted that in Embodiment 1 an EPG information acquiring means indicates a case in which the EPG data is superimposed onto a broadcasting wave however the means is not limited to that superimposed onto the broadcasting carrier but may be acquired by means of communication lines storage media etc.

Note that in Embodiment 1 a broadcast program detection method has utilized detailed information of the broadcast program described as character strings however the detection method is not limited to target character strings but may target significant information that is similar to the character strings.

Note further that although in Embodiment 1 a range where broadcast programs likely to be extended or delayed are detected is limited to the same day as that of a programming broadcast program the same day as referred herein not only means calendar dates but may in some cases means a day defined in the EPG e.g. one day from 5 00 a.m. on one day to 5 00 a.m. on the following day or a day defined by broadcasters.

Referring to a method will be described in which a broadcasting time of a programmed broadcast program is recognized to be extended or delayed thereby the recording end time is changed and then recording is performed. The method of programming a broadcast program is the same as that of programming a desired program from an electronic program guide listing as described in Embodiment 1 and also that of Embodiment 1 in which whether the program is likely to be extended is judged during a period until a programming broadcast program table is displayed and a recording end time is changed when the program is judged to be extended. In Embodiment 2 however in addition to program titles and the program detailed information of the EPG the possible extension of the program is searched by using the genre to which the program belongs to as well.

In the recording programming unit having a programming function of broadcast programs when programming a broadcast program is executed Step S the number of extension programs is reset to initial value 0 at first Step S . Furthermore checking out is made whether or not EPG information having program information is present Step S . In cases where there is no EPG data available the process ends Step S . In the case of the EPG data being available the program is searched for that is scheduled to be broadcast on the same day and the same channel as and prior to the programmed broadcast program Step S . If the targeted program is present program information relating to the program is acquired Step S . A search of character information in the acquired program data e.g. detailed broadcast program information in which program titles program contents performers etc. are described is performed for extension keywords indicating that one or a plurality of preset broadcast programs is not extended Step S . As a result of the extension keyword search when even one of the extension keywords is found Step S the corresponding program is regarded as being non extension one whereby searching the next program ensues Step S . On the other hand in the event that even one of the extension keywords has not been found the following process that is a genre search ensues Step S . In the genre search Step S a genre that a broadcast program targeted to be searched for belongs to is checked. If the genre to which the search targeted program belongs is judged to be a genre possibly to be extended or delayed Step S the next extension keyword search ensues Step S . If it is judged not the next program search ensues Step S .

The extension keyword search Step S searches character information in the same program data as in Embodiment 1 e.g. detailed program information in which program titles program contents performers etc. are described for extension keywords indicating that one or a plurality of preset programs is extended Step S . As a result of the extension keyword search when only one extension keyword is found and a plurality of extension keywords is found if their combination criterion is satisfied Step S then the position of the one or the positions of the plurality of detected extension keyword will be acquired Step S . When no extension keywords are found the processing moves to the next program search Step S . Whether or not broadcasting the program is extended or delayed is judged from either the one or the plurality of detected extension keywords and their positional relationship Step S . When the extension keywords and their positional relationships are judged to be of broadcast programs that are extended or delayed the number of the programs to be extended is increased by one Step S . When the extension keywords and their positional relationship are judged unlikely to be extended or delayed the process moves to the next program search Step S .

The processing repeats from Step S through Step until the search of all the search targeted programs is completed and the process exits from the loop when no search targeted programs are found to be present. Next if the number of the extension program is equal to or smaller than zero the process ends Step S . If the number is greater than zero Step S a total extension time period is computed Step S by multiplying the number of extension programs by the preset extension time period. Next the recording end time is delayed from the recording end time that has been set by the computed total extension time period depending on the computed total extension time period. The above described processing allows adjustment of the recording end time.

Next a method of detecting a program extension will be demonstrated by giving examples of specific detection extension keywords. First the detection extension keywords are relevant to the following 1 and 2 

On the other hand a program to be recorded is Music XXX Channel recording start time 22 00 recording end time 23 00 search targeted programs scheduled to be broadcast on the same channel and the same day as and prior to the program to be recorded are the following programs 1 through 5. Program 1 Title Professional Baseball Game 

Explanation will be started with Step S for searching the programs. In Step S Program 1 is selected in Step program titles detailed information and genres are read. Because non extension keyword is not detected StepS the program is relevant to a support genre Step S by the extension keyword search Step S the extension keyword of Shift can be found in the detailed information Step S and its positional relationship does not matter Step S the number of extension programs is set to 1. Next the process returns to Step S to select Program 2 so that information on Program 2 is acquired Step S . Any non extension keyword cannot be detected in this program either StepS the program is relevant to a support genre Step S by the extension keyword search Step S Extension and Occur are found Step S and the positional relationship between character strings Extension and Yes satisfies a preset condition Step S the number of extension programs is set to 2 by further increasing by one. Next the process returns again to Step S to select Program 3 thereby the information on the program 3 is acquired Step S . Since any non extension keyword cannot be detected in this program either StepS the program is relevant to a support genre Step S by the extension keyword search Step S Extension is found but not with Occur Step S which does not satisfy the positional relationship between character strings Extension and Occur Step S the number of extension programs will not be increased.

Next the process returns to Step S to select Program 4 thereby the information on Program 4 is acquired Step S . This program includes in the detailed information the extension keyword Shift however non extension keyword No extension is inclusive therefore the process returns from Step to Step . Next the process returned to Step S to select Program 5 so that the information on Program 5 is acquired Step S . Since this program s genre is categorized into Drama which is not a support genre Step S the process returns to Step S. Since with the above described processes the search of all programs has been completed the process moves to Step . Since the number of extension programs is two the total extension time period is judged to be 60 minutes i.e. multiplication of 30 minutes per program by 2 programs equals 60 minutes Step S and Step S delaying the recording end time from 23 00 to 24 00. This reduces even though each program is extended occurrences in which part or the whole of the programmed broadcast program fails to be recorded.

Since as discussed above in the recording programming apparatus configured as in Embodiment 2 in contrast to cases in which the extension keywords having possibilities of extension or delay as in Embodiment 1 are detected and thereby recording end time is delayed by a preset extension time period broadcast programs subject to no extension nor delay are detected by using non extension keywords confusing characters even though found in titles or detailed information will not be mistakenly recognized.

Furthermore by limiting genres where extensions are to be made programs that belong to genres unlikely to be extended have no probability of misjudgment due to the extension keyword search further requiring no time to perform the extension keyword search.

In addition to the extension keyword search since the combination of a plurality of extension keywords and detected positions of one or a plurality of extension keywords are evaluated even in cases in which only a character string of Extension as in Program 3 is included and although both characters strings of Extension and Occur are included they indicate entirely different meaning misjudgment of a non extension program as being an extension program can be reduced remarkably.

Note that as an extension keyword other phrase such as extension until may be used. Note again that it is preferable that the number of characters in the extension keyword be made to be four characters or more whereby the mathematical probability of occurrence of unnecessary extensions can effectively be reduced. Note further that extension keywords non extension keywords and support genres may be configured so as to be capable of being selected or set by a user s manipulation.

According to an apparatus and method for programming the recording of broadcast programs electronic program guide information acquired about programming broadcast programs and the electronic program guide information acquired about programs scheduled to be broadcast on the same channel and the same date as and prior to the programmed broadcast program are searched for predetermined extension keywords indicating program extension or delay. Since when a broadcast program is present in which an extension keyword is detected the recording end time of a programmed broadcast program is delayed even in cases where the programmed broadcast program and a program broadcast prior to the programmed broadcast program each on the same channel is extended on real broadcasting an occurrence in which part or the whole of the programmed broadcast program fails to be recorded can be avoided.

