---

title: Air sampling method and sensor system for spectroscopic detection and identification of chemical and biological contaminants
abstract: A continuous monitoring method and system wherein a porous substrate or film is used. The air from the environment is drawn through a region of the porous substrate by a simple air pump and the substances in the air are deposited or chemically adsorbed onto the surface of the substrate. The region of the substrate where the environmental air is drawn through is continuously monitored by an optical or spectrometric method. The substrate is in the form of a tape supplied by a feed reel in a reel-to-reel cartridge and taken up by a take-up reel as found in a film cartridge or a magnetic tape cartridge. The cartridge can be replaceable. A variety of materials may be employed as the substrate with an adequate surface area to effect accumulation of solid, liquid, aerosol, or gas phase compounds. An optical interrogation system is engineered such that the surface of the tape at the point where air from the environment is drawn through the substrate becomes the interaction region between the source output and the sample. As material from the environment accumulates in this region, the interaction of the source with the material is monitored by a suitable detector and supporting circuitry.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07295308&OS=07295308&RS=07295308
owner: The United States of America as Represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07295308
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051013
---
This application is a continuation of application Ser. No. 10 359 494 filed Feb. 6 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 985 818.

The present invention relates to an air sampling method and sensor system for spectroscopic detection and identification of chemical and biological contaminants. More specifically the invention relates to a porous film composed of select materials to be used as an environmental sampling tool for optical and or spectroscopic interrogation of captured solid e.g. dust or asbestos particles liquid e.g. chemical warfare agents liquid aerosol e.g. oil droplets and gas phase atmospheric constituents e.g. volatile organic compounds .

The process of environmental monitoring for hazardous materials presents numerous technical challenges. To date no single platform has been shown to be capable of reliably detecting and identifying all known hazardous materials that may be present in the atmosphere. The presence of most materials can be assessed through the sequential application of a variety of analytical techniques many of which involves the use of costly instruments expensive reagents with limited shelf lives and more often than not a highly trained technician to operate the sensor and collect and prepare the sample for detailed analysis. In the present art a variety of environmental samples may be collected into a solution phase for further preparation or onto a solid phase adsorbent for subsequent thermal desorption and analysis. The former method solution phase collection is useful for particulate samples whereas the latter method solid phase adsorption followed by collection is applicable only to gas phase substances such as volatile organic compounds. In either case the sample is modified somewhat by these procedures and detection is done in a batch rather than real time mode of operation.

Mass spectrometry has been applied in a role that is somewhat related to the present collection method however in mass spectrometry the sample is collected on a movable tape by impaction which only captures solid and sticky liquid aerosols and the sample must be moved into the mass spectrometer ionization chamber for interrogation at fixed time intervals rather than by a continuous real time sampling system. Impaction is a mechanical means of capturing particulates from an air stream by impacting the particles onto a flat surface using a high velocity airflow. It is used in air monitoring applications.

The following U.S. Patents relate to environmental air sampling and or detection and identification of contaminants 

U.S. Pat. No. 6 405 137 June 2002 describes a thermal imaging microscopy analysis tool only. Sample preparation is not discussed and samples must be desorbed from their substrate to be analyzed chemically by some standard chemical analysis instrumentation.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 393 085 May 2002 describes a neutron scattering system. Sample preparation is not described but system analyzes bulk samples.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 379 623 April 2002 describes a piezoelectric system that emits light determined by oscillation frequency of the piezo. The system requires a separate highly specific activation layer coating the crystal and assumes that detection would be effected by noting the specific patterns of adsorption onto the layer as for example is done with surface acoustic wave sensors.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 327 184 April 2002 describes a detector based on paper impregnated with dyes that change color in the presence of liquid chemical agents. The color change is photometrically monitored in an automated fashion.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 351 983 March 2002 describes a portable gas chromatograph and mass spectrometer used to detect and identify chemicals in the gas phase.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 314 793 November 2001 describes a device that quantitatively draws ambient air into a chamber for analysis of gas phase materials using a separate chemical detector system appropriate for the chemical to be detected.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 305 213 October 2001 describes a gas phase detection and identification system that relies on spectrophotometry to identify chemical vapor species by virtue of their spectral fingerprints. The chemical is separated by gas chromatography prior to being delivered to this sensor.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 277 651 August 2001 describes a wafer based detector comprising a diode laser in the wafer and antibodies or DNA fragments that bind specific analytes to the wafer surface. The binding event is recognized by a detector that monitors the diode laser illumination.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 237 397 May 2001 describes an acoustic wave sensor that monitors an adsorbent for a change in mass caused by absorbents. The surface must selectively adsorb materials in order to effect unambiguous identification.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 212 939 April 2001 describes uncoated cantilevers illuminated by a scanned wavelength photon source. The photon source excites change carriers into or out of the surface states depending on the electronic energy levels of any adsorbed materials.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 100 975 August 2000 describes a Raman spectrometer using an external cavity laser source and a sample cell that is monitored by the spectrometer. The cell is a flow through design and does not collect pre concentrate or archive samples.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 087 183 July 2000 describes an air sampling system consisting of a thin fluid film across which air is circulated. In the process particulates and soluble organic substances may be analyzed by some suitable analytical method to detect and identify the contaminants. The patent suggests photometric or electro analytical methods for such analyses.

In summary there is a need for a sampling method and sensor system for spectroscopic detection and identification of chemical and biological contaminants that reliably detects and identifies all known hazardous materials in the atmosphere in a real time mode of operation without modification of the sample.

It is therefore an object of the present invention to provide a sampling method and sensor system that quickly identifies hazardous materials in the atmosphere in a real time mode of operation.

It is a further object of the present invention to provide a sampling method and sensor system that does not modify the sample.

It is still a further object of the invention to provide a sampling method and sensor system that can collect and identify liquid gaseous and solid materials from the environment in a single step onto a single substrate.

It is still a further object of the invention to provide a sampling method and sensor system that is capable of demarcating the substrate so that various sampling areas on the substrate can be archived and retrieved for further analysis in a forensic laboratory or entered as forensic evidence.

These and other objects of the invention will become apparent upon further reading of this disclosure.

The present invention relates to a method for physically and physico chemically accumulating atmospheric constituents such as aerosols volatile organic compounds and any chemical or biological substance in solid liquid aerosol or gas form onto the surface of a sampling substrate for optical interrogation.

The substrate is manufactured in the form of a porous membrane such that the atmosphere to be sampled can be drawn through the substrate with the use of an ordinary diaphragm pump or other appropriate air sampler. The interaction region of the optical or spectrometric analytical system is aligned to the sampling area of the substrate so that adsorbed and or trapped materials are interrogated by the analytical method at a sampling area. The background and or baseline response of the analytical system is collected against a pristine area of the substrate. The response of the analytical system is collected and digitized as the atmosphere is drawn through the substrate to monitor the accumulation of solid liquid aerosol or chemisorbed gases on the substrate surface.

The spectral response of the system is compared to the spectral properties of analytes of interest using a suitable algorithm such as a statistical correlation multivariate analysis or spectral matched filter for detection that incorporates a database such as for example the Edgewood Chemical Biological Agent Simulant Knowledge database of spectral properties of the target analytes relevant to the interrogation method.

The substrate film is advanced to an adjacent pristine area when such conditions occur as saturation of the spectral signal detection of an analyte of interest or other conditions as deemed appropriate by the user. For each individual use of the monitoring device and method the speed of the tape is adjusted depending on the surrounding conditions. If the air is particularly dusty or full of contaminants the tape would be adjusted to move faster than if the air had relatively few contaminants. In any case the actual spectroscopic sensing method employed by the sensor could serve as a metric for saturation and control the movement of the tape to an unsaturated region.

The substrate is packaged in the form of a reel to reel tape in a cartridge format so that it is easy to replace the system in the analytical device. The surface of the substrate is demarcated with an optical mechanical or magnetic media so that archived portions of the substrate can be automatically retrieved for further analysis in a forensic laboratory or entered as forensic evidence.

The present invention is directed to a continuous monitoring method and system wherein a porous substrate or film is used as a sampling tool. The air from the environment is drawn through a region of the porous substrate and the substances in the air are deposited or chemically adsorbed onto the surface of the substrate. Substances in the air of interest are biological warfare agents chemical warfare agents industrial chemicals and materials various other toxic substances or any substance of interest. The region of the substrate where the environmental air is drawn through is continuously monitored by an optical or spectrometric method.

The invention uses a solid substrate in the form of a tape supplied by a feed reel and taken up by a take up reel as found in a film cartridge or a magnetic tape cartridge. The tape is formed from a microporous material that is permeable to air to which a variety of materials may be attached with an adequate surface area to effect accumulation of solid liquid aerosol or gas phase compounds. A simple example of such a material that is useful for mid infrared spectra is a silver metal membrane filter that is commonly used in microbiological assays. The surface may be modified physically e.g. by thermal cycling polishing irradiation or chemically e.g. by electrochemical or chemical etching attachment of molecules to the surface or coating with adsorbent substrates to increase the surface area and provide other properties such as specific affinity towards analytes of interest or concern. As another example in the instance where the system uses near infrared spectroscopy a paper or alumina material is appropriate as a substrate. When X ray fluorescence Raman spectroscopy or other spectrometric methods are used appropriate substrates that are known to be useful for each particular spectral range may be employed.

An example of a suitable thickness of silver membrane film is 10 50 microns thick. The preferred thickness is 30 microns. The material should also be flexible for use on a reel to reel mechanism.

In another embodiment of the invention the substrate may be bifurcated into materials that are better suited to solid or liquid adsorption or aerosol absorption. In this embodiment a single substrate in the form of a tape may contain various regions side by side of varying materials such as a material known for good absorption of solids a material known for good absorption of liquids and a material known for good adsorption of gases. In other words the tape may be formed of one or more materials that are known in the art for particular types of absorption. An example of such a bifurcated composition for use in mid infrared spectrometric analysis would be a porous silver membrane that is pure along one half of its length and impregnated with a metal oxide such as magnesium oxide along the other half of its length. The pure length of the membrane would trap solid particulate materials while the impregnated length of the same membrane would adsorb volatile organic compounds from the vapor or liquid state so that their infrared spectra would appear against the otherwise transparent metal oxide substrate.

The tape is routed over the intake port of a simple air pump as provided by a diaphragm pump or other such suitable device for drawing air from the environment into the device.

A suitable source of electromagnetic radiation is directed to the subject device to provide illumination and in some implementations the source itself may be modulated to enhance the signal level or to effect multiple wavelength spectral resolution as with Fourier transform spectroscopy. An optical interrogation system is engineered such that the surface of the tape at the point where air from the environment is drawn through the substrate becomes the interaction region between the source output and the sample as depicted in . Multiple optical methods may be used concurrently both engineered to interrogate the same collection region to provide independent detection schemes that allow the system to self confirm detection events. For example an infrared diffuse reflectance measurement can be performed along one axis and a Raman scattering measurement along another e.g. orthogonal axis. Other combinations may also be implemented such as Raman fluorescence Raman LIBS etc. As material from the environment accumulates in this region the interaction of the source with the material is monitored by a suitable detector and supporting circuitry. In some implementations the detector may consist of a dispersive element such as a prism or grating or a tunable bandpass filter such as a Fabry Perot etalon such that resolution of the wavelength dependence of the optical signal resulting from the interaction of the source with the accumulated sample can be effected.

Finally the output of the detector is digitized through the use of a suitable set of signal preamplifiers and analog to digital circuitry. This data may be stored in a microcomputer system for archival purposes or for immediate processing using a detection algorithm. In all cases a pristine area of the tape is interrogated by the system before the sensor starts collection of materials from the air environment. This interrogation of the clean substrate affords an initial baseline or background signal level for the sensor.

As air containing solid particulates liquid droplets aerosols or gaseous contaminants is drawn through the tape these materials accumulate by adsorbing chemically onto the surface of the tape or in the case of solid particulates the solids simply become trapped by the microporous material. The spectroscopic sensor continuously monitors the accumulation of material on the surface of the tape and the identity of such material can be deduced by comparing the spectral response of the sampled material with that from a spectral library. A database can be created of a library of known atmospheric constituents by drawing known atmospheric constituents through the sampling substrate and interrogating said constituents with an optical or spectrometric interrogation device to obtain a known spectral response thereof. Other databases of spectra are available from Government agencies such as NIST and EPA and commercially from companies such as Sadtler Aldrich Infrared Analysis etc. Practitioners in the art of spectroscopy use these databases routinely.

This process may be automated to some extent particularly in cases where a finite number of target materials to be monitored are programmed into the spectral library of the sensor and a suitable algorithm operates on the signal acquired by the sensor.

Furthermore a running or moving background method may be implemented in the signal processing to reduce or eliminate the effect of indigenous atmospheric constituents that may accumulate on the surface of the tape during routine operation of the sensor in an uncontaminated environment.

The sensor system as described herein may be calibrated in terms of the airflow rate and the spectral signal intensity such that both qualification and quantification of the target analyte may be effected. For example the system may be designed to draw one liter of air per minute while monitoring the spectral absorption level of a given analyte. As long as a quantitative absorption spectrum of the analyte of interest is contained in the sensor system s electronic database then the shape of the measured spectrum may be matched to that of the database spectrum for qualitative identification while the intensity of the measured spectrum may be compared e.g. ratiometrically to determine the quantity detected as a function of time. The total concentration of the analyte in the monitored air can then be estimated by computing the total number of liters of air drawn through the filter.

In addition the sensitivity limits of the spectroscopic method impose limitations on their ability to detect and identify analytes as material accumulates on the surface of the tape it increases in local concentration facilitating the detection and identification of low levels of the analyte or analytes of interest. Under most spectroscopic methods the interrogation process is either non destructive or at least not wholly destructive such that much or all of the analyte that accumulates on the tape remain on the tape after the sensor effects interrogation of the analyte. The tape can be coded mechanically or electronically as with for example with a bar code system or magnetic media to mark the location of the analyte particularly in those cases where the detection algorithm indicates the presence of an analyte of interest at a threshold concentration level set by analytical laboratory for validation of the identity of the material.

All sample collection systems are subject to fouling either by accumulating dust oil or other innocuous substances from the sensor environment during the normal operation of the device. The tape described in this invention has the quality that as the signal levels become saturated when the interrogation region accumulates various materials or in cases where solids accumulate in the pores and reduce the flow rate through the porous membrane then the tape can be advanced to a clean area and the operation of the sensor can continue after a new baseline measurement is effected.

The detection limit of the spectrometric method can be enhanced by the concentration function i.e. the accumulation of analytes from a large volume into a small area of the substrate and collection system.

Modifications and variations of the method and sensor system will be obvious to those skilled in the art from the foregoing detailed description of the invention. It is intended to claim all such changes modifications and equivalents as fall within the true spirit and scope of the invention as covered by the appended claims.

