---

title: One-time password credit/debit card
abstract: A one-time password (OTP) generator in combination with a conventional credit/debit card comprising a card having a magnetic bar stripe, raised imprint card numbers and name, expiration date and four digit code as are known in the art is provided. Full smart card functionality may also be provided. The card also includes a microprocessor and software, dedicated chip or a memory chip for generating the OTP. A visual and/or audio display is provided on the card to output the OTP to the user. The end user inputs the OTP to access the secured system. The credit/debit card functionality may be used apart from the OTP generator functionality.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08266441&OS=08266441&RS=08266441
owner: Bank of America Corporation
number: 08266441
owner_city: Charlotte
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050422
---
The invention relates generally to security authentication systems and more particularly to a combination one time password generator and credit debit card.

Methods and apparatuses for authenticating users to control access to secured systems are well known. One such authentication system assigns a user ID and a user password to a user. When the user desires access to the secured system the user inputs the ID and password to a system authentication node. The authentication node confirms that the input user ID and password correspond to the stored user ID and password and enables user access to the system. While such static security systems are widely used they are subject to security breaches caused in part by the static nature of the user ID and password. Because these security codes do not change frequently over time they are susceptible to being discovered through unauthorized means. Once a User ID and password are discovered by an unauthorized individual the system security is compromised and the system is susceptible to unauthorized access. Such security breaches are a concern for all secured systems including financial systems where unauthorized access may compromise confidential information and or result in asset misappropriation. Thus security authentication systems are continuously upgraded in order to prevent such security breaches.

One such enhanced security technology is known as one time password OTP authentication. OTP authentication uses a password that is transitory and only valid for a single use such that once used the OTP is not valid for later access. The OTP may be time based or event based. Thus even if the OTP is obtained by unauthorized means the possibility that it can be used to gain access to the system is very limited. OTP authentication systems generate the OTP as a function of secret information such as a user password or encryption key time dependent information such as time of day or time date and non secret information such as user ID. The OTP is generated by a token possessed by the user and is input to an authentication node. The input OTP is compared to an OTP generated at the authentication node using the same information and encryption algorithm. If the input OTP matches the OTP generated at the authentication node the user is allowed access to the system.

One problem with existing systems is that the user tokens for generating the OTP are bulky single function stand alone devices that must be available to the end user every time the user wants to access the secured system. Because the token must be readily available to the individual the token must be carried by the individual in addition to other personal effects such as keys credit cards and the like. People are resistant to carrying the OTP tokens because of the inconvenience of having to carry a separate bulky single function device. As a result wide spread adoption of OTP for authentication has been slow.

The invention comprises an OTP generator in combination with a conventional credit debit card. Specifically one embodiment of the invention comprises a credit debit card having a magnetic bar stripe raised imprint card numbers and name expiration date and four digit PIN code as are known in the art. The card also includes a microprocessor and software dedicated chip or a memory chip for generating the OTP. The OTP can be generated using existing algorithms. A visual and or audio display is provided on the card to output the OTP to the user. The end user inputs the OTP to access the system on line telephonically or otherwise. The credit debit card functionality can be used apart from its use as an OTP generator. By combining the OTP token and a credit debit card the OTP generator can be conveniently carried without increasing the number of personal effects carried by the user. By making access to the OTP generator more convenient the acceptance of OTP technology will increase and security will be enhanced. Additionally the OTP could be combined with the existing credit debit card PIN used for ATM s and point of sale terminals to increase the security associated with these transactions.

Referring to the OTP credit debit card of the invention comprises a plastic card having the size and shape of a conventional credit card. Conventional credit debit cards are approximately 3 inches 2 inches of an inch. Smaller credit cards are also known. One such card is the MINI CARD that is approximately 2 inches 1 inches of an inch and is distributed by Bank of America. The card of the invention may be provided in any conventional credit card size. The card may be provided with raised card numbers card holder name expiration date and card holder photograph and or hologram as is known in the art. The card also may include issuer information such as bank name and logo . A display is provided for visually displaying the OTP generated by card . Also located on card is an initiation button that is depressed by the user to initiate the generation of the OTP. Referring to the back of card is shown and may include a magnetic stripe coded with information about the card as is known in the art and a signature block . An authentication code may be provided consisting of a three or four digit code. A speaker may also be provided for generating an audio signal of the OTP. A standard smart card contact interface may also be provided. Smart card interface may be located on the front of card instead of on the back of the card as shown.

Referring to card includes an OTP generator that includes internal memory or memory could be provided on a separate memory chip . Where memory is provided on the OTP generator the separate memory chip may be omitted. The OTP generator used in the card of the invention may comprise the microprocessor used in the standard smart card. The industry ISO 7816 international standard defines the design parameters of the smart card. Smarts cards may have up to 1 kilobyte of RAM 24 kilobytes of ROM 16 kilobytes of programmable ROM and an 8 bit microprocessor running at 5 MHz. In place of the general purpose processor OTP generator may comprise a dedicated integrated chip memory chip or other processing technology. If the OTP credit debit card is provided with full smart card functionality a single processor may be used to generate the OTP and provide the smart card functionality.

Smart cards require a power source and a mechanism to communicate with a smart card reader. Some smart cards have contact pads such as gold plates at one corner of the card. This type of smart card is known as a contact smart card. The plates are used to supply the necessary energy to the card and to communicate via direct electrical contact with the smart card reader. For some smart cards the connection between the reader and the card is done via radio frequency RF . The cards have a small wire loop embedded inside that is used as an inductor to supply the energy to the card and communicate with the reader. When a card is inserted into the card readers RF field an induced current is created in the wire loop and used as an energy source. The standards relating to smart card interfaces are ISO 14443 and ISO 15693 for contactless cards. EMV 2000 version 4.0 published December 2000 define specifications to allow interoperability between smart cards and smart card readers on a global basis.

The card of the invention could include either contact RF connections or both however because the OTP functionality in the card of the invention is intended to be used separate from the smart card functionality a power source is provided on the card . Power source may comprise a built in battery cell of the miniature button type.

The card uses an authentication device or devices and functionality that enable the card to function as a conventional credit debit card. The authentication device may comprise the magnetic stripe signature block authentication code card number and expiration date photo and or other security devices as are known in the art. Moreover the authentication device and functionality may comprise full smart card functionality where the smart card microprocessor communicates with the card reader as previously described to authenticate the card as is known in the art.

In order to generate the OTP the Hashed Message Authentication Code HMAC One Time Password Algorithm HTOP may be used. OTP algorithms are well known and are commercially available. One such HTOP algorithm is proposed by the Open Authentication group OATH and provided by VERISIGN INC. A time clock based algorithm such as RSASecurity Inc. s SecureID algorithm could also be used. Other suitable OTP algorithms may also be used. The algorithm is stored in memory or in the OTP generator . OTP generator generates the OTP when the system is initiated by the user by depressing button . Button may consist of a film capacitance button. A third type of OTP algorithm is based on a challenge issued by the system. The challenge is entered into the card and the OTP algorithm generates the OTP based on the challenge. A challenge based algorithm requires a complement of buttons to provide the alpha numeric input as shown in . Like reference numerals are used in to reference like elements previously described with reference to . Buttons may consist of a film capacitance buttons.

In order to display the OTP output by OTP generator visual display is provided on card . Display may comprise an Organic LED electroluminescence display liquid crystal display or other suitable thin low power display. In addition to or as an alternative to the visual display an audio output via speaker may be provided. Audio output on credit debit cards is commercially available from AUDIO SMART CARD SA or BEEPCARD INC. The audio output is commonly used in conjunction with a tone reader that recognizes the audio tone output by the card. For example the user can initiate the OTP functionality and hold the card speaker to the mouthpiece of a telephone to log onto a secured system telephonically. If full smart card functionality is provided the OTP may be input via a smart card reader. Alternatively a digital certificate and private key stored on the card could be used via a secured sockets layer SSL to perform mutual authentication of the card and the web site as is known where the user enters the OTP and a PIN to complete the authorization process.

Referring to the card of the invention can function as a credit debit card and includes one or more authentication devices as previously described that allow the card to be used as a credit debit card block . Card may also be provided with full smart card functionality. In addition to the debit credit card functionality card also functions as an OTP generator. When the user depresses button OTP generator utilizes an OTP algorithm to generate an OTP block . The OTP is visually displayed on display or audibly developed at speaker block . The user inputs the OTP to the authentication system where it is authenticated to allow the user to access secure system resources block . The user may input the OTP by entering the OTP on line at for example a personal computer or by orally presenting the OTP over a voice system such as by telephone or otherwise. The combination of the credit debit card with the OTP functionality eliminates the need for the user to carry a separate OTP token and will make the use of OTP technology more widely acceptable.

Referring to the card of the invention is particularly well suited for on line banking and on line purchase transactions. The user initiates the log in procedure such as by accessing an on line banking log in page or clicking on an on line purchase request block . The user is prompted for security information such as user name PIN code password or the like to authenticate the user block . The user inputs the requested security information block . The system requests the OTP. The user depresses button and the OTP generator utilizes an OTP algorithm to generate an OTP block . The OTP is visually displayed on display or audibly developed at speaker block . The user inputs the OTP to the authentication system where it is authenticated to verify that the user is in possession of the card card present transaction to allow the user to access secure system resources block . The user may input the OTP by entering the OTP on line at for example a personal computer. The user can then perform secured on line banking functions or make an on line purchase using card as a conventional credit debit card block . The combination of the credit debit card with the OTP functionality eliminates the need for the user to carry a separate OTP token and will make the use of OTP technology more widely acceptable.

Additionally for a card version employing smart card technology the OTP capability may be accessed via an application programming interface or API and the smart card interface . In this configuration a card reader would be employed to provide the electrical interface to the card. Authentication via the card interface could be used for both online banking or other online authentication or to enable credit debit card functionality.

While embodiments of the invention are disclosed herein various changes and modifications can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. The scope of the invention is indicated in the appended claims and all changes that come within the meaning and range of equivalents are intended to be embraced therein.

