---

title: Meetings near me
abstract: A method for creating, discovering, and joining meetings over a peer-to-peer network involves creation of a graph of meetings on a local subnet. When a meeting is created a meeting record is added to the graph where it may be discovered by other potential meeting attendees. A user may select from a list of meetings displayed in a meeting management window and send requested showing the selected meaning. Credentials, such as a password, may be supplied with the request. When the request is validated, information is sent to the requester for use in joining the meeting. When an ad hoc wireless session is used to hold a meeting the discovery process may further include analyzing data traffic to determine which wireless sessions are meetings.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07660851&OS=07660851&RS=07660851
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07660851
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050706
---
There have been many attempts to facilitate computer based meetings for example Microsoft NetMeeting allows a meeting organizer to invite and admit attendees. Microsoft Live Meeting uses a conferencing server to join meeting attendees together. Apple Rendezvous and game lobbies allow finding people using a multicast protocol.

Meetings on a peer to peer network are facilitated by publishing a meeting record for each meeting active on that subnet this meeting record may be published directly by individual meeting participants or it may be published into a distributed datastore. Meeting attendees may perform queries to receive a list of meetings and associated information. The information available may include the meeting organizer start time and duration and an Internet protocol address for an associated instance of a meeting organizer application. A potential attendee may select a meeting and send a request to join a meeting including a password if required to the IP address listed. When any criteria are met such as password validation an invitation may be returned to the requesting party. Invitation may include data required to join the meeting on the peer to peer network.

In the case of ad hoc network sessions supported on wireless networks a list of each visible wireless session may be captured. Data corresponding to each visible wireless session may be evaluated to determine which sessions are meetings. Once a wireless session is determined to be a meeting a user may join using the standard flow discussed above.

Although the following text sets forth a detailed description of numerous different embodiments it should be understood that the legal scope of the description is defined by the words of the claims set forth at the end of this disclosure. The detailed description is to be construed as exemplary only and does not describe every possible embodiment since describing every possible embodiment would be impractical if not impossible. Numerous alternative embodiments could be implemented using either current technology or technology developed after the filing date of this patent which would still fall within the scope of the claims.

It should also be understood that unless a term is expressly defined in this patent using the sentence As used herein the term is hereby defined to mean . . . or a similar sentence there is no intent to limit the meaning of that term either expressly or by implication beyond its plain or ordinary meaning and such term should not be interpreted to be limited in scope based on any statement made in any section of this patent other than the language of the claims . To the extent that any term recited in the claims at the end of this patent is referred to in this patent in a manner consistent with a single meaning that is done for sake of clarity only so as to not confuse the reader and it is not intended that such claim term by limited by implication or otherwise to that single meaning. Finally unless a claim element is defined by reciting the word means and a function without the recital of any structure it is not intended that the scope of any claim element be interpreted based on the application of 35 U.S.C. 112 sixth paragraph.

Much of the inventive functionality and many of the inventive principles are best implemented with or in software programs or instructions and integrated circuits ICs such as application specific ICs. It is expected that one of ordinary skill notwithstanding possibly significant effort and many design choices motivated by for example available time current technology and economic considerations when guided by the concepts and principles disclosed herein will be readily capable of generating such software instructions and programs and ICs with minimal experimentation. Therefore in the interest of brevity and minimization of any risk of obscuring the principles and concepts in accordance to the present invention further discussion of such software and ICs if any will be limited to the essentials with respect to the principles and concepts of the preferred embodiments.

The computer may also include a cryptographic unit . Briefly the cryptographic unit has a calculation function that may be used to verify digital signatures calculate hashes digitally sign hash values and encrypt or decrypt data. The cryptographic unit may also have a protected memory for storing keys and other secret data. In addition the cryptographic unit may include an RNG random number generator which is used to provide random numbers. In other embodiments the functions of the cryptographic unit may be instantiated in software or firmware and may run via the operating system or on a device.

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM FLASH memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can accessed by computer .

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies. A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard and cursor control device commonly referred to as a mouse trackball or touch pad. A camera such as web camera webcam may capture and input pictures of an environment associated with the computer such as providing pictures of users. The webcam may capture pictures on demand for example when instructed by a user or may take pictures periodically under the control of the computer . Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through an input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a graphics controller . In addition to the monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer although only a memory storage device has been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on memory device .

The communications connections allow the device to communicate with other devices. The communications connections are an example of communication media. The communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. A modulated data signal may be a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Computer readable media may include both storage media and communication media.

Before after or contemporaneously with notifying recipients of the meeting a meeting may be created by a meeting organizer a meeting leader or a meeting attendee by activating an instance of a meeting organizer application. A corresponding meeting record may also be created for publication as discussed in more detail below. While the illustrated embodiment shows a meeting invitations being sent out for the creation of the meeting in another embodiment the meeting may actually be started before any invitations are sent .

The meeting record may include information about the meeting such as a meeting organizer a title an image associated with the meeting a start time and duration and an Internet Protocol IP address of an instance the meeting organizer application a meeting attendee or PeerName such as that defined by the Windows P2P Grouping protocol. The meeting record may also include instead of or supplemental to an IP address a network endpoint such as an IP address and port number or a hostname with either an implicit or explicit port number. The network endpoint may identify multiple instances of the meeting organizer application or multiple meeting attendees. The meeting record is then published so that it is available to other hosts on the subnet. The meeting organizer application may search for an existing meeting discovery graph distributed datastore scoped to the local peer to peer subnet such as subnet of . When found the meeting record may be added to the graph where it may be discovered by a known method such as a network explorer or database query. The meeting graph may contain other records corresponding to additional meetings currently active on the local subnet. When no existing meeting graph is found a new graph maybe instantiated in the meeting record added to the newly created graph. Alternatively the meeting record can be published by using a broadcast or multicast discovery protocol on the local subnet. Upon receiving broadcast or multicast queries for meeting records the host responds with the meeting record s that it has available. Such broadcast or multicast discovery protocols are well known in the prior art and include Simple Subnet Discovery Protocol SSDP Web Services Discovery WSD and Service Location Protocol SLP .

Publishing the meeting record either via the meeting graph or through a discovery protocol serves to advertise the meeting to the surrounding computers on the peer to peer subnet. By using a discovery mechanism such as a network explorer or a local instance of a meeting application a user or attendee may discover the meeting records and learn about those meetings currently in process. For example refer to meeting window sub pane of .

As discussed with respect to the attendee may select a meeting and request to join the meeting. The attendee may be asked for a meeting password which is discussed above may have been supplied out of band. In other embodiments a password may not be required for example a group wide meeting a training class or a streaming data feed. The request to join the meeting may be forwarded to the IP address or network endpoint included in the meeting record. The request may be examined by the meeting organizer application to determine whether to honor the request to join the meeting. The examination may include validation of a password hash of a password or other criteria included in the request. When the password or hash matches the expected value the pass branch of block may be followed and an invitation to the meeting may be forwarded to the attendee requesting admission to the meeting. Data from the invitation such as terminal services connection information or peer to peer streaming service identifiers may be used to connect to the meeting. The invitation may be signed by the meeting organizer application to protect its contents from modification and signal to other meeting participants that the recipient has been duly authorized to participate in the meeting. Because the attendee requesting admission was on the local subnet discovered the meeting and supplied a valid password if required he or she may be admitted to the meeting without any further interaction from the meeting organizer. This reduces the burden on the meeting organizer as well as minimizes interruptions caused by late arriving attendees. When at block the validation fails an error message may be sent to the attendee requesting access.

By scanning each of the enumerated wireless sessions it may be possible to determine which wireless sessions contain active meetings. For example an information element provided in the wireless session advertisement may include a meeting record or list of those users known to be in the meeting. Alternatively data traffic broadcast on the wireless network might contain a meeting record or list of those users known to be in the meeting. In another embodiment inspection of the data traffic associated with a wireless session may include that associated with a meeting such as a specific wireless information element or appended special characters indicative of a meeting. Referring briefly back to by selecting wireless meeting icon the user may see those wireless sessions that have been determined to be hosting meetings. The person wishing to join such a meeting may after attaching to the associated wireless network continue the joining process from block of that is request access and supply credentials as required.

The process discussed above allows users of a peer to peer network to create discover and join meetings easily and with a minimum of burden on the meeting organizer or leader and a minimum of intrusiveness to those already engaged in a meeting.

Although the forgoing text sets forth a detailed description of numerous different embodiments of the invention it should be understood that the scope of the invention is defined by the words of the claims set forth at the end of this patent. The detailed description is to be construed as exemplary only and does not describe every possibly embodiment of the invention because describing every possible embodiment would be impractical if not impossible. Numerous alternative embodiments could be implemented using either current technology or technology developed after the filing date of this patent which would still fall within the scope of the claims defining the invention.

Thus many modifications and variations may be made in the techniques and structures described and illustrated herein without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. Accordingly it should be understood that the methods and apparatus described herein are illustrative only and are not limiting upon the scope of the invention.

