---

title: Resonantly enhanced grating coupler
abstract: An apparatus and method for increasing efficiency of grating couplers are disclosed. The apparatus through the use of a defect or a reflective element allows coupling of light around a normal or nearly normal angle with a high efficiency. The method disclosed teaches how to increase the efficiency of a grating coupler through the use of a defect or a mirror. The apparatus and method can be of particular utility in the context of optical clocking implemented with a III-V chip flip-chip bonded on a CMOS chip.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07397987&OS=07397987&RS=07397987
owner: California Institute of Technology
number: 07397987
owner_city: Pasadena
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050429
---
The present application claims the benefit of U.S. provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 568 729 filed May 6 2004 for Grating Coupler with Defect Mode by Jeremy Witzens the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference.

The research carried out in the subject application was supported in part by grants from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research AFOSR Program Optical Logic with Gain under contract N. F49620 03 1 0418 and the National Science Foundation grant no. ECS 0335110 . The U.S. Government may have rights in any patent issuing on this application.

The present disclosure relates to grating couplers capable of coupling light around a normal or nearly normal angle with a high efficiency. In particular it relates to a resonantly enhanced grating coupler for example a grating coupler with defect mode.

Grating couplers are usually not very efficient when coupling around a right angle because the Bragg condition to extract normally out of the waveguide also corresponds to the second order bandgap of the grating. Most of the light gets back reflected into the grating instead of being coupled out.

D. Taillaert H. Chong P. I. Borel L. H. Frandsen R. M. De La Rue and R. Baets A Compact Two Dimensional Grating Coupler used as a Polarization Splitter IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 15 1249 1251 2003 describes a polarization splitting grating coupler. D. Taillaert P. Bienstam and R. Baets Compact efficient broadband grating coupler for silicon on insulator waveguides Opt. Lett. 29 2749 2751 2004 describes a reflector in the vertical direction to enhance efficiency. U.S. Pub. App. No. 2004 0156590 describes an optical waveguide grating coupler with curved grates. S. Miyanaga and T. Asakura Intensity profile of outgoing beams from uniform and linearly tapered grating couplers Appl. Opt. 20 688 695 1981 and K. A. Bates L. Li R. L. Roncone and J. J. Burke Gaussian beams from variable groove depth grating couplers in planar waveguides Appl. Opt. 32 2112 2116 1993 describe examples of varying the grate strength to tailor the emission profile. M. Miler and M. Skalsky Chirped and Curved Grating Coupler Focusing Both Outgoing Beam and Guided Wave Opt. Commun. 33 13 1980 describe chirped gratings and focusing in the vertical direction. D. A. Louderback G. W. Pickrell M. A. Fish J. J. Hindi H. C. Lin M. C. Simpson T. J. Eustis and P. S. Guilfoyle VCSELs with Monolithic Coupling to Internal In Plane Waveguides using Integrated Diffraction Gratings Electron. Lett. 40 1064 1065 2004 describes an example of grating coupler placed inside a vertical cavity.

Developing a grating coupler to couple light into a waveguide through a ninety degrees bend presents a difficult design issue. One possibility is to place the horizontal waveguide and the grating coupler etched into the waveguide into a vertical cavity such as in the Louderback paper cited above. However the approach in Louderback leads to complications. In particular it necessitates a reflector both above and below the grating. For silicon on insulator based integrated optics fabricated with CMOS compatible processing steps there is no possibility to fabricate the top reflector where bottom is where the substrate of the chip is located and top is above the chip .

According to a first aspect a grating coupler is provided comprising a first waveguide and a first grating associated with the waveguide the first grating comprising a first plurality of grates and a second plurality of grates separated by a first distance from the first plurality of grates said first distance being controllable in accordance with a profile of light to be input into the waveguide or extracted from the waveguide.

According to a second aspect a polarization splitting grating coupler is provided comprising a first waveguide a second waveguide a first grating associated with the first waveguide the first grating comprising a first plurality of grates and a second plurality of grates separated by a first distance from the first plurality of grates a second grating associated with the second waveguide the second grating comprising a third plurality of grates and a fourth plurality of grates separated by a second distance from the third plurality of grates wherein light incoming from a first direction is coupled in a second direction in either the first waveguide or the second waveguide.

According to a third aspect an arrangement is provided comprising a waveguide a first grating associated with the waveguide the first grating having a first periodicity the waveguide and the first grating forming a first grating coupler and a reflective element associated with the first grating coupler.

According to a fourth aspect a system is provided comprising a light source a waveguide receiving light from the light source a first grating associated with the waveguide and a resonant mechanism associated with the first grating to control polarization of the light source.

According to a fifth aspect a system is provided comprising a waveguide a detector receiving light from the waveguide a first grating associated with the waveguide and an in plane resonant mechanism enhancing efficiency of the system for 90 degrees bending of light.

According to a sixth aspect a method to increase efficiency of a grating coupler is provided comprising providing a first grating coupler with a grating coupler periodicity providing a resonant mechanism and combining the first grating coupler with the resonant mechanism.

Light is coupled from an in plane waveguide to out of plane with an angular change for example a 90 degree change in the direction of propagation. In the 90 degree case light propagates in the vertical direction. However this description is imprecise as the direction of propagation is only a complete description for a plane wave with a specific polarization. In reality the beam coupled out of the waveguide has a finite extent. The beam could be for example a Gaussian beam defined by the fact that the intensity distribution across the beam cross section is Gaussian. The intensity distribution of light along the beam cross section is referred to as the emission profile.

According to the present disclosure the problem of inefficient coupling around a right angle is suppressed by introducing a cavity in the horizontal direction for example by adding a defect inside the grating coupler or by adding a reflective element to the waveguide outside the grating coupler. When a defect is added inside the grating coupler the emission profile can also be tailored by tailoring the shape of the defect mode the mode profile .

In other words in the coupling mechanism according to the present disclosure the resonant mechanism occurs in the direction of the waveguide i.e. the in plane direction. This resonant enhancement can be implemented by introducing a defect inside the grating coupler or by adding a reflective element that is external to the grating coupler but also defined in the waveguide. Both cases have in common that the resonant enhancement is achieved with a horizontal geometry and does not necessitate a top reflector.

A second novel aspect of this disclosure is that the same grating coupler can be used to both couple light from a laser source into a waveguide and to control the polarization of the laser source.

Furthermore the applicants describe how the novel resonant enhancement can be used in combination with existing techniques such as focusing grating couplers polarization splitting grating couplers or the addition of a single reflector in the vertical direction. In the latter case the reflector in the vertical direction has a different function. It bears no relationship to the fact that the coupling angle is ninety degrees but enhances the grating coupler efficiency in different ways that rely on techniques that are different from the resonant enhancement. These other techniques have been described elsewhere in U.S. Pub. App. No. 2004 0156590 and U.S. Pub. App. No. 2004 0184156.

Reference is also made to the the paper by J. Witzens A. Scherer G. Pickrell D. Louderback and P. Guilfoyle Monolithic integration of vertical cavity surface emitting lasers with in plane waveguides Appl. Phys. Lett. 86 101105 2005 incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

Referring to light comes in to the coupler from a waveguide and is extracted up and down in the Z direction with a 90 degrees angle as shown by arrows and . Grates are located before the defect and grates are located after the defect . The distance d between each grate of the grates and each grate of the grates corresponds to the Bragg condition for 90 degrees light extraction. In the embodiment shown in the defect corresponds to a distance d between the last grate of the grates and the first grate of the grates which is different from the distance d. The distance d introduced in accordance with the present disclosure depends on the profile of the extracted light and could be varied in accordance with the different uses of the coupler. For example d could correspond to a 180 degrees phase shift to extract a TE mode E field along y into a single lobe far field or 360 degrees to extract a TE mode into a field with and odd E field symmetry and so on. Similar considerations apply to the extraction of TM modes which can be extracted by modifying distances d and d.

The coupler can be used both to couple light out of the waveguide as shown by arrows and or into the waveguide reverse the arrows and . When light is coupled out of the waveguide or into the waveguide the number N of grates is large and the number N of grates is chosen so as to optimize the coupling efficiency. Specifically N can be chosen to minimize back reflections into the waveguide. For example N 9 and N 20 as shown in the Figure. When light is supposed to be transferred from free space into both sides of the waveguide with equal magnitude the number of grates on both sides of the grating is equal i.e. N N. Intermediate cases are also possible.

The coupler may be adapted with various kinds of waveguides such as slab waveguide or ridge waveguides. The grates and may also take multiple forms such as trenches or rows of holes as long as the Bragg condition for normal extraction is satisfied. The person skilled in the art will also understand that grates and can also be above the waveguide below the waveguide or at different positions inside the waveguide as long as they have a finite spatial overlap with the waveguide mode. Trenches or rows of holes are discussed as such in U.S. Pub. App. No. 2004 0156590 or U.S. Pub. App. No. 2004 0184156 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The embodiment shown in could be for example a resonantly enhanced grating coupler defined in a slab waveguide with straight grates and no focusing effect a resonantly enhanced grating coupler focusing into a rectangular waveguide or a resonantly enhanced grating coupler focusing into a ridge waveguide. Whether a waveguide would be a ridge waveguide or a rectangular waveguide is determined by the waveguide cross section perpendicular to the direction of the propagation of waveguide modes while the cross section represented in is along the direction of propagation. The waveguide could be for example a dielectric waveguide or a metallic waveguide.

By bending the grates and and transforming them into ellipses with a focal point i.e. a focal point coinciding with the aperture of the waveguide centered relative to the waveguide cross section as shown in the grating coupler will focus into the thin aperture waveguide . For example in order to obtain a 90 degrees angle extraction of light grates and could be shaped as concentric circles i.e. ellipses having eccentricity 1 centered on the end of the waveguide at point . In case a different angle of extraction is needed the grates will be shaped as ellipses having a different eccentricity. The distance between the end of the waveguide and the defect is chosen so that the beam expansion between the end of the waveguide and the defect yields the targeted free space field size in the Y direction.

The space between point and grates is filled for example by a slab waveguide. For example at point the waveguide ends and a slab waveguide starts. In other words the L shaped contours above and below the waveguide delimit a region where thin film has been etched away while in the region of the slab waveguide between and the film has not been etched. A complete etch of the thin film in which the waveguide is defined would result in to be a rectangular waveguide while a partial etch would result in to be a ridge waveguide.

The embodiment shown in allows polarization splitting to be obtained. In particular the light incoming from above or below the grating coupler can have one of two preferential polarizations p and p or can have another polarization that corresponds to a superposition of p and of p. If the polarization is p light gets coupled into one of the waveguides e.g. . If the polarization is p light gets coupled into the other waveguide e.g. . If light corresponds to a superposition of p and p it is decomposed into p and p and each of the components is coupled to the corresponding waveguide .

Similarly to what is shown in the position of the apertures preferably coincides with the focal points of the ellipses forming the grating matrix in order to increase efficiency.

A polarization splitting coupler usually comprises a square lattice of scatterers. The resonant enhancement is achieved in accordance with the present disclosure by introducing a defect into the polarization splitting grating coupler. Such a defect can be defined by introducing line defects such as in but also by locally displacing some scatterers or a combination of the above.

Alternatively instead of introducing a displacement in the hole position the scatterers themselves could be deformed along and as shown in or they could be deformed and displaced. represents an embodiment using fractional edge dislocation i.e. elongated holes. Fractional edge dislocation is mentioned as such in Design of photonic crystal microcavities for cavity QED J. Vuckovic M. Loncar H. Mabuchi A. Scherer Phys. Rev. E 65 016608.

A multilayered stack is a stack of thin films with an optical width of a quarter wavelength that acts as a reflector. In the embodiment previously shown in light could be coupled both up and down the waveguide i.e. both into the waveguide and outside the waveguide. If the goal is to couple only light up a reflector like element can be used to recycle the light initially coupled down. In particular because a grating coupler without feedback reflector couples from the waveguide to both z and z light is lost if it is only collected at z. Thus the utility of the reflector .

In particular shows a free space light beam transmitted from the z direction with a reflective element for example a mirror positioned in the z direction to reflect back the power transmitted through the grating. According to the present disclosure a phase of the reflection incoming onto the coupler from the z direction and the phase of the incoming field from z may be linked by controlling a distance d between the reflective element and the coupler . The relative phase between and that optimizes the coupling efficiency can be obtained by complex conjugating the phase of and in . The phases of and can be obtained by simulating the structure shown in with numerical methods such as the finite difference time domain method.

Polarization of the incoming light generated by the laser source may be controlled by varying the distance d between the laser source and the coupler .

Because coupler reflects some power back into the z direction towards the laser source with a polarization dependent phase and intensity polarization dependent feedback towards the VCSEL is achieved. This provides polarization control.

In other words the strength of reflection depends on the polarization of the light. In the embodiment of is significantly stronger for the coupled polarization and the distance d is chosen so that the feedback to the laser is constructive for the coupled polarization. Thus polarization control of the laser is achieved so that it preferentially lazes in the coupled polarization.

The above situation can be inversed when the reflector is added to the system. The function of the reflector is to maximize the overall efficiency of the light coming from the laser to light out coupling so that reflections are suppressed for the coupled polarization when distance d is optimized. If the reflections of the non coupled light are stronger distance d is chosen to introduce a negative feedback to the laser for the non coupled polarization so that again again the laser lazes preferentially in the coupled polarization.

In accordance with the embodiment of the distance d is smaller than or of the order of the coherence length of the waveguide limited by fabrication tolerance defined as the length over which the accumulated phase due to light propagation through the waveguide is still predictable. However there are applications where d might be longer than the coherence length of the waveguide. If d is longer than the coherence length random variations in the waveguide geometry introduce a random phase. In that case reflections from grating coupler to grating coupler cannot be used to produce the resonant enhancement so that the defect d of the previous embodiments should be reintroduced into each of the grating couplers . In most cases reintroduction of the defect d might also be preferred due to additional tailoring of the emission profiles.

The person skilled in the art will understand that the lasers shown in the various embodiments are just a preferred embodiments of light sources and that any kind of light source could be used. However it should be noted that the resonant mechanism has a relatively thin pass band so that laser sources are highly preferred.

It might be useful to have the VCSEL and the detector coupled therewith on a same flip chip bonded III V chip. Vertical cavity lasers are particularly suitable for a geometry where lasers and detector are on the same chip so that alignment could be done in a single step.

An additional embodiment in accordance with the present disclosure provides for addition of a resonant mechanism in a grating coupler where the grate strength is varied to tailor the emission profile. Variation of the grate strength is described in S. Miyanaga and T. Asakura Intensity profile of outgoing beams from uniform and linearly tapered grating couplers Appl. Opt. 20 688 695 1981 and K. A. Bates L. Li R. L. Roncone and J. J. Burke Gaussian beams from variable groove depth grating couplers in planar waveguides Appl. Opt. 32 2112 2116 1993 . Those papers are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety. Variation of the grate strength as disclosed in those publications allows a better control of the emission profile to be obtained. However such feature alone is not suitable for a 90 degrees change of direction because back reflections into the waveguide need to be suppressed. Therefore the applicants have introduced in accordance with this embodiment a resonant mechanism in the grating coupler to enhance the efficiency of the grating coupler for 90 degrees bending of light. Optionally tailoring of the emission profile can also be provided if the resonant mechanism relies on a defect.

The foregoing detailed description of exemplary and preferred embodiments is presented for purposes of illustration and disclosure in accordance with the requirements of the law. It is not intended to be exhaustive nor to limit the invention to the precise form s described but only to enable others skilled in the art to understand how the invention may be suited for a particular use or implementation. The possibility of modifications and variations will be apparent to practitioners skilled in the art. No limitation is intended by the description of exemplary embodiments which may have included tolerances feature dimensions specific operating conditions engineering specifications or the like and which may vary between implementations or with changes to the state of the art and no limitation should be implied therefrom. Applicant has made this disclosure with respect to the current state of the art but also contemplates advancements and that adaptations in the future may take into consideration of those advancements namely in accordance with the then current state of the art. It is intended that the scope of the invention be defined by the claims as written and equivalents as applicable. Reference to a claim element in the singular is not intended to mean one and only one unless explicitly so stated. Moreover no element component nor method or process step in this disclosure is intended to be dedicated to the public regardless of whether the element component or step is explicitly recited in the claims. No claim element herein is to be construed under the provisions of 35 U.S.C. Sec. 112 sixth paragraph unless the element is expressly recited using the phrase means for . . . and no method or process step herein is to be construed under those provisions unless the step or steps are expressly recited using the phrase step s for . . . . 

