---

title: Seat assembly with movable seat and backrest and method
abstract: A seat assembly () for a vehicle including a seat (), a seat mounting assembly () mounting the seat for movement along an upwardly concaved arcuate path, a backrest assembly () having a lower backrest portion () coupled for motion with the seat and an upper backrest portion () mounted in a vertically extending direction. The backrest assembly further includes a recliner frame and mechanism (). The seat assembly, also including the steps of mounting the seat () for spherically guided movement along said path, mounting the backrest proximate the seat. The assembly () and method disclosed further employs mounting the seat () having a spherical surface () and guide track () the guide track mated to spherical support surface (), and may include slider roller elements () such that the seat mounting assembly accommodates lateral, diagonal and fore and aft seat motion ().
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09399415&OS=09399415&RS=09399415
owner: AMERICAN ERGONOMICS CORPORATION
number: 09399415
owner_city: Novato
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051103
---
This application is a Continuation in Part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 836 964 filed Apr. 30 2004 entitled SEAT ASSEMBLY WITH MOVEABLE SEAT AND BACKREST AND METHOD the entire contents of which is incorporated herein by this reference.

The present invention relates in general to seat assemblies for land air and water vehicles as well as stationary seat assemblies and more particularly relates to seat assemblies and methods for providing the same in which there is a moveable seat and movable backrest.

Considerable effort has been directed toward improvement of the safety of seat assemblies which are employed in various types of vehicles and the comfort of seat assemblies which are used in vehicles and in stationary applications. Typical of such effort are the seat assemblies set forth in my U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 650 249 5 244 252 5 460 427 5 558 399 and 5 735 574. Such prior art seat assemblies have sought to improve seating safety and comfort by designing seat motion in a manner controlling body posture and the forces generated in a muscular skeletal system during rapid vehicle deceleration. Numerous other patents have been directed to the same general goals.

My U.S. Pat. No. 4 650 249 for example discloses a seat assembly in which the seat is mounted to move along a concave arcuate path having a center of rotation proximate the center of mass of the user. In U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 244 252 and 5 460 427 the movable seat moves away from a lumbar support member and thereby creates a gap in the lower lumbar region that promotes reversing of the lumbar spine. In my U.S. Pat. No. 5 735 574 the lumbar support member has been added which is linked for movement with the seat. The backrest in this patent however is fixed and the lumbar support member moves up and down inside the backrest frame separating the lower part of the backrest between the upper edge of the lumbar and backrest frame. In U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 558 399 and 5 735 574 the embodiment of these patents includes seat motion which is arcuate in a downward direction which is undesirable from the safety standpoint.

In addition to my above noted prior patents U.S. Pat. No. 6 030 043 to Habedank and U.S. Pat. No. 5 961 073 to Whitmann disclose seat assemblies suitable for use in motor vehicles which include movable slots. Thus the patent to Habedank discloses a seat which is pivoted to the seat base at an adjustable pivot location. The backrest is independently tiltable and also coupled to the seat so that the backrest will be automatically tilted as the seat moves backward and forward as driven by an electric motor drive. The design is particularly well suited for use in the back seat of an automobile.

The patent to Whitmann U.S. Pat. No. 5 961 073 discloses a seat assembly for aircrafts in which the bottom seat cushion is guided by rollers in tracks to move forward and upward upon an inertial load. This is combined with a lap belt to limit head excursions on crashes.

The present seat assembly and method include a seat which is mounted for movement along an upwardly concaved arcuate path having a center of rotation proximate the center of mass of the occupant seated on the seat. This type of seat mounting is broadly known and described in my prior patents. In the present invention however a backrest is provided which also is linked or coupled for motion that is dependent upon seat motion at the lower end and coupled by an upright slide plane supporting said backrest at the upper end. This linking produces a self adjusting effect which realigns the seat assembly in response to changes of body posture by automatically and synchronously seeking equilibrium against the direction of gravitational acceleration and the direction of vehicle longitudinal accelerations. In extreme cases during frontal or rear impact of a vehicle the seat provides restraining safety motion to reduce injury.

The backrest frame also can be formed to recline so that the sliding motion of the backrest can be selectively reclined. Moreover the present seat assembly can work in conjunction with other restraints such as headrests belts airbags lower leg cushions and knee bolsters. Still further the seat assembly of the present invention can be adjusted and controlled to fit different sizes of users in many different postures such as an upright or slightly reclined posture for driving a forward leaning posture for reaching controls or auxiliary equipment a semi reclined posture as may be required in low vehicle cabins and an extremely reclined seated posture such as may be employed for sleeping in airliners or the like.

Accordingly it is an object of the present invention to provide a seat assembly and method which provide enhanced safety and comfort for vehicular and stationary seating application.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a seat assembly and method which provide enhanced safety for vehicle applications in which frontal or rear impacts rebounding accelerations and diagonally offset crashes can cause injurious forces.

A further object of the present invention is to provide a seat assembly and method which can be used to provide enhanced comfort for a wide variety of seating postures.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a seat assembly having improved safety and comfort which is economical to construct durable and can be employed in a wide range of applications.

The seat assembly and method of the present invention have other objects and features of advantage which will become apparent from or are set forth in more detail in the accompanying drawings and descriptions of the Best Mode of Carrying out the Invention.

In one embodiment the present invention may be directed to a seat assembly including a seat a seat mounting assembly mounting the seat in a near horizontal orientation for movement along an upwardly concaved arcuate seat path having one center of curvature proximate the center of mass of a person seated on the seat and a backrest assembly including a backrest member extending in a near vertical orientation proximate the seat mounting assembly the backrest member having an upper backrest portion thereof mounted to the backrest assembly for movement in a vertically extending direction and having a lower backrest portion coupled for movement with the seat.

The backrest member may include a backrest frame an upper frame portion of the backrest frame may be coupled to the backrest assembly for guided vertically extending movement and a lower frame portion of the backrest frame may be coupled for movement to the seat. The backrest assembly may include a pair of guided channels positioned outwardly of opposite sides of the backrest member. The backrest assembly may include a pair of guide channels positioned inwardly of opposite sides of the backrest member. The backrest frame may be pivotally connected to slider members the backrest assembly may include a pair of guide channels and the slider members may be slidably mounted in the guide channels. The backrest assembly may include a recliner frame separate from the backrest frame the backrest frame being movably mounted to the recliner frame and a recliner mechanism formed for selective tilting of the recliner frame the backrest frame and the backrest member rearwardly from a near vertical orientation. The backrest frame may be mounted to the recliner frame by a pair of laterally space apart guide channels and by members movably mounted in the guide channels.

The guide channels may be carried by the recliner frame and the members movably mounted in the guide channels may be one of roller members and slider members carried by the backrest frame. The guide channels may be carried by the backrest frame and the members movably mounted in the channels may be provided by rollers carried by the recliner frame. The backrest member may be provided by a first backrest member formed and positioned to support the user s lumbar region and a second backrest member mounted above the first backrest member the second backrest member being formed and positioned to support the user s upper back and the second backrest member being mounted to an upper portion of the first backrest member for vertical movement therewith.

The seat assembly may include a headrest member carried by one of the first backrest member and the second backrest member for movement therewith the headrest being formed and positioned for support of the user s head. The backrest member may include a backrest frame movably mounted to a recliner frame provided in the backrest assembly and the recliner frame may be tiltably mounted to the seat mounting assembly. The seat mounting assembly may include guide tracks carried by one of the seat and a seat support structure and a plurality of movable members carried by the other of the seat and the seat support structure and formed for movement relative to the guide tracks. The guide tracks may be arcuate and extend over substantially the full fore and aft dimension of the seat. The guide tracks may be arcuate proximate an edge of the seat and may be linear proximate the other edge of the seat. The mounting assembly may include a seat support structure and the seat may be mounted to the seat support structure by a plurality of link members pivotally coupled at opposite ends to the seat and the seat support structure. The seat mounting assembly may mount the seat for movement along an upwardly concaved spherical path having a center of movement proximate the center of mass of a person seated on the seat. The backrest may be coupled at a lower portion thereof for movement with the seat along the spherical path.

The seat may be coupled to the backrest assembly by a seat femur length and lumbar depth adjustment assembly. The seat femur length and lumbar depth adjustment assembly may include a lumbar adjustment member slidably mounted to the seat and coupled to the backrest assembly and a rotatable adjustment device coupled to displace lumbar adjustment member in a fore and aft direction to thereby adjust the distance from the front edge of the seat to the lower portion lumbar region of the backrest frame. The lumbar adjustment member may be a bar having a plurality of teeth formed therein and the rotatable adjustment device may be a rotatable axle mounted by bushings to the seat and having at least one slot therein formed to and receiving one of the teeth therein and having a manually engageable knob provided thereon.

The seat mounting assembly may include a seat locking assembly formed for selective locking of the seat in and releasing the locked seat from a desired fore and aft position opposite sides of the backrest. The seat locking assembly may include a friction member having a coefficient of friction selected to lock the seat in the desired fore and aft position during normal use of the seat and to allow seat arcuate motion in a crash event. The friction member may be provided by a pad and a spring biasing member may be formed to bias the pad relative to the set mounting assembly toward engagement with a portion of the seat. The seat locking assembly may also include a cam mounted to the seat mounting assembly and formed to urge the pad away from engagement with the seat in opposition to the spring biasing member and a cam actuator formed and coupled for selective operations by the user of the seat assembly. The cam actuator may be provided by a rotatable mounted rod carrying the cam and having a manually engageable handle thereon.

The seat assembly may also include a safety belt restraining harness anchored in a vehicle with at least one of a lap belt shoulder belt or middle belt. The shoulder belt may be anchored at one end to a recliner frame carried by the seat mounting assembly. The belt harness may be anchored at one end to a seat mounting assembly in a position below and rearward of the center of mass of a user seated on the seat. The seat mounting assembly may include a height adjustment mechanism formed to selectively raise and lower the height at which the seat may be supported for arcuate movement. The height adjustment mechanism may be provided by an actuator coupled to displace a height adjusting link acting on the seat assembly support structure. The recliner mechanism may include a gear member carried by the recliner frame and having a plurality of teeth formed therein an arm pivotally mounted to the seat mounting assembly the arm carrying an interlocking member formed to interengage the teeth to prevent movement relative to the arm and manually engageable handle mounted on the arm to enable pivoting of the arm to cause the interlocking member to move into and out of engagement with the teeth.

The seat assembly may include a motion controller coupled to the seat and one of the seat mounting assembly and a structure to which the seat may be mounted and formed to apply a force biasing the seat against the weight of the user s torso on the seat. The motion controller may be formed for adjustment of the biasing force applied to the seat. The motion controller may be provided by at least one spring assembly. The motion controller may be a shock absorber. The motion controller may include a piston and cylinder assembly with the pressure in the cylinder being controlled by the user.

The seat mounting assembly may include a backrest biasing spring biasing the backrest member in an upward direction. The seat mounting assembly may include a backrest biasing spring biasing the backrest member in an upward direction. The seat mounting assembly may include a backrest biasing spring biasing the backrest member in an upward direction. The seat mounting assembly may include an inertia locking assembly formed to selectively lock the seat against arcuate motion and release the seat for arcuate motion when a predetermined inertia level has been exceeded. The seat may include at least one arcuate track having spaced pin receiving structures in a fore and aft direction therealong The inertial locking assembly may include a movable pin dimension for insertion into the openings and an assembly for selectively moving the pin into and out of the pin receiving structures. The pin may be resiliently biased into engagement with the pin receiving structures and the pin and pin receiving structures may be cooperatively formed to automatically urge the pin out of the pin receiving structures when inertia on the seat assembly exceeds a predetermined level. The seat may include an upwardly concaved seat pan with an anti submarine member extending transversely across the seat.

Another aspect of the present invention may be directed to a seat assembly including a seat a seat mounting assembly mounting the seat in a near horizontal orientation for movement along an upwardly concaved arcuate seat path having a center of curvature proximate the center of mass of a person seated on the seat and a backrest assembly including a backrest extending in a near vertical orientation the backrest including a lower backrest member having a lower lumbar portion coupled for movement to the seat an upper lumbar portion coupled for guided movement to a remainder of the backrest assembly and an upper backrest member mounted above the lower backrest member the upper backrest member being movably mounted to the remainder of the backrest assembly and coupled to the lower backrest for movement therewith.

The seat assembly may include a headrest coupled to the upper backrest member for movement therewith. The lower backrest member may be pivotally coupled to the seat and pivotally coupled to the backrest assembly for vertical displacement of the backrest member during arcuate movement of the seat. The seat assembly may also include a pair of vertically extending side bolsters members mounted in a stationary manner to the seat mounting assembly on opposite sides of the backrest member. The seat assembly may include a pair of vertically extending side bolster mounted on opposite sides of one of a recliner frame and a backrest member.

The backrest assembly may include a recliner frame separate from the backrest frame and mounted to the seat mounting assembly for tilting relative thereto a recliner mechanism formed for selective rearward tilting of the recliner frame the backrest member being moveable mounted to the recliner frame and being tiltable with the recliner frame. The backrest frame may be mounted to the recliner frame by a pair of vertically extending guide channels and movable members mounted to the channels. The movable members may be one of slider members and roller members. The channels may be carried by one of the backrest frame and the recliner frame and the movable members may be carried by the other. The guide channels positioned laterally outwardly of the lower backrest member and the guide channels extend vertically along opposite sides of the lower backrest member. The guide channels may be positioned laterally inwardly of opposite sides of the lower backrest member and the slider movable members may be mounted to a back of the backrest frame.

The upper backrest member may be coupled for movement relative to the guide channels above the lower backrest member. The lower backrest member may be pivotally coupled to the seat and pivotally coupled to the backrest assembly for vertical displacement during arcuate movement of the seat and the upper backrest member may be fixed to the recliner frame and the headrest motion may be coupled to the lower backrest member for movement therewith. The step of using a turning knob or motorized means to cause the movement by selectively rotating the rollers elements around its axis may rotate the seat position.

The belt harness may be coupled to at least one of a buckle pretensioner retractor or load limiter mechanism. The belt harness may be mounted to each side of the seat mounting assembly and at least one of the backrest frame sides. A lap belt re route roller loop may be anchored to the seat mounting assembly in a position substantially below and rearward of the center of mass of the body to change the inclined direction of a lap belt in use anchored in a vehicle into a substantially vertical direction. The seat and backrest path of motion combined with the spring like action may be formed to provide an arcuate suspension system where the body of the user may be suspended in equilibrium with acceleration forces against the biasing force about the center of rotation of the seat. The seat mounting assembly may mount the seat for movement along an upwardly concaved spherical path having a center of curvature proximate a person s center of mass when seated on the seat.

Another aspect of the present invention is directed to a seat assembly including a seat and a seat mounting assembly mounting the seat in a near horizontal orientation for movement between a fore and aft direction and a side to side direction and diagonally oriented between the two directions The seat mounting assembly may mount the seat for movement along an upwardly concaved spherical path having a center of curvature proximate the center of mass of a person seated on the seat. The seat assembly may include a backrest movably mounted to the seat mounting assembly in a position proximate the seat the backrest being coupled for movement of a lower portion thereof with movement of the seat and mounted for near vertical reciprocation of an upper portion of the backrest member upon movement of the lower portion with the seat.

Still another aspect of the present invention is directed to a method of providing a seat assembly including the steps of mounting a seat in a near horizontal orientation for movement along an upwardly concaved arcuate path mounting a backrest in a near vertical orientation proximate the seat for support of the back of a user while seated on the seat coupling a lower portion of the backrest to the seat for movement of the lower portion of the backrest with movement of the seat and mounting an upper portion of the backrest for vertically extending movement in response to movement of the lower portion of the backrest.

The method may include the steps of mounting a second backrest above the first named backrest for movement in a vertically extending direction the first named backrest being formed for support of a user s lumbar region and the second backrest being formed for support of the user s upper back and coupling the second backrest for vertical movement with the first named backrest member. The step of mounting the backrest may be accomplished by mounting the backrest to a recliner frame having a mechanism formed for selective reclining of the position of the backrest by the user. The step of mounting the backrest may be accomplished by mounting the backrest to a recliner frame formed to support the movement to position the backrest member by the user. The step of mounting the backrest may be accomplished by mounting the backrest for movement to a recliner frame coupled to the backrest by guiding channels and mating sliding roller elements mounted in the backrest assembly. The movement mounted in a vehicle may be used to reduce injury loads to the user suffered in one of a frontal crash and in a rear end crash or diagonally offset impact. The may include the step of using the seat assembly to distribute the crash load bearing contribution with at least one of a safety belt restraint upper body airbags knee bolsters lower leg air bag lower leg bolster cushion and headrest.

Another aspect of the present invention may be directed to a seat assembly for a vehicle having a brake pedal and an accelerator pedal the seat assembly including a seat adjacent the brake and accelerator pedals and a foot restraint assembly located proximate the brake and accelerator pedals the foot restraint assembly being dimensioned and configured to prevent a driver s feet from sliding under the brake and accelerator pedals during a collision. An upper surface of the foot restraint assembly may be substantially planar with the upper surfaces of at least one of the brake and accelerator pedals. The foot restraint assembly may be L shaped having a side leg extending along a side edge of at least one of the brake and accelerator pedals and a lower leg extending along a lower edge of at least one the brake and accelerator pedals.

The seat may include a seat mounting assembly mounting the seat in a near horizontal orientation for movement along an upwardly concaved arcuate seat path having one center of curvature proximate the center of mass of a person seated on the seat the seat including an upwardly concaved seat pan with an anti submarine member extending transversely across the seat and a backrest assembly including a backrest member extending in a near vertical orientation proximate the seat mounting assembly the backrest member having an upper backrest portion thereof mounted to the backrest assembly for movement in a vertically extending direction and having a lower backrest portion coupled for movement with the seat.

The seat mounting assembly may include guide tracks carried by one of the seat and a seat support structure and a plurality of movable members carried by the other of the seat and the seat support structure and formed for movement relative to the guide tracks wherein the guide tracks may be arcuate and extend over substantially the full fore and aft dimension of the seat wherein the seat mounting assembly may include a seat support structure and the seat may be mounted to the seat support structure by a plurality of link members coupled at opposite ends to the seat and the seat support structure and wherein the seat may be mounted to the seat support structure only by the plurality of link members.

Yet another aspect of the present invention is directed to a seat assembly including a seat a seat mounting assembly mounting the seat in a near horizontal orientation for movement along an upwardly concaved arcuate seat path having one center of curvature proximate the center of mass of a person seated on the seat the seat including an upwardly concaved seat pan with an anti submarine member extending transversely across the seat and a backrest assembly including a backrest member extending in a near vertical orientation proximate the seat mounting assembly the backrest member having an upper backrest portion thereof mounted to the backrest assembly for movement in a vertically extending direction and having a lower backrest portion coupled for movement with the seat wherein the anti submarine member may be dimensioned and configured to deform and absorb impact energy in response to a predetermined force of impact exerted on the anti submarine member by the buttocks of a person seated on the seat during collision to decelerate the mass of the person.

The backrest member may include a backrest frame an upper frame portion of the backrest frame may be coupled to the backrest assembly for guided vertically extending movement and a lower frame portion of the backrest frame may be coupled for movement to the seat. The backrest assembly may include a pair of guide channels positioned inwardly of opposite sides of the backrest member. The backrest member may be provided by a first backrest member formed and positioned to support the user s lumbar region and a second backrest member mounted above the first backrest member the second backrest member being formed and positioned to support the user s upper back and the second backrest member being mounted to an upper portion of the first backrest member for vertical movement therewith.

The seat mounting assembly may include guide tracks carried by one of the seat and a seat support structure and a plurality of movable members carried by the other of the seat and the seat support structure and formed for movement relative to the guide tracks. The guide tracks may be arcuate and extend over substantially the full fore and aft dimension of the seat. The seat mounting assembly may include a seat support structure and the seat may be mounted to the seat support structure by a plurality of link members coupled at opposite ends to the seat and the seat support structure. The seat may be mounted to the seat support structure only by the plurality of link members.

Still another aspect of the present invention is directed to a seat assembly including a seat a seat mounting assembly mounting the seat in a near horizontal orientation for movement along an upwardly concaved arcuate seat path having one center of curvature proximate the center of mass of a person seated on the seat and a backrest assembly including a backrest member extending in a near vertical orientation proximate the seat mounting assembly the backrest member having an upper backrest portion thereof mounted to the backrest assembly for movement in a vertically extending direction and having a lower backrest portion coupled for movement with the seat wherein the seat mounting assembly may include a seat support structure and the seat may be mounted to the seat support structure at opposite ends to the seat and the seat support structure. The seat may be mounted to the seat support structure by a plurality of link members. The seat may be mounted to the seat support structure only by the plurality of link members.

The backrest member may include a backrest frame an upper frame portion of the backrest frame may be coupled to the backrest assembly for guided vertically extending movement and a lower frame portion of the backrest frame may be coupled for movement to the seat. The backrest member may be provided by a first backrest member formed and positioned to support the user s lumbar region and a second backrest member mounted above the first backrest member the second backrest member being formed and positioned to support the user s upper back and the second backrest member being mounted to an upper portion of the first backrest member for vertical movement therewith. The seat may include an upwardly concaved seat pan with an anti submarine member extending transversely across the seat.

A further aspect of the present invention is directed to a vehicular seat assembly including a plurality of seats a plurality of seat mounting assemblies mounting the respective seats in a near horizontal orientation for movement along respective upwardly concaved arcuate seat paths having one center of curvature adjacent a predetermined center of mass zone a plurality of backrest assemblies each including a backrest member extending in a near vertical orientation proximate a respective seat mounting assembly each backrest member having an upper backrest portion thereof mounted to the respective backrest assembly for movement in a vertically extending direction and each backrest member having a lower backrest portion coupled for movement with the respective seat and a seat assembly frame for mounting the plurality of seat mounting assemblies and the plurality of backrest assemblies to a vehicle.

The seat assembly frame may be configured and dimensioned to mount the vehicular seat assembly in an aircraft cabin. Each backrest assembly may include a recliner frame separate from the respective backrest frame each backrest frame being movably mounted to the respective recliner frame and a recliner mechanism formed for selective tilting of the respective recliner frame backrest frame and backrest member rearwardly from a near vertical orientation. Each backrest member may include a backrest frame an upper frame portion of the backrest frame may be coupled to the respective backrest assembly for guided vertically extending movement and a lower frame portion of the backrest frame may be coupled for movement to the respective seat. Each backrest assembly may include a pair of guide channels positioned inwardly of opposite sides of the respective backrest member. Each backrest frame may be pivotally connected to slider members each backrest assembly may include a pair of guide channels and the slider members may be slidably mounted in the guide channels.

Reference will now be made in detail to the preferred embodiments of the invention examples of which are illustrated in the accompanying drawings. While the invention will be described in conjunction with the preferred embodiments of the invention examples of which are illustrated in the accompanying drawings. While the invention will be described in conjunction with the preferred embodiments it will be understood that they are not intended to limit the invention to these embodiments. On the contrary the invention is intended to cover alternatives modifications and equivalents which may be included within the spirit and scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims.

Referring now to the seat assembly of the present invention generally designated is shown in which a seat generally designated is mounted by a seat mounting assembly generally designated in a near horizontal orientation for movement along an upwardly concaved arcuate seat path having at lease one center of curvature proximate the center of mass of a person mounted on seat . Arrows in illustrates the upwardly concaved arcuate path of seat motion and center line in shows the center of curvature of path to be located proximate a center of gravity CG or center of mass of the person seated on the seat . Construction of mounting assembly to provide for movement of seat along path is not regarded per se as being novel since such movement is clearly disclosed in my above referenced United States patents which are incorporated herein by reference. also shows a lower leg bolster cushion that can take the form of an airbag to contribute load bearing upon collision in a vehicle and restraining belt anchor point that can be anchored to the seat mounting assembly in a position substantially below and rearward of the center of mass of the body to change the inclined direction of a lap belt in use during a crash. Anchor can take the form of a lap belt re route roller loop when the belt is anchored on the floor.

Movable seat may advantageously be formed with an upwardly concaved seat pan as best seen in . Movable seat pan is received by and nested in a stationary mounting assembly or shell . A restraining upwardly inclined anti submarining member is advantageously provided at the front of seat pan . The front end of planar restraining member advantageously includes a lip which extends above seat pan and which combines with the remainder of the seat pan frame to provide a bucket seat support structure over which a cushion schematically illustrated as cushion extends. Restraining member tends to resist forward sliding or submarining of the person seated on the seat in the event of a frontal impact as represented by force vector in . Restraining surface therefore works in conjunction with seat motion to resist submarining.

At the bottom of side walls of seat pan are a pair of curve guide tracks which cooperate with sliders best seen in . Alternatively roller elements not shown may be substituted for sliders . Sliders are provided by a low friction material and can be mounted by bolts or other fastening means to floor mounting members which in turn are carried or fixedly mounted on fore and aft seat positioning tracks that are coupled to floor of the vehicle. Tracks can be monolithically formed with seat pan or provided as separately attached guide tracks or channels as shown in .

As will be understood therefore arcuate tracks carried by seat pan will cause arcuate motion of pan relative to stationary sliders or glide members which are fixed relative to the floor of the vehicle. It will be understood that a reversal of parts is possible in which the sliders or rollers are carried by the seat pan and the arcuate tracks are carried by the adjustment tracks or mounting members of the seat mounting assembly .

A seat restraining cross beam prevents seat from separating from sliders and limits movement of the seat to the arcuate path of channels . Cross beam has pads mounted at each end which pads slidably engage arcuate track on the side opposite to sliders to rap seat pan therebetween while allowing seat movement. Cross beam is held in place by face of cam as best seen on underside in while being biased downwardly by compression springs . Cams are fixed to a rod that in turn has handle fixedly attached thereto. Bolts hold springs in and the lower ends of the bolts are screwed onto brackets that in turn are fixed to support means shown in part in with a fastener or weld .

To enable the user to selectively lock seat in a desired position against arcuate movement a seat locking assembly may be provided. The seat locking assembly can include a handle which is turned to the broken line position in to position cam so that lower side face of the cam is facing up. This provides clearance relative to cross beam and therefore allows springs to push down on friction pads which slows down or stops arcuate channels relative to pads . Arrow shows the spring biasing force of the pads cause by spring on channels or tracks . Pads are made of material having a coefficient of friction high enough to control seat motion during normal driving and low enough to allow seat deployment at crash impact over known threshold for example a force caused by acceleration over 1 5 g .

The seat assembly of the present invention also advantageously includes a seat femur length and lumbar depth adjuster assembly best seen in . A rotatable adjustment device such as knob is used to turn axel mounted to each side of the pan by bushings . Axel has slots that are formed to engage teeth in a lumbar adjustment member or bar that is slidably mounted through bracket to pan and by guide pins which slidably rest on the top of pan . Bar provides a connection to the backrest link that pivots about pivotal assembly and thus adjustably couples the backrest to the seat. In this manner when knob is rotated pivot and the lower or lumbar portion of the backrest will move forward or back as indicated by arrows . This movement adjusts the distance from the front edge of the seat to the lower portion of lumbar region of the backrest frame. In effect by controlling the length of the seat pan the depth of the lumbar support is also controlled. As the person s pelvis is pushed fore or aft the top of the pelvis rotates to increase the lumbar curve.

Seat assembly also includes a backrest assembly generally designated which is mounted to a backrest frame generally designated . Backrest frame will be seen to extend in a near vertical orientation proximate seat and in the present invention a first or lower backrest member again shown schematically in with respect to frame assembly .

In the embodiment of there are two backrest members a first or lower backrest member and a second or upper backrest member while in the embodiment of a single backrest member is used. Both embodiments have a headrest member mounted to the uppermost backrest member. In headrest is carried by a frame member that in turn is mounted to upper backrest frame for vertical adjustment in a manner well known in the industry. In the embodiment of side bolsters show as outline section also may be mounted over the recliner frame generally designated .

In the improved seat assembly of the present invention backrest is coupled by link to seat pan for movement therewith. This can be accomplished in several manners but as illustrated in a lower portion of backrest frame member has link pivoted thereto at pivot connection . The lower end of link is secured by bar teeth axle and bushings to seat pan as described above. As seat moves along fore and aft arcuate path as shown by arrow therefore lower portion of backrest frame will follow the fore and aft seat motion. Link can be alternatively fixed or welded directly to seat pan .

An upper backrest portion of frame is coupled by pivot member to a slider member . Slider moves in channel fixedly carried by backrest recliner frame when the backrest is not reclined it will be seen that upper portion of lower backrest frame moves in a guided vertically extending direction as indicated by arrows as seat moves in an arcuate fore and aft direction as indicated by arrows . As shown in the drawings pivot is at uppermost portion of frame but it will be appreciated that pivot can be moved to a lower position or a higher position if frame is upwardly extended without departing from the spirit and teaching of the present invention.

The moveable backrest mounting assembly of the present invention enhances safety in front end impacts but it is particularly advantageous in enhancing safety when the person s head is accelerated rearwardly. For example when the vehicle is subjected to a rear end impact or the person seated on the seat rebounds rearwardly on a frontal impact. The effect of mounting the lower end of the backrest for movement with the seat while keeping the upper end confined by the backrest frame for near vertical displacement can be best seen by reference to . A person is shown in solid lines seated on seat assembly while assuming a posture for normal driving. In a front end impact as indicated by arrow the person moves to a frontwardly displaced broken line position at which point the upper body and head are cushioned by airbag and the upper body is restrained by seat belt . Seat moves to the forward broken line position shown in and lower backrest cushion moves to the forward position also shown in broken lines in .

Upon a rear impact as indicated by force vector the person moves back to the posture of intermittent broken or center line of numeral at which point the headrest moves to the higher vertically displaced position shown by intermittent lead line to better engage the head and backrest moves to the most rearwardly position to support the user s back.

Thus in the forward impact situation coupling of backrest member to move with the seat at its lower end enables the seat to swing to an upward position so as to resist submarining while having the backrest follow the user s back for most of the deceleration of the person s forward motion. The rise of the front of seat about the center of gravity of the person minimizes stress on the person during the high deceleration of the mass of the person and the backrest does not inhibit this highly desirable arcuate seat motion. Moreover when seat is in the forward position upwardly inclined anti submarining seat pan member and cushion cup or hold the person as deceleration occurs.

In the rear impact situation the seat and lower backrest portion again moves about the center of mass of the person so as to minimize the person s mass acceleration and the backrest straightens up raising the headrest assembly upwardly along arrow to support the head as it moves rearwardly against cushion . Again lower portion of the backrest frame and cushion move with the seat and do not interfere with or inhibit arcuate motion of the seat about axis .

A person seated on fixed seats in a vehicle tends to relax and slide into flexion curving the spine causing sagging of the lumbar curve and reduced back support. In the seat assembly of the present invention the position of the backrest relative to the position of the seat corrects this deficiency. The lumbar support area comes closer to the lower back of the person as the seat cushion moves forward to significantly increase low back support as the angle between the seat and the backrest becomes more acute.

When the seat rotates rearwardly voluntarily or under a rear end impact the backrest and headrest move up closer to the shoulders and head thus improving support.

While the guided channels in the illustrated embodiment are linear it will be understood that motion of upper end of backrest frame also could be guided for arcuate motion which is slightly concaved in a forward direction.

An important aspect for the proper functioning of a dynamic seat related to safety is the location of the center of rotation of the seat. The seat s center of motion most preferably is 34 mm above the center of mass CG of the seated person. Numerous crash tests have established that there will be a reduction in injury loads during the crash. The seat of the present invention significantly contributes to the reduction of injury loads of about 30 to comply with federal standards tests FMVSS 208 30 mph belted and unbelted Offset Impact 40 mph Belted and US NCAP 35 mph Belted. The dynamics provided by the enhanced protection of the present seat assembly against frontal and rear impacts reduce crippling injuries and in some cases reduce the likelihood of a fatality.

Another important feature of the present invention is that together with backrest motion and seat backrest deceleration function shown in shown in provides a shock absorber means for frontal or rear impacts.

The seat assembly of the present invention further preferably includes a recliner assembly generally designated . shows recliner assembly at what is preferably its full reclined limit namely thirty five degrees rearwardly of the position in . Recliner mechanism best seen in is coupled between upwardly and rearwardly extending arms of seat assembly mounting shell and a back recliner frame and to which backrest channels or in are fixedly mounted is provided which is separate and apart from the movable backrest frame and . The mechanism for selectively locking and releasing recliner frame for reclining can take any one of a number of standard forms which allow selected tilting of backrest frame rearwardly from its orientation in to that of or .

As shown in the drawing member has an arcuate array of teeth . This rack or gear member is fixedly carried by the recliner frame. A pivotal arm having handle is mounted to stationary seat mounting shell . At least one interlocking member such as pins are carried by end of arm and interengage with teeth . Arm may be rotated upwardly about pivot to release pins from teeth to allow motion of recliner frame relative to mounting member about pivot . Link coupled to arm which is keyed to transverse axle transmit arm motion to the other side of the assembly to release the pins from rack or gear on the other side of the seat.

The reclined position of is much more effective in distributing the weight of the user over the seat and seat back than is true for fixed seats which remain horizontal. When sitting on a horizontal fixed seat with a reclined back the user s weight is concentrated on the buttocks and the thighs are lifted up off the seat losing support. The user tends to slide forwardly off the seat unless his or her buttocks digs into the cushion. The lumbar curvature also loses support which is undesirable.

In the present seat assembly the front edge of the seat rises up under the thighs and the user s weight is more evenly supported over the area of cushion . The backrest cushion follows the seat and maintains a desirable forward thrust to the lumbar region.

Additionally and very importantly seat assembly makes more efficient use of space than simply reclining the seat backrest cushion assembly from proximate the rear of the seat. Thus seat moves forward as does the back rest assembly during seat motion when the backrest is reclined about pivot point . The headrest also is lowered so that in an airline application for example the backrest does not invade the space of the seat behind to the same degree as occurs for conventional reclinable seats.

Channels are fixed proximate a top end of a separate back recliner frame . A cross beam is provided at a lower end of frame and recliner mechanism is secured to cross beam . This assembly fixes the position of the slide plane formed by channels relative to stationary seat assembly support structure . Thus for any selected recliner frame angle backrest frame can move fore and aft with seat and its lower end and can slide or roll up and down along arrow at its upper end.

The backrest of is designed to receive side bolsters fixed to movable backrest frame . A back cover not shown for simplicity also can be provided to hide intermediate back recliner frame . In the embodiment of headrest support member is fixed to backrest frame and headrest cushion moves with backrest cushion as best can be seen in .

The range of arcuate motion of seat can be as much as 35 degrees in a forward direction and 20 degrees rearward. These limits can be altered to meet the need of the seat s application.

As is typical in many automobiles and as is shown in a restraint device such as a shoulder belt may be provided. Belt has an upper end mounted over a roller assembly and coupled to upper end of movable backrest frame by a standard retractor and or load limiter . A lap portion of belt is secured at anchor to seat mounting structure at a position located straight below the user s hip joint on the window side of seat . An opposite end of belt portion with standard buckle is symmetrically anchored at the other side of seat . Pretension retractors and load limiters also can be installed at anchor points and secured to the backrest frame assembly support structure or on the floor structure or a pillar provided in the vehicle.

In addition when belt anchors are located on the floor lap belt can be rerouted with a roller and pin which provides a continuous loop anchor point located preferably straight under the hip femur joint fixed at the location of anchor in this manner the belt causes the body to be pulled down into the seat during a crash event. More typically anchor points would be located to the rear of the seat in a fixed seat assembly so as to pull back on the user during a crash event. More typically anchor point would be located to the rear of the seat in a fixed seat assembly so as to pull back on the user during a crash event. In the present invention having an arcuately movable seat however anchor insures that the user is held down against the seat as the seat moves along its arcuate path. A rearwardly positioned anchor point for lap belt portion would resist seat arcuate motion but can also be accomplished by using belt material that stretches with more elongation to allow seat arcuate motion.

In a ten degree range of self adjustment motion is shown during normal driving conditions. Extending the legs by a voluntary change in posture can be used to produce rotation of the seat assembly. That rotation about axis in turn causes a change in the height and angular position of backrest raising headrest upwardly by about 50 mm. When seat rotates rearward the backrest and headrest move up curving in closer to support the head as shown by arrows . In this position the occupant can easily rest his or her head on the headrest and can easily reach a comfortable balance while still having his or her eyes on the road. In this manner the entire supporting cushion assembly can be adjusted between very upright and somewhat reclined postures by just rotating the seat angle with voluntary motion of the legs buttocks or torso.

Meeting the goal of maintaining a stable body equilibrium involves preventing backrest from moving downward by weight. Maintaining a dynamic equilibrium state can be assisted by motion controller of in . Motion controller applies a force which biases seat to balance the seat against the gravitational pull of the weight of the user s torso on the seat. Such biasing can be accomplished by compression springs coupled by attachment devices at the frontal edge of seat pan and at floor mounting assembly or at the seat support or mounting shell .

Although not shown a biasing adjustment assembly also can be provided for example a cam that can regulate the spring force by gradually compressing spring . The cam can be set at different positions to adjust the equilibrium point for different sized people. Biasing of seat rearwardly resists the tendency of the user to slouch or slide the hips forwardly.

Motion controller can also take the form of a shock absorber not shown which causes resilient displacement of the buttock against the shock absorber when deceleration on the seat exceeds a know force for example is greater than 2 5 kN .

Control device also can take the form of a piston in a pressure cylinder with a pyrotechnic device having the ignition timing controlled by the vehicle s computer or other restraints deployment system. Thus an electric solenoid can actuate or ignite the pyrotechnic device at collision to boost or accelerate seat rotation and the compound backrest motion.

Motion controller can alternatively be controlled by the driver during normal operation for comfort and control of the seat tilt motion by a manual switch or an on board computer.

In shows the seat assembly of the present invention mounted in a vehicle such as a van or truck having in the front seat position a taller floor mounting suspension means . Suspension assembly can be used in heavier vehicles to cushion road bumps or potholes. Rear seat position in shows the present seat assembly mounted to a deck having legs supported and attached to vehicle floor .

When the vehicle is driven over a bump the cab jumps up moving the entire seating assembly upwardly. Thus the driver moves from the solid line position to the broken line position

The lower end of backrest member moves along an arcuate path as shown by arrows as the seat moves rearwardly along an arcuate path and the upper end of cushion moves upwardly as shown by arrows . The driver s body remains aligned during this motion with the driver s foot on the floor or gas pedal.

Backrest biasing compression spring provides a dynamic seat balancing force and additional suspension function which may be applied between seat recliner frame cross member that is mounted to seat mounting structure and backrest frame at approximately the level of axles . Spring balances assembly against downward body motion.

The total trajectory of the body therefore is influenced by two structures. First suspension which displaces as indicated by arrows and second by the movement of the seat assembly of the present invention which moves as indicated by arrows and . In this manner seat assembly adjusts to support the body during changes in posture and or during an occurrence of violent vertical or horizontal acceleration.

Although not shown using a turning knob or motorized means to cause seat movement by selectively rotating the rollers elements around its axis and thereby rotate seat track to a new position can be utilized.

The seat assemblies of are constructed substantially as described in . In addition to suspension and floor mount rollers guide arcuate motion of seat on guide tracks instead of sliders. Moreover seat is a single member with a recliner frame or constructed as shown in and the back seat in is mounted to a rear wall or panel of the vehicle.

Turning now to an embodiment is shown in which arcuate guide tracks were formed as separate members that are affixed by fasteners welding or the like to seat pan proximate the bottom of side walls of the seat pan. Mounted to support guide tracks are arcuate members which are secured to mounting member . Arcuate seat tracks are movably supported on arcuate members by a plurality of ball or roller bearings best seen in .

In addition to the guide track arrangement show illustrate a seat releasable locking or detent assembly generally designated that will hold the tracks in a fixed location on arcuate supports until an inertial threshold is exceeded for example in a frontal rapid deceleration of 2 gs.

In enlarged scale sectional views B and C show an inertia locking release assembly formed to include a vertically reciprocal pin slidably mounted inside bushing or sleeve and formed with a pointed or tapered end which is dimensioned to protrude through selected ones of a plurality of holes or mating pockets . In pin is shown retracted in the solid lines and cross hatched and is shown with tapered end in holes in broken lines. Movement of pin between the solid line and broken line positions can be manually activated by handle .

Handle is used to turn shaft inside busing as indicated by rotation arrows shown in . Pin is pushed up or down by a finger member having a forked end which fits in a notch in pin . When handle is rotated shaft rotates and finger is tilted. Finger can be mounted through a transverse bore through shaft and held in place by a set screw . The outer end of finer can be formed with a cylindrical cup . Inside cylindrical cup a spring biases ball against the side of housing . In this manner when pin is engaged in pockets spring is biasing finger upwards and therefore pin against into pockets of track . Although not shown it can be used in curved track . The detent pin will remain biased upwardly locking seat to support member on cross beam the seat assembly support structure is not shown for clarity.

Release of seat for arcuate motion can occur in either a fore or aft direction by acceleration of track and seat represented by vector arrows in . Thus in frontal crashes or upon rear end impacts as tracks that define holes or pockets push the inclined face of pin fore or aft pin is displaced down to the solid line position in or the broken line position of . As ball passes over the center line of the tilt range of finger spring biases the finger to the downward or pin retracted position.

Manual release of seat motion is accomplished by turning handle in a counter clockwise direction to tilt finger in a counterclockwise direction in and displace pin to the lowered position. Cylindrical cup is rotated upward about 30 degrees along arrow biasing pin downward with sufficient clearance to displace end out of opening in track which releases the track and seat for arcuate movement.

Coupled by pins to an upper edge of the movable lumbar support frame member are tubular members that extend through bushing and are fixed to upper backrest frame portion . Joining of bushing to the upper edge of frame neighbor is preferably flexible to allow any misalignment of member due to arcuate seat motion. Headrest is carried by frame member that is telescoped inside tubular members to enable adjustment of the height of the headrest. In this manner upper backrest frame portion remains fixed to recliner frame member and lumbar frame member is formed to follow arcuate seat pan motion at the lower end and to reciprocate at the upper end.

In the embodiment of guide tracks having a spherical surface are provided on seat pan while mating spherical support surfaces are provided on seat mounting structure . In the embodiment support surfaces are connected by an intermediate surface for structural rigidity. Surface is shown as a spherical surface too but a cylindrical arcuate or discontinuous reinforcing structure between spherical support surfaces also could be employed because surface does not directly support tracks or seat pan . Tracks are mated with support surfaces for sliding contact therewith and tracks and surfaces preferably have substantially the same radius of curvature and axis rotation centered at point that is generally proximate to the center of mass of the occupant. Seat as shown will therefore be supported for movement in the fore and aft direction as shown by arrows in a lateral direction as shown by arrows and in directions which are various combinations of fore and aft and lateral directions.

As was the case for other embodiments of the present invention movable backrest frame is coupled at a lower end to seat pan for movement therewith while upper end is coupled to separate recliner frame at for vertical reciprocation in response to seat movement. Since seat pan can move along a spherical path it is preferable that link be coupled to backrest frame by spherical coupling rather than a mere pivotal coupling . A spherical coupling at point will reduce the tendency to twist backrest frame in a manner sufficient to significantly impede spherical seat movement under lateral impact force vectors such as vectors . Some resilient frame twisting can be experienced without materially affecting the seat s performance and some difference in height of pivots at each side will also accommodate and relive said frame twisting.

The advantage intended by the embodiment of is to reduce injury causing forces and to improve safety during an offset frontal crash such as proposed by NHTSA and or a side impact crash. In addition when applied to an off road vehicles or industrial equipment such as a tractor seat assembly of will act as a lateral suspension to reduce the health hazards of constant pitching and rolling.

The movable backrest framework assembly of the present invention also can be employed with seat mounting structures which only approximate a continuous one radius are about a center of curvature proximate the user s center of gravity. Thus in two alternative seat mounting structures are illustrated with the movable backrest assembly of the present invention.

In arcuate fore and aft motion of seat is obtained by the use of pairs of pivoted arms or links. A front pair of arms or links and a rear pair of rear links are provided that pivot about axle assemblies and . Axles or pivots are mounted to floor mounting rails or to assembly mounting means while upper axles or pivots are mounted to seat pan . Links and rotate about path in the front and about a path in the rear. In this manner even though the path of motion of the links is a downward arcuate path about the axes seat is caused to move along an upwardly tilting path that has an approximate axis of rotation located proximate center of mass of an occupant seated on seat . The upper surface of seat therefore moves along an arc that is centered about axis rotation . As above described in connection with other embodiments backrest member is coupled to seat pan by a link and a pivot assembly .

In guide slots and are provided in seat assembly mounting structure and the slots are formed to allow rolling or sliding elements and to travel along paths of motion indicated by arrows and . Seat pan is attached to the front rolling element by triangular member and directly to rear rolling element by an axle mounting busing not shown. The rear of the seat pan will travel downward along guide while the front of the seat will travel predominately forward and upward along guide . In this manner the surface of seat will move substantially along an arc that is centered at about axis .

Again the motion of backrest cushion will follow seat motion at its lower end by reason of links and pivots . The upper end of backrest cushion is pivoted at to slider as shown by arrow . In this manner the combined seat and backrest motion of the present invention can be carried out with alternate seat pan motion mechanisms.

Turning now to along with other features described above the seat assembly of the present invention may also be provided with a foot deceleration assembly generally designated which is configured to prohibit feet from sliding forward under the control pedals during the initial stages of a collision. As in the above embodiments a seat mounting assembly is in a near horizontal orientation for movement along an upwardly concaved arcuate seat path having at lease one center of curvature proximate the center of mass of a person mounted on seat . shows the center of curvature of path to be located proximate a center of gravity CG or center of mass of the person seated on the seat. also shows a lower leg bolster cushion that can take the form of an airbag to contribute load bearing upon collision in a vehicle and restraining belt anchor point that can be anchored to the seat mounting assembly in a position substantially below and rearward of the center of mass of the body.

As discussed above movable seat may be formed with an upwardly concaved seat pan and a restraining anti submarining member may be provided at the front of seat pan . The front end of planar restraining member extends above seat pan and which combines with the remainder of the seat pan frame to provide a bucket seat support structure over which a cushion schematically illustrated in as cushion extends. Movable seat may also be formed with arcuate tracks carried by seat pan to cause arcuate motion of pan relative to stationary sliders or glide members which are fixed relative to the floor of the vehicle as discussed above.

Upon a front end impact as indicated by arrow the person moves to a frontwardly displaced position at which point the upper body and head are cushioned by airbag and the upper body is restrained by seat belt . The seat and in particular the restraining member of the seat pan moves to the forward position as indicated by the numeral in . Thus in the forward impact situation the seat swings to an upward position so as to resist submarining while having the backrest follow the user s back for most of the deceleration of the person s forward motion as discussed above. The rise of the front of seat about the center of gravity of the person minimizes stress on the person during the high deceleration of the mass of the person and the backrest does not inhibit this highly desirable arcuate seat motion as discussed above. Moreover when seat is in the forward position upwardly inclined anti submarining seat pan member holds the person as deceleration occurs.

The foot restraint prevents the person s feet from sliding forward during initial part of a collision. The foot restraint assembly located proximate the brake and accelerator pedals the foot restraint assembly being dimensioned and configured to prevent a driver s feet from sliding under the brake and accelerator pedals during a collision. Preferably the foot restraint is provided with an upper surface having a layer of carpet or other suitable material having a relatively high coefficient of friction to prevent foot slippage. In addition the foot restraint also includes a structural member that vertically spaces the upper surface from the toe pan of the floor such that the upper surface is substantially coplanar or vertically aligned with the bottom edges of the operator pedals such as the illustrated brake pedal and accelerator pedal . One will appreciate that the foot restraint may also be used in conjunction with a vehicle having a clutch pedal and or other operator pedals adjacent the drivers seat.

The foot restraint may be a structural member affixed to the toe pan with suitable fastening means. Alternatively the foot restraint may be a unitary structural member monolithically formed in the toe pan by stamping or other suitable means.

In one embodiment the foot restraint is L shaped having a side leg extending along a side edge of the brake pedal and a lower leg extending along a lower edge of both of the brake and accelerator pedals. One will appreciate that the foot restraint may have other configurations in accordance with the present invention. For example the foot restraint may be U shaped such that it also extends along the inside edge of the accelerator pedal.

Turning now to a unitary seat pan is illustrated that substantially similar to that shown in . In this embodiment anti submarining member is again provided at the front of seat pan but includes a substantially planar section which extends above seat pan and which combines with the remainder of the seat pan frame to provide a bucket seat support structure in a manner similar to that described above.

In both cases the seat pan is deformable. In particular the anti submarining beam of both seat pans is dimensioned and configured to deform at a predetermined threshold of collision force in order to absorb some of the impact energy. The buttocks and thighs will be contained by the deformable seat pan and accordingly there will be significant resistance to movement of the body in a forward direction relative to the rapidly decelerating vehicle by employing the anti submarining beam securely to deform at a known threshold and thus decelerate the mass of the person seated in seat . Preferably the anti submarining beam is configured to limit compressive forces against the buttocks and thighs in collisions under 35 mph to ranges below 10 kN and most preferably below 6 kN 

One will appreciate that the specific dimensions of the anti submarining beam for example the length width and thickness of planar section may be varied in order to provide a beam which deforms at a desired amount of compressive forces.

In this embodiment seat pan also includes a discrete anti submarining beam which may be attached to the forward edge of a closed bottom and to a forward lip by suitable means. One will appreciate that other suitable configurations may be utilized.

In the illustrated embodiment the assembly includes three seats however one will appreciate that two three four or more seats may be mounted to a single seat assembly frame. Furthermore one will appreciate that the vehicular seat assembly may be configured for use in the aircraft environment or for use in other types of vehicles including but not limited to automobiles trucks aquatic vessels and amusements rides.

Each seat mounting assembly mounts the respective seats in a near horizontal orientation for movement along respective upwardly concaved arcuate seat paths which are largely defined by the lower profile of curved guide . The arcuate seat paths have a center of curvature adjacent a predetermined center of mass zone in a manner similar to that discussed above. As discussed above arcuate guides are carried by seat pan and cause arcuate motion of pan relative to stationary sliders or glide members mounted on a forward end of seat assembly frame and relative to stationary rollers mounted on a rearward end of the seat assembly frame. It will be understood that a reversal of parts is possible in which the sliders or rollers are carried by the seat pan and the arcuate guides are carried by seat assembly frame. Moreover one will appreciate that alternative embodiments may incorporate only sliders or only rollers. A seat restraining cross beam is provided to prevent seats from separating from sliders in a manner similar to that described above and thus limits movement of the seats to the arcuate path of their respective guide .

Each backrest assembly includes a backrest member extending in a near vertical orientation proximate a respective seat mounting assembly again in a manner similar to that discussed above. Each backrest member has an upper backrest portion thereof mounted to the respective backrest assembly for movement in a vertically extending direction. Each backrest member also has a lower backrest portion coupled for movement with the respective seat.

Preferably each seat assembly includes a recliner assembly . each show the shows the three recliner assemblies setting the respective backrest assemblies at various stages of recline. Backrest assembly is at the most upright position e.g. a take off and landing position approximately 16 from vertical. Backrest assembly is at an intermediate angle of recline of approximately 17 to 20 and backrest assembly is at a fully reclined angle of approximately 31 to 37 . One will appreciate that the actual range of angles may vary in accordance with the present invention.

In operation and use each seat assembly provides a movable seat and a movable backrest which function in a manner similar to that described above so as to minimize the person s mass acceleration during collisions or other instances of rapid deceleration.

The foregoing descriptions of specific embodiments of the present invention have been presented for purposes of illustration and description. They are not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise forms disclosed and obviously many modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teaching. The embodiments were chosen and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention and its practical application to thereby enable others skilled in the art to best utilize the invention and various embodiments with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated. It is intended that the scope of the invention be defined by the claims appended hereto and their equivalents.

