---

title: System and method for generating content rules for a website
abstract: A system and method for generating content rules for a Web application server. A system is provided that includes a content manager for selecting a content item; and a segment manager for defining a data segment to associate with a selected content item, wherein the segment manager includes a multifaceted search interface for defining the data segment.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09632758&OS=09632758&RS=09632758
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 09632758
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050824
---
The present invention relates generally to Website development environments and more specifically relates to a system and method for providing a user interface that will give non technical people the ability to generate application logic for dynamic content selection by using data within a multifaceted search engine and export rules to a Web application server.

The process of utilizing Websites to collect manage and exploit data is recognized as an important commercial resource form many enterprises. For instance if the enterprise knows certain demographics or history about a site visitor logged into their Web portal the enterprise would ideally like to have a system that can display the most effective content for that user. One of the challenges for such enterprises is that while the business people tend to understand and know how to exploit the data the technical people tend to control the data and the implementation of the Website. Thus for example while a business person may be able to examine user data such as sales history and determine the best content and ad placement for a given Web page the business person cannot implement such rules without interfacing with a technical specialist. This process severely limits the effectiveness of the business person who may need to analyze and refine such rules in an ongoing and timely fashion.

One method of addressing this problem is to provide a rules based Website interface that gives non technical people the ability to control the dynamic display content for their Web pages. Unfortunately the promise of developing Websites based on rules is largely unfilled because present day systems continue to require skills normally possessed by programmers rather than business people. These skills include developing if than else and case based logic as well as requiring in depth understanding of the nature of the data and data model. In addition a deep understanding of the data is required to develop matching rules to ensure that relevant content exists for each rule. Such knowledge is only typically gained through programmatic access to the data such as use of SQL or other similar query languages. Currently rules definition facilities are considered development environments and are modeled after facilities that programmers use to develop software. Existing rules creation mechanisms provide an environment where the rule must first be coded run potentially debugged and then deployed. This creates a significant impediment to business users creating rules. An example of this type of solution is the current rules wizard inside the WEBSPHERE Portal Server.

Accordingly a need exists for a Website development environment that will allow non technical people to effectuate changes to the Website by exploiting data associated with the enterprise.

The present invention addresses the above mentioned problems as well as others by providing a user interface that will give non technical personnel i.e. business users the ability to exploit data by utilizing a multifaceted search engine and export rules to a Web application server. The invention defines a system that allows these non technical personnel to explore data and create business rules for portal behavior using an interface that they can understand. The system provides a data navigation interface that uses a multifaceted search engine to expose the attributes values and aggregates using a cognitive model for their display. Business rules can then be constructed using attribute values selected during the data exploration without additional technical manipulation.

The use of a multifaceted search engine within the interface not only exposes the data and meaning within it but it also incrementally creates business rules as the user selects each attribute value. At the same time the interface allows the user to see the potential effect the rule will have on the Website. When the user selects an attribute that causes a rule to be implemented the user can see both how many visitors will potentially be included and excluded. The present invention can also expand on a rule by further segmentation of the remaining audience since the use of a multifaceted search engine allows the user to intuitively navigate the remaining attributes.

In a first aspect the invention provides a system for generating content rules for a Web application server comprising a content manager for selecting a content item and a segment manager for defining a data segment to associate with a selected content item wherein the segment manager includes a multifaceted search interface for defining the data segment.

In a second aspect the invention provides a program product stored on a computer readable medium for generating content rules for a Web application server comprising program code configured for generating a first user interface for selecting a content item and program code configured for generating a second user interface for defining a data segment to associate with a selected content item wherein the second user interface includes a multifaceted search interface for defining the data segment.

In a third aspect the invention provides a method for generating content rules for a Web application server comprising selecting a content item within a user interface defining a data segment to associate with a selected content item by examining a multifaceted search interface that provides user data from a database associated with the Web application server and generating at least one rule for the Web application server based on the selected content item and data segment.

In a fourth aspect the invention provides a method for deploying an application for generating content rules for a Web application server comprising providing a computer infrastructure being operable to generate a first user interface for selecting a content item and generate a second user interface for defining a data segment to associate with a selected content item wherein the second user interface includes a multifaceted search interface for defining the data segment.

In a fifth aspect the invention provides computer software embodied in a propagated signal for generating content rules for a Web application server the computer software comprises instructions to cause a computer to perform the following functions generate a first user interface for selecting a content item and generate a second user interface for defining a data segment to associate with a selected content item wherein the second user interface includes a multifaceted search interface for defining the data segment.

In a sixth aspect the invention provides a system for generating rules to control a behavior of a computer application comprising a system for selecting a behavior an interface to a data store having information relating to the computer application and a multifaceted search engine for allowing a user to navigate the data store to create rules for the computer application to control the selected behavior based on a state of the application.

The illustrative embodiments described herein generally relate to generating content rules for a Web application server based on data segments defined using a multifaceted search engine. However it should be understood that the invention is not necessarily limited to such an embodiment. Namely the invention may comprise a system for generating rules for any type of behavior of any type of computer application based on information acquired via a multifaceted search engine.

For instance the invention could be utilized to generate rules for a telephone VRU voice response unit to deliver dynamic content in a non web environment. In such an embodiment when a user calls into the VRU the entire user experience could be dynamically generated based on a business rule for the user s phone number e.g. known from caller id . In another embodiment the invention could apply to generating rules for an on line music service or radio service that delivers a different set of dynamic content to system users programmatically based on a rule generated for the specific user. Moreover the invention could involve processes that not only deliver dynamic content but that involves any dynamic system state. For instance in the case of a highly available Website rules could be created to handle changes in traffic to the Website to cause site change behavior or request additional resources. Thus for the purposes of this invention the system state could refer to not only delivering dynamic content based on the identity of the user but can also refer to any dynamic operation of the computer application.

Referring to drawings depicts a computer system having a Website rules interface for generating content rules rules for a Web application server e.g. that provides a Web portal a Website etc. . In general rules dictate what content will appear on a given Web page based on attributes of the visitor signed onto recognized by the Web application server .

Website rules interface allows a business user to develop plans e.g. a marketing plan that associate content for a Website with different segments of visitors. Each plan provides a set of i.e. one or more rules that are loaded to the Web application server . As described in further detail below Website rules interface includes a plan definition system for defining a new plan i.e. set of rules a content manager for selecting and managing content via a content selection system to appear on the Website in conjunction with an associated plan a segment manager for selecting and managing data segments from the application data stored in a database for a given plan via a segment definition system a content placement system for placing selected content within a given Web page and a site analysis system for analyzing performance of a given plan.

Included in Website rules interface is a multifaceted search interface that allows the business user to interface with a multifaceted search engine . Multifaceted search engine may be implemented separately from the Website rules interface as shown or could be integrated therein. Illustrative multifaceted search engines which are well understood in the art include ENDECA PROFIND and FAST DATA SEARCH . In the illustrative embodiments described herein the multifaceted search engine includes both multifaceted and text search capabilities and includes an application programming interface API that accepts queries and returns results. Data from the visitor database is indexed from the data sources to be used in rules generation. As described below with reference to a business rules wizard containing various user interfaces is provided that exposes the data indexes in the multifaceted search engine and then exports rules to the Web application server .

Web Application Server may comprise any type of Web server such as WEBSPHERE APPLICATION SERVER BEA WEBLOGIC MS SHAREPOINT or SUN JAVA SYSTEM PORTAL SERVER etc. which can provide dynamic Web pages to the site visitors. In general such a server typically includes one or more programmatic interface such as Java PERL Python etc. for rendering dynamic content.

In general computer system may comprise e.g. a desktop a laptop a workstation a handheld device etc. Moreover computer system could be implemented as part of a client and or a server. Computer system generally includes a processor input output I O memory and bus . The processor may comprise a single processing unit or be distributed across one or more processing units in one or more locations e.g. on a client and server. Memory may comprise any known type of data storage including magnetic media optical media random access memory RAM read only memory ROM a data cache a data object etc. Moreover memory may reside at a single physical location comprising one or more types of data storage or be distributed across a plurality of physical systems in various forms.

I O may comprise any system for exchanging information to from an external resource. External devices resources may comprise any known type of external device including a monitor display speakers storage another computer system a hand held device keyboard mouse voice recognition system speech output system printer facsimile pager etc. Bus provides a communication link between each of the components in the computer system and likewise may comprise any known type of transmission link including electrical optical wireless etc. Although not shown additional components such as cache memory communication systems system software etc. may be incorporated into computer system .

Access to computer system may be provided over a network such as the Internet a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN a virtual private network VPN etc. Communication could occur via a direct hardwired connection e.g. serial port or via an addressable connection that may utilize any combination of wireline and or wireless transmission methods. Moreover conventional network connectivity such as Token Ring Ethernet WiFi or other conventional communications standards could be used. Still yet connectivity could be provided by conventional TCP IP sockets based protocol. In this instance an Internet service provider could be used to establish interconnectivity. Further as indicated above communication could occur in a client server or server server environment.

In this example the business user has chosen the service contract content item which is then displayed in the content manager as shown in . From this page the business user can either define segments for the content item or browse the portal to determine where to place the content item . Also available on this page is a Website analysis system that provides a chart showing statistics for the content item . In this case since the content item has not yet been placed there are no available statistics. However as the statistics are gathers over time e.g. customers click on a link associated with the content item or purchase goods services associated with the content item Website analysis system will update the chart . In addition although not shown the chart may include further details e.g. statistics for different groups within a defined segment statistics for each plan for each defined segment etc. .

If the business user selects the define segments option the business user is brought to a segment definition interface in the segment manager as shown in . As can be seen the segment definition interface includes a multifaceted search interface that is linked into a multifaceted search engine . In this example the multifaceted search interface breaks down all visitors in this case customers of the Website portal by customer type and order history. In addition multifaceted search interface lists each of the customers defined in the breakdowns by alphabetical order. In this example it can be seen that there are 25 000 customers namely 6 000 business and 19 000 consumer. Note that while this embodiment describes a system for defining data segments involving customers the segment definition interface could be utilized to define any type of data segment. For example it could define segments based on metrics or price data e.g. which type of purchases have the highest profit margins best user satisfaction etc.

Assuming the business user is only interested in business customers the business user can click on the business link which will further breakdown the customers as shown in in accordance with predetermined attributes defined for the multifaceted search engine . In this example the multifaceted search interface breaks down the 6 000 business customers by number of employees and order history. Assuming the business user was interested in businesses having 51 100 employees the business user would click on the link which would further break down those 1 500 customers by order history and customer state as shown in . From here the business user may select the warranty link which would further breakdown the 400 warranty customers as shown in . At any time during the process the business user may decide to create a segment for the selected content item by selecting the create segment button .

The create segment button would then cause an overview page to appear in which the business user could check the boxes they want included in the segment as shown in . Once the appropriate selections are made the business user can select the save segment button which will bring up a naming interface as shown in where a name for the segment plan and segment can be made. provides options to define another segment or name the rest as one segment . When the name the rest as one segment button is selected the business user is able to place all other customers not currently assigned to segments in a newly defined segment. This alleviates the need to go back through and manually create a segment for those unassigned customers.

It should be appreciated that the teachings of the present invention could be offered as a business method on a subscription or fee basis. For example a computer system comprising a Website rules interface could be created maintained and or deployed by a service provider that offers the functions described herein for customers. That is a service provider could offer to provide a rules wizard as described above.

It is understood that the systems functions mechanisms methods engines and modules described herein can be implemented in hardware software or a combination of hardware and software. They may be implemented by any type of computer system or other apparatus adapted for carrying out the methods described herein. A typical combination of hardware and software could be a general purpose computer system with a computer program that when loaded and executed controls the computer system such that it carries out the methods described herein. Alternatively a specific use computer containing specialized hardware for carrying out one or more of the functional tasks of the invention could be utilized. In a further embodiment part of all of the invention could be implemented in a distributed manner e.g. over a network such as the Internet.

The present invention can also be embedded in a computer program product which comprises all the features enabling the implementation of the methods and functions described herein and which when loaded in a computer system is able to carry out these methods and functions. Terms such as computer program software program program program product software etc. in the present context mean any expression in any language code or notation of a set of instructions intended to cause a system having an information processing capability to perform a particular function either directly or after either or both of the following a conversion to another language code or notation and or b reproduction in a different material form.

The foregoing description of the invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed and obviously many modifications and variations are possible. Such modifications and variations that may be apparent to a person skilled in the art are intended to be included within the scope of this invention as defined by the accompanying claims.

