---

title: Wireless internet services billing
abstract: Wireless internet services billing enables a telecommunications company to bill internet service events on a transaction level. In a described implementation, an internet service event, which occurs at least partially within an internet environment, is detected. An internet services proxy injects event billing information related to the detached event into an event billing information communication that is sent to a telecommunications billing gateway. At the telecommunications billing gateway, the event billing information is logged into an event billing log in association with an identity of a telecommunications user. By way of example, the event billing information may comprise an action indicator and an entity identifier. The action indicator indicates an action corresponding to the event, and the entity identifier identifies an entity that is associated with the event. The internet services proxy may be located at a telecommunications device of a user, at a provider of internet services, or both.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07453997&OS=07453997&RS=07453997
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07453997
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050429
---
This disclosure relates in general to wireless internet services billing and in particular by way of example but not limitation to generating and or disseminating wireless internet services billing information in a heterogeneous network environment.

Over approximately the last decade the internet has matured to provide a number of services. For example users can send and receive email access databases effectuate transactions etc. via the internet. Mechanisms have arisen to enable financial accounting of these services.

Over approximately the last two decades mobile networks have been created to provide their own set of services. For example users of mobile networks can make and receive phone calls send and receive text messages and access the internet. Internet access via mobile networks is relatively limited despite the efforts of mobile network companies to link their mobile networks with the internet.

Wireless internet services billing enables a telecommunications company to bill internet service events on a transaction level. In a described implementation an internet service event which occurs at least partially within an internet environment is detected. In response to the detection an internet services proxy injects event billing information that is related to the detected event into an event billing information communication that is sent to a telecommunications billing gateway. At the telecommunications billing gateway the event billing information is logged into an event billing log in association with an identity of a telecommunications user.

By way of example the event billing information may comprise an action indicator and an entity identifier. The action indicator indicates an action e.g an operation that is being performed corresponding to the event. The entity identifier identifies an entity e.g. an object such as related data that is associated with the event. The internet services proxy may be located at a telecommunications device of a user at a provider of internet services both endpoints or anywhere along a communication chain defined by these endpoints.

Other method system approach apparatus device media procedure API arrangement etc. implementations are described herein.

As explained above internet access via mobile networks is relatively limited despite the efforts of mobile network companies to link their mobile networks with the internet. One reason for the relatively limited access to the internet via mobile networks is that there are no provisions to account for occurrences of internet services in the context of mobile networks. Accordingly there is a need for schemes mechanisms techniques etc. that can enable mobile service companies to account for internet services that are accessed and or experienced via mobile networks.

Today there are significant barriers preventing mobile network operators e.g. telcos and mobile network service providers e.g. merchants from enabling internet services for consumers to be billed in a simple and flexible framework. Billing models in mobile networks are typically limited to either network usage based fees or monthly service based fees. Billing models that rely on network usage are dislike by users because usage metered in network minutes utilized or bytes transceived does not correlate well to the way users value the network service. Billing models that rely on fixed fees with unlimited access during a given fixed period do not bide well with network operators because networks especially wireless networks are inherently bandwidth limited. Consequently at least from the perspective of network operators there should be some level of price regulation associated with application costs and overall network usage. In other words network operators generally want a nexus between a user s level of network consumption and the network access fees paid by the user.

A billing model that correlates application usage to fees billed bridges these two competing preferences. In other words a billing model that can charge users for network usage on a basis and or quantum they both appreciate and value without relying on an unlimited access fee structure can potentially meet at least the higher priorities of both users and network operators. With application transaction level billing from a network operator s perspective network operators have more options and are more directly in control of billing. Application transaction level billing exposes a more granular billing system that associates application usage with billable events. With application transaction level billing from a user s perspective users are able to directly correlate there application level network usage e.g. in terms of actions initiated and or authorized to billable events that can be indicated directly on their bills e.g. in an itemized listing .

To accommodate their current billing systems network operators wish to generate service usage events that are billable which are typically referred to as billing events in telecommunications parlance . These billing events are processed to generate customer bills. In a described general implementation application usage that occurs in an internet environment is communicated to the telecommunications network environment. For example upon the occurrence of an event in the internet environment event billing information is communicated to the telecommunications network environment. This event billing information may comprise an action corresponding to the event and or an entity that is associated with the event.

In a described specific implementation Web Service WS technology may be extended to support billing events by adding a WS Billing section to a Simple Object Access Protocol SOAP header. This billing section of the header can be used to convey in a generic way the type of operation the action and the object that is being processed the entity by the web service method. For example the billing section can communicate that an email of a defined type is being sent with or without an attachment. A telecommunications billing unit of a network operator of a network service provider or of another telecommunications company from a telecommunications network environment can use the billing information to generate telecommunications billing events.

Within internet environment an event occurs or transpires. Generally event billing information that is related to event is communicated to telecommunications billing unit as event billing information communication . Event billing information communication is effectuated as part of a transaction that is related or interrelated to event . Event may or may not be considered a billable event by a telecommunications company. In fact a telecommunications company may make the decision as to whether an event is billable on a case by case basis e.g. based on an individual user s subscription plan .

Regardless event billing information may be collected for all events for only those events known to be billable with respect to telecommunications billing unit for those events that are specially stipulated by a telecommunications company for those events that are defined by some other parameter s and so forth. Although is oriented toward telecommunications billing unit receiving event billing information of event billing information communication event billing information may also be monitored and or collected by internet related companies.

In a described implementation event billing information includes an action indicator that corresponds to event and an entity identifier that is associated with event . Action indicator indicates the action corresponding to event . The action connotes some operation that is being performed e.g. a task that is being accomplished or a goal that is being effectuated with respect to the detected event. Entity identifier identifies the entity that is associated with event . The entity denotes an object e.g. a data type or other item that is the focus or target of the task or goal that is related to the operation being performed with respect to the detected event.

Although a single action indicator and entity identifier are illustrated in a given event billing information communication may actually include more than one action identifier and or more than one entity identifier . Examples of indicated actions and identified entities are described further herein below with particular reference to .

In a described implementation internet environment includes an internet services proxy . Internet services proxy includes an event billing information injector . Internet services proxy includes at least temporarily event billing information which comprises action indicator and entity identifier .

Generally multiple devices and are coupled to including being a part of internet . Specifically personal computers PCs and and web service are coupled to internet . As illustrated PC is executing an embedded application that communicates via internet using e.g. a Transmission Control Protocol TCP . PC is executing a web browser that communicates via internet using e.g. a Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP . Web service may be realized as one or more server devices and is providing a web service via internet using e.g. a Web Services WS protocol WS .

Web service may be any one or more of many different types of web services such as a web portal an email provider an internet service provider ISP a database offering remote access some combination thereof and so forth. Other examples of web services include but are not limited to messaging calendaring social networking such as instant messaging photo sharing catalog shopping services search and retrieval services gaming services commerce services media metadata management services group membership managing services some combination thereof and so forth. Although only three different devices and protocols are illustrated in and described herein with regard to devices that are coupled to internet many different alternative device types of various protocols and connection capabilities may be coupled to internet . Any such device type and or service offering may be capable of participating in the occurrence of an event .

Telecommunications network environment includes in addition to telecommunications billing unit a telecommunications gateway GW TGW and a mobile device . Telecommunications GW includes an event billing information extractor and telecommunications billing unit includes an event billing log . In a real world implementation telecommunications GW and telecommunications billing unit may be co located and or realized using the same device infrastructure. They may also be individually or jointly considered a billing GW for telecommunications network environment . As illustrated telecommunications networks include at least one wireless network that is capable of communicating with mobile device via wireless connection .

Mobile device typically comprises a mobile telephone or other hand held wireless device. Nevertheless mobile device may alternatively comprise any device having a wireless communication capability. Although only one mobile device is illustrated there are typically many such mobile devices simultaneously communicating via telecommunications networks . Also there may additionally be one or more non mobile or fixed devices communicating via telecommunications networks .

Internet services proxy is capable of detecting an event that occurs at least partially in internet environment . Event billing information injector of internet services proxy is adapted to inject action indicator and entity identifier into event billing information communication as event billing information . In this example event billing information communication is destined for telecommunications network . Accordingly event billing information communication is communicated to telecommunications network environment .

Telecommunications GW acts as a gateway between telecommunications networks and one or more other networks such as internet of internet environment . Telecommunications GW is therefore capable of receiving event billing information communications from internet services proxies . Upon receipt of each packet telecommunications GW can inspect it e.g. inspect a header thereof for the presence of event billing information .

Received packets may be part of a general communication exchange unrelated to an event that is even potentially billable or part of a communication exchange or transaction that is related to a potentially or actually billable event. If the latter individual packets of the transaction may have event billing information without any of the entity both event billing information and all or part of the entity or the entity without any event billing information . Thus telecommunications GW may route switch or otherwise forward or handle packets of many different types and purposes without being limited to billing and or event related packets. When telecommunications GW receives an event billing information communication event billing information extractor operates.

Event billing information extractor is adapted to extract event billing information from event billing information communication . The extracted event billing information is forwarded to telecommunications billing unit . The original packets if part of the event transaction are also forwarded e.g. to mobile device . Telecommunications billing unit is capable of analyzing the forwarded event billing information and telecommunications billing unit is adapted to log relevant event billing information into event billing log in accordance with one or more parameters established by the telecommunications company.

Mechanism is now described by way of an example operation. In this example it is given that event occurs on behalf of mobile device . Event may occur fully or partially within internet environment and partially within telecommunications network environment . Event may be initiated by mobile device or by a device e.g. a PC or or a web service server device that is coupled to internet . It is also given in this example that web service is participating in a unidirectional or bidirectional communication with mobile device that produces or at least results in event . Regardless in a described implementation event occurs at least partially within internet .

Internet services proxy detects the occurrence of event . The event types that are to be detected may be determined by a telecommunications company by a company operating in internet environment by the creator or user of internet services proxy by the types of events that internet services proxy is actually capable of detecting based on technology or location some combination thereof and so forth. In response to the event detection an action corresponding to event is determined and an entity associated with event is ascertained.

In this example event billing information is comprised of an indicator of the determined action and an identifier of the ascertained entity. Specifically event billing information comprises action indicator and entity identifier . However event billing information may instead be comprised of one or more alternative descriptors of event that are suitable for enumerating any desired billing related parameter s .

To create event billing information communication event billing information injector injects action indicator and entity identifier into event billing information . In a described implementation event billing information communication is comprised of one or more packets. These packets may originate at mobile device or at web service as an intrinsic part of the communication exchange between them. Alternatively internet services proxy may formulate such packets to create event billing information communication .

After injection of the billing related descriptors of event event billing information communication is transmitted from internet services proxy via internet of internet environment to telecommunications GW via telecommunications network of telecommunications network environment . Telecommunications GW discerns or recognizes that e.g the packet s of event billing information communication includes event billing information . For example telecommunications GW may inspect at least one predetermined portion of incoming packets e.g. a header or all portions of incoming packets to recognize those incoming packets that include event billing information .

When an event billing information communication having event billing information is recognized telecommunications GW provides event billing information communication to event billing information extractor . Event billing information extractor operates to extract event billing information including action indicator and entity identifier from event billing information communication . Telecommunications GW forwards the extracted event billing information to telecommunications billing unit . Alternatively telecommunications GW may forward the full packet s to telecommunications billing unit for it to extract event billing information .

At telecommunications billing unit the extracted and forwarded event billing information is added to event billing log in association with an identity of the user of mobile device . By way of example only event billing information may be inserted into one or more fields of a billing entry corresponding to the user s identity. The billing entry corresponding to the user s identity as well as other billing entries may be organized for instance in a comma delimited record CDR format in accordance with traditional telecommunications billing practices or in another alternative format.

To associate event billing information with a user telecommunications billing unit is notified implicitly or explicitly of the identity of the user e.g. by telecommunications GW . The identity can be included for example along with the forwarded event billing information in the same or different packet s . Knowledge of the user s identity is addressed further herein below with particular reference to .

Internet services proxy is illustrated generically as being coupled to internet . Internet services proxy may actually be implemented in one or more of many possible locations. For example internet services proxy may be implemented anywhere along a communication chain that stretches between the source and destination which is web service and mobile device or vice versa in the example operation described above as long as internet services proxy is capable of obtaining event billing information .

As illustrated in an internet services proxy ISPx A can be located at web service and or an internet services proxy ISPx B can be located at mobile device . Although it is more likely that an internet services proxy is located at either or both endpoints e.g. at the source and or at the destination of a communication transaction an internet services proxy and the functions provided thereby may be located anywhere. Moreover internet services proxy may be distributed including along the communication chain. Consequently action indicator and or entity identifier of event billing information may be injected into an event billing information communication anywhere between mobile device and web service inclusive .

Mechanism is now described by way of another example opreation. In this example it is given that mobile device initiates a transaction with web service . Although event billing information may only be present in a limited number of the packets for the transaction it is assumed in this example for the sake of clarity that heading field s for event billing information are included in at least each initial packet of the transaction.

The transaction involves multiple participants such as the user of mobile device a telecommunications service provider web service and so forth. These participants might be identifiable from the source or destination of the packets. If not or if additional identifying information is desirable the identities of the transaction participants can be included as part of event billing information . An example of a header field for transaction participants is described further herein below with particular reference to however transaction participant identifications may be included in other packet portions.

When mobile device initiates the web service transaction an internet services proxy B located thereat may inject the known transaction participants. Possible examples include the user of mobile device the name of the telecommunications service provider and or web service . If action indicator and or entity identifier are known these may also be injected upon transaction initiation. After formulating the initial packet s mobile device transmits them to a telecommunications service provider as represented by telecommunications GW via telecommunications network .

At telecommunications GW the telecommunications service provider may add any known transaction participant identities that were not previously included in the transaction packets. For example there may be a customer number for the user of mobile device that is unknown to mobile device some specific designation for the telecommunications service provider e.g. a carrier designation and or some partner code for the destination web service . Also one or more of these three may not have been included at all by mobile device . The telecommunications service provider may also preliminarily or conditionally log the transaction while awaiting confirmation of the consummation of the transaction. The transaction packets are then forwarded from telecommunications GW toward web service via internet .

At web service the portion of the web transaction that is to be effectuated by web service is performed. An internet services proxy that is located at web service may also inject additional information into the transaction packets. The additional information may include for example action indicator entity identifier identities of known transaction participants including its own in the format of a name code partner identification etc. a transaction identification code or confirmation number its customer number or other identifier for the user of mobile device and so forth. The event billing information items that are injected by various different transaction participants may be injected into a single billing header multiple billing headers e.g. a header for each injecting participant and so forth. Different participants may be permitted to overwrite previous event billing information items or participants may be limited to adding items. The replacement privilege may be granted to certain transaction participants.

Of course as part of the web service s performance of the requested transaction or event web service may include all or part of the entity which is associated with the event and identified by entity identifier in the transaction packets. The web service may also elect to log the transaction in an event billing log in association with an identity of the user of mobile device . By way of example only event billing information may be inserted into one or more fields of a billing entry corresponding to the user s identity. The transaction event billing log maintained by the web service may be organized for instance in a format that enables if not actually facilitates periodic reconciliations with the event billing logs of telecommunications service providers e.g. event billing log . The transaction packets are then sent back towards telecommunications GW via internet .

At telecommunications GW logic recognizes the existence of event billing information which may possibly include transaction participants special transaction or customer codes a transaction consummation confirmation etc. in addition to action indicator and entity identifier . Event billing information extractor extracts any or all of the contents of event billing information from the transaction packets and forwards such contents to telecommunications billing unit for appropriate logging. Alternatively telecommunications GW may forward a greater portion including the entirety of a transaction packet having event billing information to telecommunications billing unit for extraction.

The transaction packets are also forwarded onward to mobile device via telecommunications network . The internet services proxy at mobile device may also log the internet transaction events at mobile device to enable a user to track transactions monitor expenses double check a bill and so forth. To this end a telecommunications service provider and or the web service may elect to inject the cost of the transaction event to facilitate a user s ability to keep a running total of transaction expenses for any given period. In an actual internet service transaction there are probably multiple packet communication exchanges between mobile device and web service before the transaction is completed including being completed for billing purposes.

The two major examples described above with reference to provide specific possibilities with respect to communication flows information injections and so forth. However many other possibilities may alternatively be implemented. For example event billing information injection may be effectuated anywhere along the communication exchange path between the mobile device and the web service inclusive . Transaction event logging may also occur anywhere along the communication exchange path. Thus transaction event detection and billing information injection extraction and or logging may occur at any endpoint gateway etc. along the communication exchange path.

Both event billing information injection and transaction event logging may be performed by other parties or participants beyond web service the telecommunications service provider and the user of mobile device . For example a general internet services proxy ISPx that is located within telecommunications network may perform either or both operations.

At block a billable event is detected. As indicated by the asterisk the detected event may ultimately be categorized as non billable by a telecommunications company. For example an event that occurs at least partially within an internet environment may be detected by at least one internet services proxy that is located along a chain stretching between a telecommunications device and a device providing the internet service.

At block an action corresponding to the event is determined. At block an entity associated with the event is ascertained. For example an action corresponding to event may be determined and an entity associated with event may be ascertained. The determination and ascertainment may be performed by the at least one internet services proxy .

At block an action indicator and an entity identifier are injected into at least one packet. For example an action indicator and an entity identifier may be injected into at least one packet. This packet may include none part or all of the ascertained entity. An example packet is described further herein below with particular reference to .

At block the packet is communicated to a telecommunications gateway. For example the packet may be communicated from internet services proxy to a telecommunications GW .

After the packet is received at block the action indicator and the entity identifier are recognized in the packet. For example telecommunications GW may recognize action indicator and entity identifier as being event billing information within the packet. The packet may comprise an event billing information communication .

At block the action indicator and the entity identifier are forwarded to a telecommunications billing unit. For example telecommunications GW may forward at least action indicator and entity identifier and optionally more of the packet as event billing information to a telecommunications billing unit .

After the event billing information is received at block the billable event is logged using the action indicator and the entity identifier. For example telecommunications billing unit may log action indicator and entity identifier in association with an identified user into an event billing log .

Proper transaction event logging into event billing log entails identifying the user associated with the billable event. The identity of the user may be particular to an account or subscription of the user a subscriber identity module SIM card and or the telecommunications device. Usually the telecommunications company can intrinsically determine the identity of the user based on the source or destination of the packet s that carry event billing information . When this is not the case the identity of the user may be affirmatively included in the packet s having event billing information . Alternatively when a session is established having a context with an identified user the user identity need not be included in the same packet s having event billing information as long as the billing related packet s may be determined to correspond to the session.

A user identity may comprise one or more of the following a name an account number a telephone number an email address a network address some combination thereof and so forth. Within internet environment user identities often comprise email addresses. Within telecommunications network environment user identities often comprise telephone numbers. However other combinations additions and substitutions are possible in both environments.

When event billing information for internet services is provided to telecommunications companies the reconciliation of billing records between telecommunications companies and internet oriented companies can be facilitated. Reconciliation is performed between different companies to determine after all of the transactions for a given time period are accounted for which company owes which and how much based on contractual obligations. Furthermore disbursement of bills may be delayed until after billing logs are synchronized.

Typically for each billable event telecommunications companies know the identity of the telecommunications company and the identity of the user. They can receive an action indicator and an entity identifier as described herein. Optionally they may also be given the identity of the related internet service company.

Internet oriented companies on the other hand typically know the identity of the internet service company and the identity of the user. In addition to logging the action indicator and entity identifier internet oriented companies can benefit from knowing the identity of the telecommunications company of the user. By logging the identity of the telecommunications company for each internet service event transaction event billing reconciliation with the various telecommunications companies is made easier and more accurate.

In order to log any of the different information described above it may also be added to the packets e.g. the headers of the packets being communicated between the endpoints involved in the internet service transaction event. For example an identity of the telecommunication company of the user may be injected into billing related packets and or other packets.

Logging internet service transaction events offers several enhancements and opportunities to telecommunications companies. As described above telecommunications companies are empowered to bill for the consumption of their network resources in a manner and at a granularity that customers understand and are willing to accept. However telecommunications companies can also log transaction events for tracking purposes analysis of individual users network consumption cost benefit analysis of different billing plans etc. with or without ultimately billing these logged transaction events.

Additionally the logging of internet service transaction events can enable telecommunications companies to ensure that there is a quality of service QoS aspect to proper transaction event billing. More specifically the actual or final billing of a transaction event may be based on confirmation that the transaction is successfully completed. Billing of the user may be instituted only upon confirmation of delivery of the entity and or completion of the transaction event.

By way of example an internet service transaction event may be recorded in an event billing log upon observation of an inbound outbound packet that is initiating a transaction event. However the transaction event is not finally logged at this point. Upon observation of a corresponding outbound inbound packet that is concluding the transaction event the billing event is checked off for final logging and subsequent billing. Whether packets have such a correspondence to a single transaction event may be determined using a session indication field a relates to field etc. depending on the transmission protocol employed. It should be understood that initiating and concluding as used above may not necessarily indicate an absolutely first or last packet due to negotiation session establishment authentication and other communication related tasks. Also final logging may be made dependent on a special final confirmation received at telecommunications billing unit from an internet services proxy located at mobile device .

Action indicator and entity identifier may be located anywhere within packet . However in a described implementation header includes action indicator and entity identifier . Entity identifier identifies an entity . If any portion of entity is present within packet body usually includes all or a portion of it as illustrated. Body may also contain other information that is related to the transaction event. Regardless action indicator and entity identifier may be communicated in band within a given transaction session along with the identified entity .

Header also includes a source and a destination . Source holds or represents an address or other identifier of the originator of packet . Destination holds or represents an address or other identifier of the intended recipient of packet . Thus source and destination may be network addresses email addresses telephone numbers some combination thereof and so forth. When source and or destination are inadequate to convey desired participant identifications one or more participants to the transaction may be injected into another field transaction participant s . As described above one or more transaction participant fields may be populated with identifiers of the web service the telecommunications service provider the user of the mobile device and so forth.

By way of example if mobile device of originates a packet and sends it to web service device an identifier of mobile device populates source and an identifier of web service device populates destination . In such an example telecommunications GW inspects header searching for an action indicator and or an entity identifier . When discovered they are stripped from header and forwarded to telecommunications billing unit . Alternatively additional parts including all of packet may be forwarded to telecommunications billing unit . Also telecommunications GW may inject an identifier of the associated telecommunications service provider into transaction participants for subsequent extraction and logging by the web service of web service device .

Examples of actions that may be indicated by action indicator include but are not limited to accessing a database accessing scheduling information sending receiving an email ordering a product service accessing information from a web site networking socially and or managing social networking data performing a search managing gaming data accessing entertainment services managing contact information managing group membership data managing and organizing media metadata some combination thereof and so forth. Examples of entity that may be identified by entity identifier include but are not limited to information from a database entry calendar appointment information an email attachment and or body invoice information weather or news information instant message data and or social networking data search results e.g. URLs gaming data contact information group membership data media metadata documents media content communication channels e.g. voice streaming video etc. other structured data some combination thereof and so forth.

Various example options may be implemented with respect to packet . In one example implementation all of packet is transparent for access and understanding without applying a cipher or other cryptographic decoder. In another example implementation all of packet except those portion s needed for routing may be encrypted or an entire communication path may be set up to be encrypted e.g. using a virtual private network VPN . In an illustrated example implementation header is transparent but body is opaque after application of an encryption mechanism. Generally different portions of packet may be encrypted or unencrypted in accordance with a desired security protocol.

Also different portions of packet may be signed to ensure authenticity. In another illustrated example implementation of options at least action indicator and entity identifier are e.g. digitally signed to prevent unauthorized manipulation that might affect correct billing of internet service transaction events. If a signature of an action indicator or entity identifier cannot be verified the transaction event related to packet may not be billed and packet may even be diverted and undelivered.

Any of these example implementation options may be combined in any manner. Additionally header may be considered to be comprised of multiple headers such that for example action indicator and entity identifier are part of one header and source and destination are part of another header.

In operation with a packet such as example packet header informs a billing engine e.g. of telecommunications GW and or telecommunications billing unit of the contents of body . Continuing with the example described herein above with particular reference to header can originate at mobile device or web service device . Regardless of the originating source an internet services proxy at mobile device at web service device or at another location along the communication chain can inject action indicator and entity identifier into header .

As described above action indicator and entity identifier or any other portion or portions of packet may be signed individually or in groups. One transmission protocol that is capable of such partitioned signing of packets is the WS Security protocol. However the schemes mechanisms techniques etc. that are described generally herein may be implemented using other protocols. Examples of such other applicable protocols include but are not limited to Wireless Application Protocol WAP Internet Protocol IP including IPv6 Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP Simple Object Access Protocol SOAP Session Initiation Protocol SIP Transmission Control Protocol TCP Lightweight Directory Access Protocol LDAP some combination thereof and so forth.

Although other protocols may be employed an example of a message format pertaining to WS Technology is described in this subsection. An example of an extensible message format is as follows 

The example message format above comports with Simple Object Access Protocol SOAP 1.2. Lines to represent the example header of the SOAP message where the mechanisms described herein are used. The body is represented by lines to . Lines to contain WS Addressing data that may be used in the generation of billing events. Lines to contain the message billing header blocks. Specifically line specifies the entity being processed by the web service method line specifies the action for the web service method and line illustrates an extension that specifies the customer identity which can be used to relate the billing information to a user. It should be noted that the billing action is not necessarily the same as the WS Addressing action. It should also be noted that a WS Addressing From element can be used to relate the billing information to a user.

As is apparent from the extensibility capability of this example the billing metadata is extensible. For example it may be extended to include identification of an original equipment manufacturer OEM of the mobile device an application identifier and or version that is functioning at the mobile device or at the web service and so forth.

The devices actions aspects features functions procedures modules data structures components etc. of are illustrated in diagrams that are divided into multiple blocks. However the order interconnections interrelationships layout etc. in which are described and or shown is not intended to be construed as a limitation and any number of the blocks can be modified combined rearranged augmented omitted etc. in any manner to implement one or more systems methods devices procedures media apparatuses APIs arrangements etc. for wireless internet services billing. Furthermore although the description herein includes references to specific implementations including a general device of the illustrated and or described implementations can be implemented in any suitable hardware software firmware or combination thereof and using any suitable transmission protocol s telecommunications billing gateway configuration s event billing information format s packet organization s internet services transaction event definition s network types within the respective environment s and or billable event logging approach es and so forth.

Example operating environment is only one example of an environment and is not intended to suggest any limitation as to the scope of use or functionality of the applicable device including computer network node entertainment device mobile appliance general electronic device etc. architectures. Neither should operating environment or the devices thereof be interpreted as having any dependency or requirement relating to any one or to any combination of components as illustrated in .

Additionally implementations for wireless internet services billing may be realized with numerous other general purpose or special purpose device including computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known devices systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use include but are not limited to personal computers server computers thin clients thick clients personal digital assistants PDAs or mobile telephones watches hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics video game machines game consoles portable or handheld gaming units network PCs videoconferencing equipment minicomputers mainframe computers network nodes distributed or multi processing computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices some combination thereof and so forth.

Implementations for wireless internet services billing may be described in the general context of processor executable instructions. Generally processor executable instructions include routines programs protocols objects functions interfaces components data structures etc. that perform and or enable particular tasks and or implement particular abstract data types. Realizations of wireless internet services billing as described in certain implementations herein may also be practiced in distributed processing environments where tasks are performed by remotely linked processing devices that are connected through a communications link and or network. Especially but not exclusively in a distributed computing environment processor executable instructions may be located in separate storage media executed by different processors and or propagated over transmission media.

Example operating environment includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer which may comprise any e.g. electronic device with computing processing capabilities. The components of computer may include but are not limited to one or more processors or processing units a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including processor to system memory .

Processors are not limited by the materials from which they are formed or the processing mechanisms employed therein. For example processors may be comprised of semiconductor s and or transistors e.g. electronic integrated circuits ICs . In such a context processor executable instructions may be electronically executable instructions. Alternatively the mechanisms of or for processors and thus of or for computer may include but are not limited to quantum computing optical computing mechanical computing e.g. using nanotechnology and so forth.

System bus represents one or more of any of many types of wired or wireless bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a point to point connection a switching fabric a peripheral bus an accelerated graphics port and a processor or local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example such architectures may include an Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus a Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus an Enhanced ISA EISA bus a Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus a Peripheral Component Interconnects PCI bus also known as a Mezzanine bus some combination thereof and so forth.

Computer typically includes a variety of processor accessible media. Such media may be any available media that is accessible by computer or another e.g. electronic device and it includes both volatile and non volatile media removable and non removable media and storage and transmission media.

System memory includes processor accessible storage media in the form of volatile memory such as random access memory RAM and or non volatile memory such as read only memory ROM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules instructions that are immediately accessible to and or being presently operated on by processing unit .

Computer may also include other removable non removable and or volatile non volatile storage media. By way of example illustrates a hard disk drive or disk drive array for reading from and writing to a typically non removable non volatile magnetic media not separately shown a magnetic disk drive for reading from and writing to a typically removable non volatile magnetic disk e.g. a floppy disk and an optical disk drive for reading from and or writing to a typically removable non volatile optical disk such as a CD DVD or other optical media. Hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are each connected to system bus by one or more storage media interfaces . Alternatively hard disk drive magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive may be connected to system bus by one or more other separate or combined interfaces not shown .

The disk drives and their associated processor accessible media provide non volatile storage of processor executable instructions such as data structures program modules and other data for computer . Although example computer illustrates a hard disk a removable magnetic disk and a removable optical disk it is to be appreciated that other types of processor accessible media may store instructions that are accessible by a device such as magnetic cassettes or other magnetic storage devices flash memory compact disks CDs digital versatile disks DVDs or other optical storage RAM ROM electrically erasable programmable read only memories EEPROM and so forth. Such media may also include so called special purpose or hard wired IC chips. In other words any processor accessible media may be utilized to realize the storage media of the example operating environment .

Any number of program modules or other units or sets of processor executable instructions may be stored on hard disk magnetic disk optical disk ROM and or RAM including by way of general example an operating system one or more application programs other program modules and program data . These processor executable instructions may include for example one or more of event billing information having action indicator and entity identifier an event billing information communication an internet services proxy coding for a telecommunications billing gateway packet some combination thereof and so forth.

A user may enter commands and or information into computer via input devices such as a keyboard and a pointing device e.g. a mouse . Other input devices not shown specifically may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish serial port video camera scanner and or the like. These and other input devices are connected to processing unit via input output interfaces that are coupled to system bus . However input devices and or output devices may instead be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port a game port a universal serial bus USB port an infrared port an IEEE 1394 Firewire interface an IEEE 802.11 wireless interface a Bluetooth wireless interface and so forth.

A monitor view screen or other type of display device may also be connected to system bus via an interface such as a video adapter . Video adapter or another component may be or may include a graphics card for processing graphics intensive calculations and for handling demanding display requirements. Typically a graphics card includes a graphics processing unit GPU video RAM VRAM etc. to facilitate the expeditious display of graphics and performance of graphics operations. In addition to monitor other output peripheral devices may include components such as speakers not shown and a printer which may be connected to computer via input output interfaces .

Computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computing device . By way of example remote computing device may be a peripheral device a personal computer a portable computer e.g. laptop computer tablet computer PDA mobile station etc. a palm or pocket sized computer a watch a gaming device a server a router a network computer a peer device another network node or another device type as listed above and so forth. However remote computing device is illustrated as a portable computer that may include many or all of the elements and features described herein with respect to computer .

Logical connections between computer and remote computer are depicted as a local area network LAN and a general wide area network WAN . Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets the Internet fixed and mobile telephone networks ad hoc and infrastructure wireless networks mesh networks other wireless networks gaming networks some combination thereof and so forth. Such networks and logical and physical communications connections are additional examples of transmission media.

When implemented in a LAN networking environment computer is usually connected to LAN via a network interface or adapter . When implemented in a WAN networking environment computer typically includes a modem or other component for establishing communications over WAN . Modem which may be internal or external to computer may be connected to system bus via input output interfaces or any other appropriate mechanism s . It is to be appreciated that the illustrated network connections are examples and that other manners for establishing communication link s between computers and may be employed.

In a networked environment such as that illustrated with operating environment program modules or other instructions that are depicted relative. to computer or portions thereof may be fully or partially stored in a remote media storage device. By way of example remote application programs reside on a memory component of remote computer but may be usable or otherwise accessible via computer . Also for purposes of illustration application programs and other processor executable instructions such as operating system are illustrated herein as discrete blocks but it is recognized that such programs components and other instructions reside at various times in different storage components of computing device and or remote computing device and are executed by processor s of computer and or those of remote computing device .

Although systems media devices methods procedures apparatuses techniques schemes approaches procedures arrangements and other implications have been described in language specific to structural logical algorithmic and functional features and or diagrams it is to be understood that the invention defined in the appended claims is not necessarily limited to the specific features or diagrams described. Rather the specific features and diagrams are disclosed as exemplary forms of implementing the claimed invention.

