---

title: System and method for associating keywords with a web page
abstract: A web page optimization engine for optimizing a web page is described. The web page optimization engine includes a keyword mapping engine configured to generate a keyword map including a listing of keywords, where each keyword is associated with one or more web pages. The web page optimization engine further includes a map reversal engine configured to generate a web page map including a listing of web page subject matters, where each web page subject matter is associated with one or more keywords based on the associations from the keyword map. The web page optimization engine yet further includes a web page generation engine configured to generate a web page for a web page subject matter in the web page map to include at least one of the one or more keywords for that web page subject matter.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09141713&OS=09141713&RS=09141713
owner: Amazon Technologies, Inc.
number: 09141713
owner_city: Seattle
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051230
---
Consumers increasingly utilize the Internet to make purchases of goods and services. Consumers make these purchases utilizing a purchasing interface implemented as a web site including a web page or a series of web pages. A web site may be configured to offer products including both goods and or services for sale. The web site may include a search engine to allow the consumer to search through the products offered for sale. The web site may be created and maintained by the provider of the goods and or services or by another entity. The web site may be configured to provide users with information to assist the user in deciding to make a purchase. The web site may further include functionality configured to allow the user to easily purchase one or more goods or services.

A user desiring to make a purchase over the Internet often begins the purchasing process by entering one or more keywords in a search engine. The search engine uses the keywords to generate a listing of search results where each search result may be associated with a provider of goods or services associated with the keywords. The search results listing is often quite large and may include multiple pages of search results where each page includes some portion of the search results. For example a first web page may be used to display the first ten search results a second web page may be used to display the second ten search results etc. Because of the large number of search results and the correspondingly large number of pages displaying those search results a user may have difficulty finding websites of interest to the user particularly if the relevant website is displayed on a fourth fifth or even later page of search results.

In order to assist users search engines often use an automated ranking algorithm to rank the search results based on relevancy. The relevance of each search result is generally determined based on a number of factors including the content or subject matter of the web page the number of other web pages having links to that web page etc. Web page subject matter may include a product featured on the web page and related information the subject of a news story displayed on the web page a category associated with items displayed on the web page etc. However determining the relevancy of a particular web page to a keyword search is an inherently difficult task. If a web page does not happen to use the same terms that a user might include in a search for that web page then identifying the web page as relevant to the search is often quite difficult.

What is needed is a system and method for identifying keywords relevant to a web page. What is further needed is a system and method for modifying a web page for the sale of products to include the keywords associated with the product. It will be appreciated that while the teachings herein describe certain features and advantages that may be achieved the teachings herein may be used to implement systems and methods that do not necessarily achieve any of these features or advantages but rather achieve other features and advantages.

One embodiment relates to a web page optimization engine for optimizing a web page. The web page optimization engine includes a keyword mapping engine configured to generate a keyword map including a listing of keywords where each keyword is associated with one or more web pages. The web page optimization engine further includes a map reversal engine configured to generate a web page map including a listing of web page subject matters where each web page subject matter is associated with one or more keywords based on the associations from the keyword map. The web page optimization engine yet further includes a web page generation engine configured to generate a web page for a web page subject matter in the web page map to include at least one of the one or more keywords for that web page subject matter.

Another embodiment relates to a method for optimizing a web page for a product. The method includes aggregating data from at least two users to generate a keyword map including a listing of keywords where each keyword is associated with one or more products and generating a product map including a listing of products where each product is associated with one or more keywords based on the associations from the keyword map. The method further includes generating at least one web page for a product in the product map to include at least one of the one or more keywords for that product.

Another embodiment relates to a web page optimization system for optimizing a product web page for a product. The system includes a search engine configured to receive one or more keywords generate a search results listing based on the one or more keywords the search results including one or more products and generate an association indicator based on the one or more keyword and activity of a user responsive to the search results listing. The system further includes a web page optimization engine having a keyword mapping engine configured to generate a keyword map including a listing of keywords based on the association where each keyword is associated with one or more products. The engine further includes a map reversal engine configured to generate a product map including a listing of products where each product is associated with one or more keywords based on the associations from the keyword map and a web page generation engine configured to generate at least one web page for a product in the product map to include at least one of the one or more keywords for that product.

Referring to a web site system including a web page optimization engine for optimizing web pages is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. The web page optimization engine optimizes the web pages by making it easier for an automated ranking algorithm of a search engine to determine whether the web pages are relevant to a particular keyword search. The web pages which may be generated by a web page generation engine are optimized by including keywords shown to be associated with purchases or selections of products being offered for sale through web pages . The above described web site system and search engine are configured to interact with each other and one or more users through a communication network such as the Internet.

Web site system and search engine may be implemented as computing systems or computer programs to be executed using a computer system. The web site system and search engine may be implemented using a single computing system e.g. comprising one or more servers or separate computer systems configured to communicate through a communication channel such as a direct connection or a communication network . Methods and systems described herein as being associated with a particular engine or interface may alternatively be associated with a different engine or interface to achieve the functions described herein.

Web page optimization engine hereinafter referred to as optimization engine includes a keyword mapping engine and a map reversal engine . Keyword mapping engine is configured to generate and maintain a listing of keywords where each keyword has been associated with one or more products. Map reversal engine is configured to generate a listing of products where each product is associated with keywords based on the listing of products maintained by keyword mapping engine .

Web page generation engine is configured to generate one or more web pages or other purchasing interfaces for one or more products which include the keywords associated with that product by map reversal engine . Generating a web page may include modifying an existing web page to include the keywords. Although specific engines are described as performing specific functions it should be understood that any function may be implemented by any alternative engine to perform the functions described herein.

Web pages may relate to one or more products and may be configured to provide information about the products including photographs detailed product descriptions testimonials etc. Web pages may further include functionality allowing users to purchase the product associated with a particular web page either directly or by linking to other web pages. Web pages are described in further detail below with reference to . Alternatively web pages may be content web pages unrelated to on line retail or purchasing such as on the web site of a news source interest group and so on.

Search engine may be any type of search engine configured to receive one or more search terms hereinafter referred to as keywords and generate a listing of search results. Search engine may be configured to retrieve data files or documents from a database or network such as the Internet based on the keywords entered by a user or other user of a search engine website. The listing of search results may be a listing of web pages or web sites offering information or functionality associated with the keywords that were entered by the user. The listing of search results may be displayed on multiple pages. For example a first web page may display the first results a second page may display the second results etc.

The web site system may include its own product search engine which may be used to search for products within the web site implemented by the web site system . Search engine may be any type of search engine configured to performing searching functions as described above with reference to search engine . Search engine may be configured to display items associated with the keywords and also offered for sale through the web pages . For example web pages may implement a purchasing interface for a bicycle seller. The search engine may be configured to allow a user to search through all of the bicycles that are available for sale through the bicycle seller and display the search results using web pages . For example each search result may be associated with a web page for a specific bicycle.

Referring now to A and B the manner in which web page optimization engine identifies keywords to be associated with a web page is described in greater detail. Referring first to when search engine is provided with one or more search terms from a user the results of the search may be provided by search engine in the form of data such as data for a search results web page which may include a listing of content based web pages associated with the search term. illustrates a search results web page displayed using search results data from search engine according to an exemplary embodiment. While the search results data provided by search engine is generally described with reference to in the context of a displayable search results web page it will be understood that the search results data may be provided in other forms such as for example a direct data input to web page optimization engine or another component of system .

In the illustrated example search engine has executed a search for the search term bicycles in field and has provided a set of listing of search results consisting of hyperlinks to content based web pages regarding for example products associated with the search term bicycles. In this embodiment hyperlinks may represent web pages providing detailed information about various individual products for sale. A subset of the resulting hyperlinks are displayed along with a button to allow the next set of search results to be accessed.

Web page may be configured to allow a user to select one or more of the hyperlinks in the search results listing to display a web page associated with the particular search result that was selected. Search engine may further be configured to communicate the keywords that were used to generate the search results and an indication of the search result that was selected based on the entry of the keyword by user . The keyword association with a particular product may be communicated to web page optimization engine .

Although is discussed in the context of search engine it will be appreciated that search engine may also be configured to communicate keywords that were used to generate search results and an indication of the search result that was selected based on the entry of the keyword by user . For example if a user performs a search for a product from search engine and lands directly on a web page associated with that product the keywords that caused the user to land on that page may be communicated by the search engine to the web page optimization engine . This information may be used alone or in combination with the information from search engine .

Referring now to a keyword to product map hereinafter map including a listing of keywords and the products that were associated with those keywords by search engine is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. Keyword to product map may be generated by aggregating keyword associations with products from multiple searches performed by multiple users . The keyword association data may be received either from the search engine or from independent search engine . The keyword to product map may be constructed by monitoring and recording the activity of a user on the website and making assumptions and or calculations based on the activity for example in accordance with the teachings of U.S. Pat. No. 6 185 558 entitled Identifying the items most relevant to a current query based on items selected in connection with similar queries hereby incorporated by reference.

In an exemplary embodiment in constructing the map keyword mapping engine is configured to take into account not only immediate browsing activity of the user e.g. which search result from a list of search results was selected by the user after a keyword search but also subsequent browsing activity. For example the keyword map may be constructed based on information such as whether the user completed a purchase after the selection what other pages the user visit after the search results were returned whether the user returned to the page and made an alternative selection indicating that the user did not find what they were looking for on the first web page etc. For example a user may enter a keyword related to the name of a popular movie and ultimately may purchase a product apparently unrelated such as a CD by a particular artist. The relationship between the movie and the particular artist may not be intuitive and therefore may not be recognized by an automated ranking algorithm. There may be no readily apparent connection between the items other than the user behavioral pattern detected by web pattern optimization engine . However based on aggregate purchasing data web page optimization engine may determine that there exists some connection between the two e.g. the artist has a song on the movie soundtrack particularly if the same pattern of behavior is observed for multiple users.

Accordingly by taking into account past user activity map can capture and utilize user associations to facilitate user searching. For example map can be used to provide the user with not only the information that the user was seeking but also information that the user was not seeking that would probably be of interest to them. For example using the CD example above a user may not even be aware of the CD by the particular artist. However since a number of other users typing the same search did express interest in the CD there is a strong possibility that the current user may also be interested. This possibility may be reflected in the aggregate purchasing data in map and may be made accessible to the user by displaying selectable search queries on the web page as described below.

Map may further be augmented by assigning a ranking to each product associated with a keyword. The ranking may be relative to other products that are also associated with the keyword. The ranking may be implemented as a relevance score. For example products that have been repeatedly selected by users may be given a higher relevance score while products that have only been provided sporadically in association with the keyword may be given a lower relevance score. Map may also be augmented using different methods such as weighting data aging etc. Keyword mapping engine may be configured to modify map based on input from sources other than search engine or or from more detailed information generated by search engine or .

Products may also be associated with keywords based on information associated with each product. For example search engine may be configured to associate a product category with that a keyword based on a known relationship between the product and the category. The product may be within the category an accessory of items in the category a product that is often purchased at the same time as items in the category be made by a manufacturer of items normally associated with the category etc. Accordingly each keyword may be associated with both products as well as categories of products.

Products may also be associated with keywords based on other types of relationships. For example map may map keywords to product categories keywords to browse nodes and so on. Additionally user may enter a keyword based on an actual or perceived relationship between the keyword and the good or service sought by the user. For example a user seeking to purchase an MP3 player may enter the name of a well known MP3 player as a search term based on the actual relationship of that name with an MP3 player. Alternatively a user may enter a common misspelling of the manufacturer s name or may enter some other term associated with the product based on a perceived relationship. The keyword data may further be associated with both broad and narrower categories of products. For example if the product is a particular model of brand name camera the listing of keywords may be associated with that particular model of brand name camera as well as the broad category of products including all cameras having the same brand name. The strength of the actual or perceived relationship may be based on the number of times the relationship is reinforced by users through repeated selection of the product based on the keyword.

Although a single map is described above with reference to map system may be configured to generate more than one keyword to product map. For example a first map may be created for a first group of users and a second map may be created for a second group of users. The groups of users may be defined according to an attribute associated with the users such as geographical location age gender interests etc.

Referring now to a product to keyword map is shown including a listing of products and the keywords that have been associated with each product according to an exemplary embodiment. Optimization engine may be configured to reverse map to generate product to keyword map hereinafter reverse map . Reverse map may further include the additional information such as the categories and relationship that were associated with each keyword the relevance score indicating the strength of the relationship between the keyword and the product and so on. Accordingly product to keyword map may be indexed by product where each product is associated with one or more keywords. Where multiple maps are provided generating the reverse map may include generating multiple reverse maps one for each map .

Advantageously reversing the keyword to product map to generate product to keyword map produces a listing of the keywords that are most relevant for the product. Each product will be associated with keywords that have been shown to be relevant to the particular product based on actual user activity. These keywords may include keywords for accessories related products products that are commonly associated with the product keywords for products that are often purchased together with the product etc. Keyword map may be maintained for thousands or millions of product pages or more as needed depending on the number of products offered on the website of website system allowing keywords to be generated for any product page in the keyword map and avoiding the need to generate optimum keywords for each web page manually.

Further as indicated above for each product keywords may be ranked based on their relevance to the particular product. The ranking may be implemented as a relevance score. The relevance score may be proportional to the number of users that have searched for the keyword and then taken a subsequent action such a clicking a web page making a purchase etc. for the particular product. For example keywords that have been associated with users that have made purchases of the product may be given a higher relevance score while keywords that have only been provided sporadically in association with the product may be given a lower relevance score. The relevance score of each keyword may further be incorporated from map such that the higher the relevance of a product to a particular keyword within map the higher the relevance of the keyword for the product within reverse map .

Map and reverse map may be configured to be created and continually updated based on received keywords products and associations. Updating may include addition of new keywords and or products deletions of older or stale keywords or products updating of relevance scores etc. For example older data may get weighed less heavily than newer data in determining the relevance score. Updates and or changes to map may trigger an update to reverse map and or web pages displaying information based on reverse map described with further detail below with reference to .

Although map and are described above with reference to creating associations between keywords and products system may also be configured to create associations between keywords and other web page subject matter. Web page subject matter is the general subject matter represented in the web page. In the context of an on line retail web site for example the subject matter of a web page e.g. a product detail page may be the particular product described on the page as described above. In other types of web sites the web page subject matter may relate to other subject matter. For example the subject matter bicycling may be represented in both an informational web page created by a bicycling enthusiast and a web page containing a news article about the Tour de France. Thus for an on line newspaper the web page subject matter may be the subject matter of a particular news story or the news story itself.

Referring now to a web page for a product that is associated with keywords in reverse map is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. In web page includes the keywords associated with the product in reverse map . Web page may be created and maintained by a web page publisher and be configured to display information and functionality associated with the product to a visitor to the web page. The information may include a photograph showing the product testimonials purchasing functionality or any other information or functionality that may be of interest to a potential customer desiring to purchase or considering a purchase of the product.

Web page may be configured to include one or more Meta Tags. Meta Tags are data stored on the web page but not necessarily displayed to a user . The two most popular Meta tags used for search engine optimization are a Meta description tag and a Meta keyword tag. The Meta description tag allows web site publishers to describe the subject matter of the web page. Search engines may use Meta description tag information to display the description of a web site in the search results. The Meta keyword tag allows web site publishers to put keywords in web page to help search engines determine the subject matter of web page .

Optimization engine may be configured to incorporate one or more of the keywords associated with the product in reverse map into one or more of the Meta Tags. Because these keywords have been provided by users that have shown a particular interest it is more likely that users in the future entering these keywords will be interested in web page and will benefit from the placement of the keywords in web page . The relevance of web page to the keywords has been shown by historic user activity as represented in reverse map . Insertion of the keywords in web page may help an automated ranking algorithm of search engine identify web page as relevant to a search including that keyword such that web page will be displayed higher in the listing of search results.

In addition to use in the Meta Tags the keywords may further be used to generate a listing of keywords that is displayed to a user viewing web page . Listing of keywords may be listed with an appropriate title such as Customers found this item by searching for followed by the keywords. The keywords may also be used within the URL description the page title keywords in backlinks etc. The user may further be provided with the ability to select keywords from the listing to perform a search to find related products. Web page may alternatively include other listings of keywords that are provided for different purposes such as helping a user discover related or different products. For example web page may include a listing of keywords related to other searches performed by users that viewed the current web page other web pages viewed by users that viewed the current web page other items purchased by users that entered the same search terms as the user etc. Thus the listing of keywords may be displayed to the user in order to provide the user with an additional tool to discover related products.

Referring now to web page shows a web page that contains secondary products that are similar to a primary product. For example the web page may be a page that would be reached if a user clicks on the explore similar items button in . In each of the different products including the primary product and the secondary similar products may have an associated set of keywords in reverse map . For web page the keywords that are added to the Meta Tag and or that are displayed to the user may be a composite of the keywords for the primary product and the keywords for the secondary products. In such an arrangement in selecting keywords for web page keywords that are specific to individual products may be weighed less heavily than keywords that are general to both the primary products and the secondary products. In this manner a general set of keywords for web page may be developed. As a result when a user conducts a search at search engine using general keywords related to a particular product the user may be more likely to land at web page due to the higher correspondence between the general keywords entered by the user and the general keywords for the web page . Accordingly where a user enters general search terms web page is more likely to show up higher in the search rankings than a more detailed product page such as web page in and therefore is more likely be the landing page for the user.

Referring now to a web page for a broad category of products that is associated with keywords in reverse map is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. Web page is a product category page that may be displayed based on entry of the keyword bicycles in search engine or search engine . As indicated above map and reverse map may map keywords to product categories and vice versa keywords to browse nodes and vice versa and so on. Generally web page may include either a listing of products within a product category such as brands of bicycles or product categories that having a common theme such as bicycling products . The entries with the listing are selectable by a user . Selection of a product will display a web page related to that particular product similar to web page . Selection of a product category will display a listing of multiple products within that product category.

In web page includes the keywords associated with the product category in reverse map . For example web page may be configured to include one or more Meta Tags similar to web page described above with reference to .

In addition to use in the Meta Tags the keywords may further be used to generate a listing of keywords that is displayed to a user viewing web page . The listing of keywords may be useful with reference to broad categories to identify of items of interest in other broad categories. For example users who have entered keywords associated with bicycles may also frequently be interested in books about Utah because Utah has good quality biking trails. Displaying listing may help newer bicyclists to recognize that books about Utah may be of interest.

Referring now to a flowchart illustrating a method for determining keywords associated with a product by reversing associations between keyword and products and inserting the keyword in a web page for the product is shown according to an exemplary embodiment. Method may be implemented by optimization engine in conjunction with search engine and web site system .

In a step an association indicator is received by optimization engine . An association indicator is any type of indication that a product is associated with a particular keyword. For example the indicator may be an indication that a user has clicked on a search listing for the product after the keyword was used to generate the search listing an indication that a user has purchased the product after using the keyword etc.

The association indicator may be received either directly based on an association indicator received by optimization engine or indirectly where the association indicator is detected by another system such as search engine and communicated to optimization engine . Further the association may take into account aggregate user activity for multiple users and for all activity of a given user after a given search has been performed. As described above a direct association may exist where a user enters a keyword and then selects the product associated with that keyword. An indirect association may exist between the product and the keywords where the user engages in other browsing activity on the website before ultimately selecting a product.

In a step the product is associated with the keyword within map . Association with the keyword may include association with the actual keyword association with other keywords having some relationship to the keyword association with a category associated with the keyword etc.

In a step map is reversed to create reverse map including a listing of products and the keywords that are associated with each product. Map may be generated using a standard database program configured to perform the transmutation described above with reference to .

In a step the keywords associated each product in map may be inserted into a web page associated with each particular product. Insertion may include population of one or more Meta Tags with the keywords. Insertion may further include reconfiguration of a listing of keywords appearing on web page . Insertion may yet further include underlining bolding making selectable or otherwise highlighting instances of the words that appear to the user on web page e.g. bolding words already appearing in the text of a news article . The words may be made selectable for example by a hyperlink associated with the keyword that will link the user to a web page directed to the keyword or that will initiate a new search based on the keyword.

Method may be utilized to generate a web page associated with the a product offered for sale by the operator of the search engine. Alternatively method may be performed on behalf of a third party where the third party provides user tracking information to the web site system performing method . Web site system may store and process the user tracking information to generate either a web page or a listing of keywords for the third party. Web site system may further provide program code to be used by the third party in generating the user tracking information inserting the keywords generating a web page etc.

According to an exemplary embodiment step may be performed by optimization engine automatically without human intervention allowing optimum keywords to be included on the web page without manual selection of the keywords and reconfiguration of the web page. For example a plurality of web pages may be stored in a database associated with or accessible by optimization engine . If web page is dynamically generated each web page may comprise a template comprising fields that are populated with data based on service requests made to services at the time the page is generated. For the web pages as part of the process of generating the web page the web page generation engine may make a service request to the optimization engine which may respond to the service request by supplying a list of keywords for publication with the web page. The web page generation engine may then populate the web page with the keywords in one of the fields of the template e.g. the field the field for the meta tag and or other fields . If web page is statically generated optimization engine may be configured to include a text modification engine configured to automatically insert the keywords and any necessary supporting information into the html or other code associated with each web page based on reverse map .

Here and throughout terms such as user publisher visitor and so forth are to be understood in the broadest possible sense. Herein the term user is used generically to refer to consumers advertisers publishers and visitors. By way of illustration and not of limitation a publisher is not restricted to persons or entities who purport to be in the on line publishing business or any other kind of publishing business nor to entities who have complete or even primary control dyer the content of particular websites but rather is used in a more general sense. In the context of Internet based advertising for example publisher includes any person or entity responsible directly or indirectly for putting content on the Internet whether by hosting or sponsoring websites posting pages frames graphics applets blogs audiovisual content etc. on their own or others websites providing web services that can source content for websites or in any other manner. Still further a visitor may be an individual who visits and views or otherwise perceives the content of a web site and pages therein via a web browser or other client software program running on a personal computer wireless handheld device or the like but may also be for example a corporate or other entity whose servers access published web content and advertisements by invoking web services through appropriate application programming interfaces APIs a visitor may or may not be the intended or actual end user of a product or service that is the subject of an advertisement etc. A visitor may also be an automated system such as a web crawler associated with a search engine. A potential customer may be an individual who views advertising regardless of the media in which it is published e.g. print television on line etc and may or may not be the intended or actual end user of a product or service that is the subject of an advertisement etc. In sum persons of skill in the art will appreciate that a wide variety of actors more than can be conveniently set forth here can play the roles of advertiser publisher and visitor for purposes of the present invention. It will be further appreciated that the selfsame person or entity may be both publisher and advertiser or both publisher and visitor or both advertiser and visitor or even all three depending on the context. In a similar Vein and as will be apparent from the foregoing terms such as web page website and so forth are used to give specific illustrative examples of settings in which on line content and advertisements can be presented to and perceived by users. Such examples are not intended to be limiting and persons of skill in the art will appreciate that many other such settings now known or yet to be developed may be suitable to the practice of the present invention in specific embodiments.

It should be noted that although flow charts may be provided herein to show a specific order of method steps it is understood that the order of these steps may differ from what is depicted. Also two or more steps may be performed concurrently or with partial concurrence. Such variation will depend on the software and hardware systems chosen and on designer choice. It is understood that all such variations are within the scope of the invention. Likewise software and web implementations of the present invention could be accomplished with standard programming techniques with rule based logic and other logic to accomplish the various database searching steps correlation steps comparison steps and decision steps. It should also be noted that the word component as used herein and in the claims is intended to encompass implementations using one or more lines of software code and or hardware implementations and or equipment for receiving manual inputs. It is to be understood that any method steps as recited herein e.g. in the claims may be performed by a configuration utility e.g. Java based executed by a computing device based on input by a user. Of course according to various alternative embodiments any suitable configuration utility application system computing device etc. may be used to execute implement and or perform method steps as recited in this disclosure including the claims .

The invention is described above with reference to drawings. These drawings illustrate certain details of specific embodiments that implement the systems and methods and programs of the present invention. However describing the invention with drawings should not be construed as imposing on the invention any limitations associated with features shown in the drawings. The present invention contemplates methods systems and program products on any machine readable media for accomplishing its operations. The embodiments of the present invention may be implemented using an existing computer processor or by a special purpose computer processor incorporated for this or another purpose or by a hardwired system.

As noted above embodiments within the scope of the present invention include program products comprising machine readable media for carrying or having machine executable instructions or data structures stored thereon. Such machine readable media can be any available media which can be accessed by a general purpose or special purpose computer or other machine with a processor. By way of example such machine readable media can comprise RAM ROM PROM EPROM EEPROM CD ROM or other optical disk storage magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to carry or store desired program code in the form of machine executable instructions or data structures and which can be accessed by a general purpose or special purpose computer or other machine with a processor. When information is transferred or provided over a network or another communications connection either hardwired wireless or a combination of hardwired or wireless to a machine the machine properly views the connection as a machine readable medium. Thus any such connection is properly termed a machine readable medium. Combinations of the above are also included within the scope of machine readable media. Machine executable instructions comprise for example instructions and data which cause a general purpose computer special purpose computer or special purpose processing machines to perform a certain function or group of functions.

Embodiments of the invention are described in the general context of method steps which may be implemented in one embodiment by a program product including machine executable instructions such as program code for example in the form of program modules executed by machines in networked environments. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Machine executable instructions associated data structures and program modules represent examples of program code for executing steps of the methods disclosed herein. The particular sequence of such executable instructions or associated data structures represent examples of corresponding acts for implementing the functions described in such steps.

Embodiments of the present invention may be practiced in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers having processors. Logical connections may include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN that are presented here by way of example and not limitation. Such networking environments are commonplace in office wide or enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet and may use a wide variety of different communication protocols. Those skilled in the art will appreciate that such network computing environments will typically encompass many types of computer system configurations including personal computers hand held devices multi processor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. Embodiments of the invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by local and remote processing devices that are linked either by hardwired links wireless links or by a combination of hardwired or wireless links through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

An exemplary system for implementing the overall system or portions of the invention might include a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer including a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit. The system memory may include read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . The computer may also include a magnetic hard disk drive for reading from and writing to a magnetic hard disk a magnetic disk drive for reading from or writing to a removable magnetic disk and an optical disk drive for reading from or writing to a removable optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. The drives and their associated machine readable media provide nonvolatile storage of machine executable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer.

The foregoing description of embodiments of the invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed and modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teachings or may be acquired from practice of the invention. The embodiments were chosen and described in order to explain the principals of the invention and its practical application to enable one skilled in the art to utilize the invention in various embodiments and with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.

