---

title: Interactive patient education system
abstract: Interactive patient education system for use in operatory or office settings, provides interactive 3-D animations, graphics and other media, enabling real-time markup and customization to better illustrate and communicate not only generic information, but the individual patient's physiology, treatment options, and anticipated outcomes. Preferred embodiments are portable, computer-implemented, interactive multimedia educational tools. Import of patient-specific graphics, video and audio contributes to full-custom educational content to optimize patient understanding.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07658611&OS=07658611&RS=07658611
owner: Reality Engineering, Inc.
number: 07658611
owner_city: Camas
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050315
---
This application claims priority from U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 554 630 filed Mar. 18 2004 and incorporated herein by this reference.

 2004 2005 Reality Engineering Inc. A portion of the disclosure of this patent document contains material that is subject to copyright protection including without limitation the drawing figures submitted herewith. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office patent file or records but otherwise reserves all copyright rights whatsoever. 37 CFR 1.71 d .

This application pertains to interactive patient education for use in a medical or dental setting and more specifically relates to computer implemented interactive multimedia educational tools.

Studies of patient education provided during diagnosis and treatment have demonstrated time savings and cost reductions as well as improvements in patient satisfaction better health outcomes better compliance more empowered patient decision making and reduced medical malpractice. In a healthcare environment where there is relentless pressure to reduce costs the value of patient education as a cost savings tool is appreciated.

The market for patient education tools is very large. On average Americans visit their doctor 3.5 times per year totaling approximately 985 million patient encounters per year. 40 million people have surgery each year. Each of these encounters or procedures generates an opportunity for patient education.

Currently physicians and hospitals use a variety of methods for patient education. The primary tool for patient education is direct communication i.e. talking between the provider and the patient. Often times the provider uses demonstrations such as by using previously prepared or contemporaneously prepared images to supplement the discussion. Written materials such as brochures handouts and other written material can also be provided to the patient. Audiovisual material such as videos can sometimes be provided to the patient or given to the patient to watch in their own homes or in a waiting room or lobby.

Each of these methods has an associated cost in time or materials and limitations. In present healthcare provider settings providers often do not have enough time to fully explain diagnoses or procedures to patients. Materials that are previously prepared may not explain the particular details that make a particular patient s procedure different than one that is common or routine. Audiovisual materials with nothing further do not provide ability for the patient to ask questions.

One example of commercially available materials for dental practice are those offered by Orasphere. Orasphere provides a variety of still images and animations for use in dentistry see www.orasphere.com. While these materials may include good quality images the content is passive it cannot be changed or adapted to a specific patient s needs or situation. show examples of content from a dental collection. These icons launch pre recorded animations. Again the content cannot be altered in real time.

Another example of the prior art is called the CAESY system which is a collection of multimedia content delivered on DVD. A viewing system can be set up in a dental office operatory or reception area for patient use. The patient can select content to view as desired. The content is all pre recorded and fixed in the DVD.

A computer driven interactive multi media patient education system in accordance with the invention uses creates and stores a variety of digital content such as photos x rays movies and computer animations for selective presentation to a patient before during or after consultation with a healthcare professional. During display of an animation the patient or dentist for example can pause the animation. This action automatically makes a copy of a still image corresponding to the frame where the animation paused. In one embodiment this copy can be revised or marked up for better communication with the patient.

In one embodiment the still image is electronically marked up using a stylus in combination with a pen enabled display screen and suitable software. In one embodiment the screen is integral with a tablet or slate PC. Still images that are created by pausing the animation along with their markups are automatically saved as part of an electronic record of the session.

The electronic session record provides content for creating a custom report which in turn can be forwarded printed emailed etc for reference. In one embodiment the user creates the custom report including selection of digital content by means of a simple user interface preferably comprising a pen enabled screen. The patient as well can virtually sign the record using a stylus.

In one embodiment a history panel is displayed. Each time the current animation is paused a still image is created by the software automatically and stored. Each such still image is represented by a corresponding icon or thumbnail in the history panel. These thumbnails can be selected clicked tapped etc. at any time to display the corresponding image. The history thumbnails also serve to skip to the corresponding frame in the animation from which they were created. The user can resume playing the animation from that spot using the play button. In this way the history panel enables the user to skip around quickly between points of interest in the animation.

Additional aspects and advantages will be apparent from the following detailed description of preferred embodiments which proceeds with reference to the accompanying drawings.

Embodiments of the invention include animated interactive models that can be manipulated to show organ structure how body parts work together how incisions or other invasive techniques will affect the involved structures etc. Voice over and video can be added to the model if desired. These teaching models can be viewed on any modern computer display such as a CRT LCD Plasma etc. One advantage to particular embodiments of the invention is that the animation may be available on a portable computer and easily carried. Although it is possible to display such animations on Palm computers having screens that are roughly 3 5 more dramatic results can be achieved from using larger computers such as those on a laptop computer. Further for portability and ease of use tablet PCs often called slate style computers are an excellent platform for displaying the animations.

One particular type of slate style PCs that can be used with embodiments of the invention are the Motion line of Tablet PCs from Motion Computing. Wacom is a provider of pen sensor components to Microsoft IHVs independent hardware vendors for Tablet PC solutions. So called pen enabled products provide a simple convenient and intuitive user interface for both the dentist and patient. In one embodiment of the present invention interaction with the computer or display is done with a pen like stylus.

Any acceptable display can be paired with a user interface that is extremely easy to use. The displays may be designed to be taken into the examining room or carried on hospital rounds. When such 3D animated procedures are coupled to the viewing device a virtual tour of any organ or body part can be shown as well as demonstrating the effect of surgery or other procedures.

A combination of anatomically precise three dimensional models and interactivity provides a perfect avenue for physicians or other knowledgeable persons to educate patients about their illness explain surgical procedures and respond to specific patient concerns. These interactive 3D models of human anatomy can be installed on portable PC tablets or slates and used in the doctor s office.

Example embodiments of the invention combine one or more technologies to create a useful end product. An animation begins with a 3D model of the desired object to be animated. Organs groups of organs skin layers muscles bones ligaments arteries and veins and any other material desired to be animated can be represented in a 3D model.

Artists can mock up the 3D design in well known computer programs such as 3D studio Max Maya Alias Pro Engineer AutoCad Catia or Solid Works for example. 3D designs are typically a collection of polygon elements and may include a variety of skins to provide texture to the objects. Further any supporting objects such as instruments used in surgical procedures can be animated. Animated 3D models will explain surgical processes or anatomy functionality.

The 3D models may be optimized to reduce the number of polygons by using for example one or more reducing tools such as 3D Studio max Cult 3D Cycore technology and Stl reducers. Reducing the number of polygons reduces the ultimate amount of storage necessary to store the 3D animations. Of course the number of polygons need not be reduced at all but reducing them will typically enhance the performance of the display and the interaction.

Once the number of polygons is settled smart models can be created that can be controlled to rotate zoom and animate. Tools for creating such interactions include Cult 3D and custom java Macromedia director programming.

Next animations are created that can play back without interaction. Video may be shot on subjects that are appropriate. This video can aid in explaining information such as medical information to the patient. Relevant images and audio tracks can also be added to help convey information about the animation to the patient.

Other animations are created for an interactive environment. These animations can be controlled in real time by a knowledge provider such as a doctor as further described below. The animations can be manipulated to demonstrate function and interaction between the different represented components. For example the animations can be manipulated to show organ structure how body parts work together and how incisions or other invasive techniques will affect the involved structures.

Software running on a computer which may be inside the display as in a slate machine displays content and allows the user to mark up images on the fly with a stylus before during or after the animation is run. This user interface can be made to interact with any software that may be present on the video screen such as active X and the technology driving the stylus. Macromedia products and Java scripting may be used. A preferred embodiment of a user interface is further described below.

In combination this blend of advanced engineering design Digital Mockup 3D modeling animation multimedia and web module development allows for increased education and importantly improved understanding.

Animations may be designed specifically with the doctor patient relationship in mind. One of the aims of uses for the invention is to increase patient understanding of conditions leading to better treatment compliance and improved outcomes for both patients and healthcare professionals. Such a set of tools helps the patient understand complicated conditions and gives doctors a tool through which they can more easily explain medical concepts.

In some embodiments animations can be pre loaded on a server and available to be watched or run at their convenience. Access to such animations may be password protected. In other embodiments a record of the animations may be created during the animation itself including real time audio input from the instructor and student. Then this stored animation becomes a new animation that can be viewed in playback. Either or both of the animations may be made available to the student one animation that is interactive and another that simply plays back the first animation directed by the instructor.

In a presently preferred embodiment an interactive patient education system for use in dental or medical applications is deployed in a tablet PC with a pen enabled display screen. The tablet machine can be hand held by the doctor or patient while in use. Battery operation enables it to be un tethered. Alternatively the PC can be mounted on an repositionable support arm for hands free use. In one embodiment a second screen can be connected for one of the users to view.

In one embodiment menu selection of content serves as a starting point in an interactive session. In the list below there is one category called IMPLANTS and in that category there are three content selections two animations and one image. One animation is called Implant Incisor . In our illustrative interactive session the dentist wants the patent to understand this treatment option. Viewing the screen together they see an initial screen display image similar to that shown in .

Referring to the screen display comprises a window consisting of several frames. The window includes by way of illustration and not limitation a content display window a menu window and a toolbar . In the menu window the dentist selected the Implants topic which resulted in display of a list of content available under that topic.

The following list illustrates one embodiment of content for an interactive dental patient education system. The left column shows the topic and the right column shows the medium 

The above list is merely illustrative and it could vary for example depending upon the practitioner s areas of practice or specialization. The Implant Incisor animation highlighted above will be used to further describe the invention below.

Referring again to the user hereinafter the user refers to either the dentist or the patient then selects the Implant Incisor video. In a presently preferred embodiment the display is pen enabled and the selection is made by touching a stylus to the display screen. Other user input devices are known and can be used. Upon selection the Implant Incisor video is loaded and begins display in the display panel or frame .

The observant reader will see that an incisor tooth is missing at location in the animation at the point shown in i.e. at the beginning of the animation. shows the toolbar in greater detail. It includes buttons to rewind and to play stop the animation at any time. A slider bar shows progress of the animation or video or audio when such are playing . Moving the slider bar allows the user to quickly move to any desired point in the presentation. Other toolbar buttons are discussed shortly.

Turning now to the animation has progressed as indicated on the slider bar on toolbar . Here the user taps the play stop button in to pause the animation. When the animation is stopped the system immediately and automatically saves a still image corresponding to that point in the animation. That image is now displayed on the screen panel . Visual indicia show that the animation is paused for example the play pause button is changed to an alternate state indicated for example by shadow or color. Also other tools now available for use are likewise changed to alternate states. Referring again to such tool buttons include a marker button color palette eraser as well as fast forward and rewind arrows and respectively. The user can return to playing the animation at any time simply by pressing the play pause button once again.

Returning to while the animation is paused and the still image displayed the user can mark up that image to facilitate discussion with and understanding by the patient. Again various user input devices such as a mouse can be used but we describe the pen enabled preferred embodiment for illustration. The dentist selects the marker tool by touching that button . Referring to the button preferably expands or pulls up a selection of marker tools which can be of various sizes shown as buttons A B C and D in descending order of relative size. Similarly the user can select the palette button which will bring up a selection of color buttons indicated by A for selection.

Having now selected a desired marker and marker color we return to where the dentist marks up the still image using the stylus. At she circled the site of interest and wrote 6 months healing . Applying the stylus will cause corresponding markings to display on the image consistent with the selected marker size and color. Errors can be removed by selecting the eraser button and again applying the stylus in an intuitive manner. In the display panel of the dentist circled the site of interest and wrote 6 months healing to better explain the image.

Notice here the history panel below the toolbar. Each time the current animation is paused as noted above a still image is created by the software automatically and stored. Each such still image is represented by a corresponding icon or thumbnail in the history panel . Here the still image in is represented by the thumbnail in the history panel. These thumbnails can be selected clicked tapped etc. at any time to display the corresponding image in panel for review or further discussion among the users. The history thumbnails also serve to skip to the corresponding frame in the animation from which they were created. The user can scroll through a larger number of thumbnails using arrows A B to march them along the history panel. The user can resume playing the animation from that spot using the play button. In this way the history panel enables the user to skip around quickly between points of interest in the animation. A new image can be made at any time for further marking or study again merely by pausing the presentation. Of course an unwanted image can be deleted easily.

Referring now to the slider bar indicates further progress of the animation and again it is stopped as described above. Another still image is created automatically corresponding to the place where the animation was paused in other words the corresponding frame of the animation is used to create a still image. That still image is displayed in panel as before. In the history panel below we see the first still thumbnail and the second current thumbnail . In still the dentist once again can add markings if desired.

Referring now to the dentist next invokes an import function by selecting the IMPORT button on the screen which in turn displays an image import panel or browser . The import panel provides a browsing function to enable selection among existing files. These can be from any source for example they may be images of the present patient s dentition for comparison to the image . Standard digital image formats can be imported for example gif tiff jpeg bmp png targa.

Referring now the it shows the result of importing a digital image for display namely an x ray A. Note that the history panel below now shows the still thumbnails and the last one corresponding to the imported digital x ray. These images shown in history panel are forming a record of the present interactive session complete with custom markings and other content. For example an audio commentary by the user can be created and imported into the record. Details of digital audio recording are known and therefore omitted here.

Note also in that a new display panel Imports is opened where imported files are listed in this case the Upper Arch Bottom.jpg as shown. This panel allows easy selection at any time among imported files. Referring now to the dentist marks up the digital image A circling points of interest on this image of the patient s upper teeth for discussion with the patient using the marker tools as described above. The markups are stored automatically in or in association with the still image.

Referring now to in one embodiment the dentist now invokes an EXPORT button to display a save image file browser and here she selects the x ray image file A. The x ray image is saved and can be emailed. Any image can be saved with or without markings. shows how the dentist has marked up the x ray A using the same marker tools as described above.

Referring now to a print panel is invoked to prepare a custom record or printout. This is invoked by a print button . shows an enlargement of the print panel . It includes a selection panel that mirrors the history panel to provide for selection of any items from the history panel. The print panel also includes a Select Page Layout field for selecting a desired layout for a report or record of the interactive session. Thumbnail is an example of a comparison of bridges to implants can that be included in a report.

Alternatively the dentist could assemble a report at any time without the patient present either in preparation for meeting with the patient or after an office examination. The dentist can simply select various images and other content by touching the desired icons or thumbnails. She can also select a layout for the report. The finished report can be saved emailed printed etc. for further reference. It may be useful for insurance billing documentation. For content the dentist can select among various images including standard or stock images stock images marked up for the current patient the patient s own images and or x rays in any combination. This powerful tool creates a record or printable presentation that is extremely effective for helping the patient understand the situation presented.

Patient education is a key component of patient physician communication however the average patient asks only two questions during an entire medical visit lasting an average of 15 minutes. Patients who are actively involved in decision making are more satisfied have a better quality of life and have better health outcomes. A meta analysis of 41 research studies showed that giving patients more information is associated with increased patient satisfaction better compliance better recall and understanding of medical conditions.

Physicians are the primary purveyors of medical information to patients. Given the documented value of patient education in improving outcomes increasing patient satisfaction and avoiding malpractice patient education should be a key tool for physicians and their staffs. Using embodiments of the invention can also reduce a number of malpractice claims a significant portion of which extend from a lack of informed consent or failure to instruct the patient properly.

Surgeons demonstrate a much greater usage of patient education in their patient interactions than the typical physician. Almost one half of patient surgeon visits are dedicated to patient education and counseling by surgeons. Out of a average 13 minute visit surgeons spent an average of 5.5 minutes educating and counseling the patient. Surgeons improve productivity with the introduction of time saving patient education techniques.

Particular segments of the medical community may be prime candidates to benefit by using embodiments of the invention such as Ob GYN surgery such as orthopedic surgery neurosurgery pediatrics neurology oncology and cardiology.

Hospitals are under pressure to reduce inpatient length of stay since the introduction of reimbursement based on diagnostically related groupings DRG . Under the DRG system used by Medicare the hospital is paid an established fee based on the average length of stay associated with a diagnosis and or procedure. By improving patient education hospitals will benefit in producing better outcomes. In addition nurses tend to spend a large portion of their time providing patient education. Interactive animated patient education on portable PC tablets as well as other embodiments of the invention has a potential to meet hospital needs in several ways.

Embodiments of the invention combine 3D technology audio video animation logic interface programming and the portability of a tablet PC. This combination of technology and portability allows the instructor to have personal interaction with the student or patient while interacting with three dimensional models of anatomy. The 3D anatomy models show with clarity procedures that are difficult to understand. Doctors can take snap shots of areas of interest as they spin the 3D models and zoom in on the area of the anatomy or procedure being discussed. The images that are created on the fly from the 3D interactive model animation or video can then be marked up on the tablet using the stylus as explained above and then printed or emailed to the patient for reference.

A signature area can be included where the patient signs to verify they understand what has been explained to them. Patients may also have the ability to interact with the tablet unattended by a nurse or doctor. They can look up areas of interest and interact with the educational content. The patient is given a URL with a password so they can view over the Internet much of the content explained to them using the tablet PC.

In other embodiments of the invention custom 3D representations can be made. For instance using information available from a variety of resources custom representations can be made of particular organs of the body or objects based on other custom measurements.

In one method the custom representations can be made from modifying existing normalized versions of the particular object. Then measurements of the particular object to be animated could be made. Such measurements could be made by scans ultrasounds magnetic imaging etc. The information obtained from these procedures is used to create a model from scratch or a typical model may be modified. Measurements could be made of only a few important points or from many points on the object to be imaged depending on the level of customization desired.

The created model may be fully animated allowing it to be viewed from any angle or distance. This unique ability will enable the patient and doctor to communicate like never before. This very clear 3D model will educate a patient about their condition including treatment options. These custom models will have the ability to be shared online in print via printer or email . The same process will update the 3D models as the patient undergoes a treatment regimen. The doctors can also use these simplified models to communicate with other physicians.

In other embodiments a library of variety of similar objects can be stored. For example a library of 10 200 or more different hearts animation images can be individually stored each of which represents a particular problem or feature such as size or having clogged arteries. Instead of custom measuring the patient s particular heart the closest model representing the patient s particular condition can be selected and used to communicate educate and log the progress of the patient s medical condition. The model can also be utilized to demonstrate corrective procedures giving a very comprehensive understanding of diagnosis treatment and follow up protocol.

It will be obvious to those having skill in the art that many changes may be made to the details of the above described embodiments without departing from the underlying principles of the invention. The scope of the present invention should therefore be determined only by the following claims.

