---

title: High energy dissociation for mercury control systems
abstract: An apparatus and method for controlling mercury emissions in the gas stream from a fuel fired system includes a chamber for creating dissociated halogen to be supplied to the gas stream, with or without carbonaceous material.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07615101&OS=07615101&RS=07615101
owner: Energy & Environmental Research Foundation
number: 07615101
owner_city: Grand Forks
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050907
---
This invention was made with U.S. Government support under agreement CR 830929 01 awarded by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The government has certain rights in this invention.

The present invention relates generally to the field of mercury emission control in coal fired systems and in particular to a new and useful control apparatus method of operation and potential applications for the apparatus for the removal of mercury from flue gas where more effective removal of elemental mercury is obtained by oxidation with high energy dissociated halogens brought into contact with the flue gas with or without the addition of sorbents such as carbon.

Mercury Hg emissions have become a health and environmental concern because of their toxicity and ability to bioaccumulate. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency EPA has recently determined that regulation of Hg emissions from coal fired electric power plants is necessary and appropriate. Recently enacted clean air regulation seek to phase in more stringent mercury emissions over the next several years creating an urgent need to develop more effective mercury control technologies.

Mercury in flue gas can be captured by injection of sorbents such as carbon which are removed by subsequent particulate collection devices. Although sorbent injection is so far the most mature control technology the amount of sorbent needed to serve the U.S. market is expected to be large and economically burdensome to implement and maintain. There is a need to develop new methods to minimize changes required for utilities and to reduce costs associated with capital equipment and carbon injection.

Flue gas constituents especially halogens or halides can impact the fate and form of mercury in the flue gas. Naturally occurring chlorine in coals or halogen compounds that have been added to the fuel are converted in the furnace to the atomic form but being highly reactive react with flue gas components and each other to form more complex molecular forms. For example when a halogen such as chlorine is used reactions with water vapor SO and other flue gas components will occur and will form products such as HCl SOCl and Cl. As the flue gas cools reactions of atomic or molecular halogens with elemental mercury will also occur but are limited depending on other competing reactions discussed above. Heterogeneous reactions with or on particulates can occur in addition to gas phase reactions.

Reactions of atomic halogen species generated in the furnace are kinetically limited and heavily depend on temperature time profile. The issue is the amount and form of halogen available for oxidation of Hgin the gas phase or for interaction on the surface of a sorbent.

Horne Horne D. G. Gosavi R. Strausz O. P. 1968 48 4758. determined a rate constant for a Hg Cl atom by measuring the formation of HgCl using a spectroscopic 279 nm method for this product. The second order rate constant for this Hg I species was about 1.3 10cmmoleculessec. This very fast reaction could be followed by a second reaction to form HgCl. Using indirect methods Ariya Ariya P. A. Khalizov A. Gidas A. 2002 106 7310 determined second order rate constants for Hgwith halogen species as follows with a Cl atom 1.0 10cmmoleculessec with a Br atom 3.2 10cmmoleculessec with Br 9 10cmmolecules sec and with Cl 2.6 10cmmoleculessec. Thus the atomic Cl rate constant is about four million times higher than Cl. However under a typical temperature profile of a coal fired utility plant the atomic Cl generated in the combustion zone has already reacted with other flue gas constituents or itself before it could oxidize elemental mercury at required temperatures.

Because halogen reactivity with mercury is a key factor in control basic research in this area has been conducted by several investigators. Mamani Paco and Heble Mamani Paco R. M. Helble J. J. In . Salt Lake City AWMA Pittsburgh 2000 studied the oxidation of Hg with injected HCl and Clusing a quenching system comprising a gradient temperature reaction tube from which samples could be withdrawn for analysis. No oxidation occurred using realistic quench rates with 100 ppm HCl. This is expected HCl is not an oxidizing agent since it is already in a highly reduced form. Using a composition containing 50 ppm Clgave only 10 oxidation of Hg while very large amounts 500 ppm of Clgave 92 oxidation. The implication is that the more reactive atomic chlorine was not available in the system. Sliger et al. Sliger R. N. Kramlich J. C. Marinov N. M. 2000 65 66 423 injected HCl and Hg II acetate into a natural gas flame and obtained oxidation data consistent with the formation of atomic chlorine and subsequent reaction of a superequilibrium concentration of atomic chlorine with Hgat temperatures of 400 to 700 C. Using a very fast 10 fast quench rate Niksa reported up to 40 oxidation at 300 ppm Cl see Niksa S. Fujiwara N. 2003 48 2 768 .

The Energy Environmental Research Center EERC recently demonstrated significant mercury enrichment in ash when HCl was fed into a high temperature environment followed by a superfast quenching rate of 5400 C. s Zhuang Y. Thompson J. S. Zygarlicke C. J. Galbreath K. C. Pavlish J. P. in Sep. 22 24 2003 . Only 6 of the elemental form was not oxidized and converted to particulate forms. This experiment implies that atomic chlorine generated in the hot zone was still available at lower temperatures and thus oxidized the mercury at a lower temperature where Hg Cl reactions are most probable. While in the end most of the mercury was on the ash it was not clear whether oxidation occurred in the gas phase or solid phase or where on the solid phase. More recent results from EERC suggest that a significant portion of mercury is oxidized by reactive halogens in a heterogeneous reaction on carbon particulate surfaces. The initial product of the atomic chlorine reaction with Hg is HgCl which would readily collect on ash carbon or sorbent particulates or react with other species or itself.

Further EERC pilot scale experimental data Zhuang Y. Pavlish J. H. Holmes M. J. Benson S. A. Pilot Scale Study of Advanced Mercury Control Technologies for Lignite Fired Power Plant in a Retrofit Advanced Hybrid Filter 29 2004 Vol. 2 pp 753 764 showed that the reactive halogen species formed at high temperatures can not only significantly enhance mercury oxidation but also improve the reactivity of mercury with activated carbon. The atomic radical and or molecular halogen species that are formed at least momentarily in the high energy environment react at high rates with mercury both as gas phase and solid gas interactions. Flue gas quenching rates also play a role in the mercury halogen chemistry. A high flue gas quenching rate will preserve the reactive halogen species formed in the high temperature zone for ongoing mercury oxidation and gas to particle conversion.

Recent bench pilot and full scale experimental data at the EERC demonstrate that halogen species can vastly improve mercury capture kinetics and overall control performance of sorbents. Halogen species are able to improve the reactivity of the sorbent surface thereby increasing the sorbents ability to remove mercury from the flue gas stream.

Part of the insight of the present invention is that because of high reaction rates it is difficult to preserve reactive halogen species generated in the furnace so that these forms will be available for reaction with Hgat lower temperatures where the resulting mercury compounds will be stable and more easily captured. The present invention reduces the fundamental teachings of the prior art concerning formation addition and rapid transfer of atomic radical and or molecular halogen species to a combustion flue gas or product gas from a gasification system into a practical and effective method for mercury control in a utility flue gas stream.

It is an object of the present invention to provide an apparatus and method for oxidation and removal of mercury in a combustion gasification flue gas and or for the enhancement of mercury sorbent performance.

To effect this purpose the method utilizes a high temperature high energy process to dissociate halogen containing materials into atomic halogen forms such as but not limited to Cl Cl Br and Br which are very strong mercury oxidants reactants. To utilize the halogen in highly reactive forms in the reactive portion of the mercury removal process the dissociated halogen gas is either passed directly into the flue gas stream to oxidize elemental mercury and or transform gaseous mercury into a particulate associated form or alternatively passed into a chamber or duct containing a sorbent e.g. carbon that provides a reactive surface for the mercury oxidation and capture with performance enhanced by the reactive halogens.

The reactive process of the high energy halogenated gas described herein can be applied at any location downstream of the boiler outlet and or exit of a gasification system. Preferably the halogenated gas is applied at a location downstream of the boiler outlet wherein the combustion gas has a temperature of between about 100 F. to about 1000 F. and more preferably between about 300 F. to 850 F.

The generated reactive halogens described herein can treat sorbents that are generated in situ either in the halogen dissociation unit or in a separate sorbent generation unit. The halogen treated sorbent has enhanced reactivity with mercury and improves mercury capture in flue gas thereby requiring less sorbent to optimize mercury removal.

The generated reactive halogens described herein may be used to treat commercially available sorbents such as carbons at any point prior to the injection of the sorbent into the flue gas. In one embodiment of the present invention the sorbent is treated in its feed line just prior to being injected into the flue gas. The halogen treated carbon has an enhanced reactivity with mercury and improves mercury capture in flue gas.

The high energy halogen dissociation can be achieved by any heating and or energy process known to one of ordinary skill in the art including but not limited to convective conductive and radiative heat transfer microwave radio frequency RE arc acoustics combustion etc.

The halogen containing materials can be pure elements or chemical organic or inorganic compounds and they can be solid liquid and or gas phases.

Accordingly the present invention generates the reactive halogens and introduces them into the flue gas stream at any point downstream of the boiler outlet and or exit of a gasification system to optimize mercury halogen or mercury halogen sorbent interactions while minimizing reaction time with other flue gas components. Alternatively the reactive halogen species can be combined with a carbon sorbent or other sorbent to form a reactive sorbent surface for enhanced mercury control.

A unique technique of the present invention for preparation of the treated sorbent e.g. carbon is through combining the treatment system with the sorbent injection system at the end use site. With this technique the halogen is introduced to the sorbent air mixture in the transport line or other part of the sorbent storage and injection system .

Some benefits of the present invention including those benefits associated with treating sorbents off site include but are not limited to 

The invention allows for transport and handling of less volatile hazardous and or expensive forms of halogens for on site treatment 

The inventive process allows rapid on site tailoring of additive sorbent ratios in order to match the requirements of flue gas changes such as may be needed when changing fuels reducing loads or otherwise changing operating conditions thus further optimizing the economics and

The invention produces an ash comprising less spent sorbent thereby increasing the saleability of the ash since ash with high sorbent concentrations are generally not saleable and reduced to landfill.

The invention reduces potential for corrosion slagging and fouling by introducing the halogen after the furnace.

The invention allows for on site treatment of sorbents using less corrosive and hazardous forms of halogens such as but not limited to bromine salts.

With the foregoing and other features in view there is provided in accordance with the invention a process and apparatus for preparing and regenerating carbon sorbents whose activity for mercury capture is promoted by the addition of halogens such as bromine to the carbon structure.

It is to be understood that one of ordinary skill in the art readily understands that the terms combustion gas flue gas and synthesis gas as used in this disclosure refers to any gaseous or gas stream byproduct of a fossil fuel combustion process and that such terms may be used interchangeably without deviating from the teachings of this disclosure.

The various features of novelty which characterize the invention are pointed out with particularity in the claims annexed to and forming a part of this disclosure. For a better understanding of the invention its operating advantages and specific objects attained by its uses reference is made to the accompanying drawings and descriptive matter in which a preferred embodiment of the invention is illustrated.

As indicated above the present invention may be used to assist in the removal of mercury contained in the flue gases produced during the combustion of fossil fuels such as but not limited to coal used in the production of steam for industrial uses and or electric power generation. Persons skilled in the art however will appreciate that other combustion processes such as those used in incinerators and the like may also produce flue gases containing mercury species and the present invention may also be applied to remove the mercury species from the flue gases produced by such equipment and processes. Further the present invention may also be applied to other partial oxidation processes such as goal gasification processes which involve the partial oxidation or partial combustion of hydrocarbon feedstocks.

As described in an article titled How Coal Gasification Power Plants Work available at the United States Department of Energy website http fossil.energy.gov programs powersystems gasification howgasificationworks.html such partial oxidation processes may be considered not to be a conventional combustion process involving the hydrocarbon feedstock which may still be coal but rather a complex reaction in which most of the carbon containing feedstock is chemically broken down under conditions of heat and pressure to produce a synthesis gas or syngas. Syngas is comprised of hydrogen carbon monoxide and other gaseous constituents.

Since the hydrocarbon feedstock may contain mercury the syngas produced by such processes as well as the flue gases produced during the subsequent combustion of the syngas may include various mercury species. Accordingly while the following disclosure may describe the present invention in the context of a typical coal fired system such as a coal fired utility or industrial boiler or steam generator it will be understood that the present invention may be applied to any type of combustion or partial oxidation process which produces a flue gas or synthesis gas hereinafter referred to simply as gas stream from which mercury species are to be removed.

Referring now to the drawings in which like reference numerals are used to refer to the same or similar elements shows a conceptual schematic of a high energy halogen dissociation system or apparatus applied in a coal fired system . A coal combustor of the coal fired system can be fired by means of a pulverized coal burner a Cyclone furnace or stoker firing a bubbling bed or circulating fluidized bed combustor or any other type of coal combustor used in a coal fired system or any coal gasification system generally referred to as a fuel fired system in this disclosure. Fuel is supplied schematically at fuel inlet . The dissociation apparatus includes a high energy halogen dissociation unit installed at any location downstream of an outlet or exit of the coal combustor of the fuel fired system.

The halogen dissociation unit is heated or energized by any available heating means including electric heating plasma heating and organic and inorganic compound combustion. The halogen containing materials enter the dissociation chamber at halogen inlet in any of their physical forms i.e. gas liquid or solid and are then dissociated into atomic molecular and or radical forms by the addition of heat from the heating means.

The dissociated halogen species are then conveyed by means of a carrier gas supplied at carrier gas inlet into the main gas stream conveyed along flue while halogen quenching can occur either in a passageway connecting the dissociation chamber to the main gas stream in flue or inside the flue . The quench rate can be controlled by either any available heat transfer approaches or heat transfer between the high energy halogen stream and the gas inside the flue . The reactive halogens preserved by a high quenching rate will efficiently oxidize elemental mercury vapor in the main gas stream and or convert gaseous mercury into particulate associated forms and or react with a mercury sorbent material to enhance mercury removal.

Additionally for mercury oxidation only the reactive halogen species can again be introduced at any location downstream of the outlet and or exit of a gasification system.

An air preheater can be provided in the flue at a location upstream of the passageway and one or more pollutant control devices of known construction can be provided downstream of the passageway and upstream of a known stack for discharging the exhaust gases from the system.

Note that are not meant to imply that the sorbent and carbon materials need to be co injected at the same point into the flue or that the injection location has to be downstream of the air preheater . The technology can be applied at any location downstream of the outlet or exit of the fuel fired system as is illustrated in and .

In another alternative embodiment the halogen dissociation may take place in one or more dissociation chambers and the reactive halogens may be subsequently supplied to the gas stream by the carrier gas via one or more passageways . In such an embodiment a sorbent may or may not be supplied to each of the resulting one or more reactive halogen streams being supplied from the dissociation chambers into the gas stream within the flue .

In yet another alternative embodiment an SCR system may be positioned up or downstream of the carrier gas inlet wherein the dissociated reactive halogen is provided into the gas stream through the carrier gas inlet. In this embodiment a sorbent may or may not be used.

In still another alternative embodiment a sorbent bed may be placed downstream of the carrier gas inlet. The bed may be a fixed moving fluidized or other type of sorbent bed commonly known in the art. In an embodiment where a sorbent is injected into the carrier gas stream the injected sorbent facilitates an additional sorbent bed regeneration role and increases mercury oxidation due to the increased residence time provided through bed suspension.

While the foregoing Figures and description describe the present invention and alternatives thereof as applied to a fuel fired system it is understood that the present invention may also be utilized in any process producing a mercury containing gas without departing from the teachings of the present invention.

The EERC has completed a series of tests to verify the present invention and prove the potential of this technology for efficient control of mercury emissions with reduced cost and minor impacts on plant operation.

NaCl solution was selected atomized into aerosol form and fed into the dissociation chamber. The high energy dissociated halogens were introduced into the main flue gas stream where they contacted the activated carbon resulting in the oxidation of mercury on the carbon surface. In the baseline test with no dissociated halogen addition 2.8 lb Macf carbon injection into the ESP slightly reduced mercury emissions from 28 inlet to 23.2 g dNmof Hg g in the outlet with a very small reduction in elemental to 15.8 g dNmHg. Compared to this small mercury capture across the ESP by adding dissociated chlorine from 0.7 lb Macf of NaCl combined with 2.8 lb Macf carbon injection the mercury emissions out of the ESP reduced to 18.1 g dNmof Hg g and with 54 of the mercury oxidized.

Another test was completed by injecting a quenched high energy dissociated Clgas into the FF but with no activated carbon injection . Although there was no significant improvement on mercury capture over 60 of Hg g was oxidized with only 5 ppmv quenched high energy Clinjection into the FF and this increased to over 90 oxidized mercury at the FF outlet with 20 ppmv Clinjection. Mercury in Texas lignite flue gas is very difficult to oxidize and capture because of its high mercury and low chlorine contents and the presence of selenium. The current results are encouraging and indicate that quenched high energy halogens are able to efficiently oxidize mercury and improve mercury control.

The invention was also evaluated for dissociated bromine injection in a subbituminous flue gas in a FF configuration but with no carbon injection. With introduction of dissociated bromine from only 0.22 lb Macf NaBr into the FF mercury emissions at the FF outlet reduced to 7.1 g dNmof Hg g with 62 oxidized mercury. See . Compared to the FF mercury emissions of 11.7 g dNmof Hg g with 72.6 Hgin the baseline the current technology again proved its effectiveness on mercury oxidation and control.

The EERC results have demonstrated the potential of this technology for mercury oxidation and control. It can be applied to any fossil fuel fired system equipped with a pollution control device including but not limited to ESP FF wet flue gas desulfurization WFGD and spray dryer apparatus.

While a specific embodiment of the invention has been shown and described in detail to illustrate the application of the principles of the invention it will be understood that the invention may be embodied otherwise without departing from such principles.

