---

title: Effectuating personalized, process-integrated information, communications and entertainment (ICE) service delivery
abstract: Method and system for effectuating personalized, process-integrated information, communications and entertainment (ICE) service delivery to enterprise and residential subscribers. In one embodiment, the process-integrated ICE delivery system includes at least one application server disposed as part of a service delivery platform, wherein the at least one application server is interfaced with an enterprise network for hosting one or more service application modules. A process flow management server interfaced with the enterprise network is operable for managing a modularized flow of a business process in the enterprise, wherein the modularized flow includes a number of process blocks, at least a portion of the process blocks each having an interface with one or more service application modules that are activated depending on where a particular project is located.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07546301&OS=07546301&RS=07546301
owner: Alcatel Lucent
number: 07546301
owner_city: Paris
owner_country: FR
publication_date: 20050817
---
The present invention generally relates to communication services. More particularly and not by way of any limitation the present invention is directed to a method and system for effectuating personalized process integrated information communications and entertainment ICE service delivery.

Service differentiation and value addition have become two of the most significant factors in defining the relationship between a telecommunications service provider and its subscribers. To maintain a loyal customer base as well as fend off intense competition from cable operators and other non traditional players conventional service providers are transforming themselves into providers of triple play services and other types of bundled services. However it is becoming increasingly clear that more novel ways of service provisioning will be necessary in order to obtain and retain a customer over a long period of time.

In one aspect a scheme is disclosed for effectuating personalized process integrated information communications and entertainment ICE service delivery to enterprise and residential subscribers. In one embodiment the process integrated ICE delivery system includes at least one application server disposed as part of a service delivery platform wherein the at least one application server is interfaced with an enterprise network for hosting one or more service application modules. A process flow management server interfaced with the enterprise network is operable for managing a modularized flow of a business process in the enterprise wherein the modularized flow includes a number of process blocks at least a portion of the process blocks each having an interface with one or more service application modules that are activated depending on where a particular project is located.

In another aspect the present invention is directed to a method for providing process integrated service to a subscriber comprising modularizing a process flow associated with the subscriber into a number of process blocks interfacing one or more service application modules with at least a portion of the process blocks and invoking appropriate service application modules for a particular project that is managed in accordance with the modularized process flow.

In a further aspect the present invention is directed to a system for providing process integrated service to a subscriber comprising means for modularizing a process flow associated with the subscriber into a number of process blocks means for interfacing one or more service application modules with at least a portion of the process blocks and means for invoking appropriate service application modules for a particular project that is managed in accordance with the modularized process flow. Relatedly a still further embodiment of the present invention is directed to a system comprising means for invoking a communication session as part of a process integrated service delivery application associated with a modularized process flow of a work project and means for automatically sharing the communication session s context with additional participants based on the modularized process flow.

Embodiments of the invention will now be described with reference to various examples of how the invention can best be made and used. Like reference numerals are used throughout the description and several views of the drawings to indicate like or corresponding parts wherein the various elements are not necessarily drawn to scale. Referring now to the drawings and more particularly to depicted therein is an exemplary network environment wherein an embodiment of a process integrated service delivery mechanism may be effectuated in accordance with the teachings of the present invention for providing process flow dependent services to a business enterprise. An enterprise network comprising any combination of local area networks LANs wide area networks WANs etc. that may span one or more geographic locations is operably coupled to one or more service provider networks e.g. an information communications and entertainment ICE service provider network and one or more external communications networks via suitable gateway node s A. It is envisaged that the various operations and projects of the enterprise are managed according to one or more business process flows that are established based on the enterprise s internal procedures management objectives tactical and strategic goals and the like whereby appropriate personnel departments business divisions et cetera of the enterprise are interfaced as needed at various times during the execution of a process flow for communicating and exchanging information over the enterprise network . Accordingly enterprise entities such as key personnel business divisions or departments management information databases e.g. accounting financial sales marketing databases information technology IT databases and so on are collectively abstracted as a plurality of resource entities through N that are suitably coupled to the enterprise network . One or more process flow management servers are also interfaced with the enterprise network for managing a particular business process in conjunction with key personnel such as project managers and other decision makers in the enterprise. In other embodiments the process flow management servers may be disposed as part of the ICE service provider network .

In executing the enterprise s business processes access may be provided via appropriate gateways to various external resources such as public databases business partners supply chain entities and key third party personnel. Although a single gateway node such as gateway A is illustrated for providing gateway access to external communications networks and service provider network it should be appreciated that any number of service gateways may be provided depending on the type of communication involved e.g. email text messaging instant messaging voice video data communications et cetera . An ICE service delivery platform supported at least in part by the ICE service provider network is operable to effectuate personalized process integrated service delivery to the enterprise by interfacing various service offerings with the process flows managed in the enterprise wherein the enterprise resources through N and external resources are placed in interactive ICE environments that are created maintained and terminated based on the requirements of the process flow. By way of illustration the ICE service network may be interfaced with external networks via its own or third party gateways e.g. gateway node B in the course of providing process integrated ICE services to the enterprise.

Those skilled in the art should recognize upon reference hereto that although the process service integration schema described hereinabove allude to business process flows in an enterprise the teachings of the present invention may also be practiced in a residential service environment wherein contextualization of service is effectuated in terms of a process flow. For example providing a teleconference service may be contextualized based on the parties service profiles device types capabilities video audio or audio only for instance content management and distribution presence information and the like. Furthermore the process service integration schema may be applied in different types of enterprises having variable complexity levels in their process flows e.g. startups growing companies mature establishments et cetera .

By way of example an A V teleconferencing service invoked during a project flow may be process contextualized as set forth in the following scenario. Various entities and resources may be involved in such a context e.g. key personnel the enterprise s service profile historical data content aggregation and distribution and the like. Associated with each of these categories are a number of factors that are utilized in personalizing the conferencing service. With respect to the parties to be involved in the conference information relating to their domain expertise reachability contact lists buddy lists device capabilities location presence group ID access connection capabilities and security may be required in personalizing the service. The service profile associated with the enterprise may relate to quality routing policies e.g. least cost routing wide area access security and the like in addition to service arbitrage capability i.e. whether third party applications may be brokered on behalf of the enterprise if it is determined that they satisfy a service metric . Historical data may involve past message exchanges and or conferences relating to the same or similar project company financial data current and relevant news information relating to the enterprise as well as any third party company involved etc. Based on the data that is available with respect to the resources and entities a conference bridge may be set up in accordance with a scheduling application for effectuating a highly contextualized conference session among the participants.

Based on the A V conferencing example highlighted in the foregoing discussion it should be seen that the architecture of a process integrated service platform involves invoking various discrete service application modules using appropriate interfaces for effectuating a personalized service in the enterprise. By way of illustration depicts a functional block diagram associated with a contextualized A V conferencing service that involves interaction among one or more service application modules. A conferencing module is interfaced with a messaging module a content distribution module a context based scheduling module and a notification module to carry out the functionality of an instantiation of a conferencing service as set forth above. Other modules can include e.g. alerting event generation auto program activation messaging group management presence service content or information push to users or auto process activation etc.

Given the flexibility and configurability of the ICE service delivery model of the present invention it should be appreciated that a number of instantiations of the service delivery embodiments are possible within the ambit of the teachings hereof. For example ICE realtime status e.g. contact information presence availability location terminal device hardware capability may be embedded within documents Web pages products by way of suitable Universal Product Codes UPCs or radio frequency ID RFID tags advertisements etc. that are accessed processed presented and distributed via any number of the service application modules set forth above that are adapted for a particular ICE service delivery application. Accordingly a document that needs to reviewed for a particular meeting conference may have embedded therein a list of reviewers with respect to that document. Upon selecting the name of a contact or reviewer e.g. by clicking on the contact by a pointing device the embedded ICE status can be determined and if needed an appropriate communication session may be established and the context of the document can be exchanged when the call is placed. Thus the communication mode and context may be embedded within the document. Furthermore the communication that is auto triggered can share additional context history e.g. the document or subject line may be transmitted to other participants automatically past interactions fax email IM communications relating to the subject matter of the document or the project within which the communication is contextualized etc. In further implementations external resources e.g. Web sites may be searched for relevant information from news and other media that can be adapted for sharing with the participants in addition to sharing relevant internal information culled from the enterprise knowledge databases.

From a residential consumer perspective for example embedded document delivery can allow a user to select an artist s name e.g. a singer in a document and view related information such as the singer s songs Web site personal information sample songs etc. Likewise a writer s name may be linked to the writer s titles summaries of the contents writer s IM locations schedules of book tours etc.

It should be further appreciated that an enterprise s process es domain knowledge base s and process flow policies may be captured in any number of appropriate techniques e.g. a flowchart if necessary. Alternatively or additionally the employees of the enterprise can create and publish their own process. Users may also adapt existing process for particular projects. Accordingly multiple instances of the processes may be executed within an ICE service delivery system which may involve customized service application modules or blocks e.g. customized communication modes wherein IM is specified for one project and email is specified for another project or where one communication mode is specified for one portion of the project and another communication mode is specified for another portion of the same project .

As described earlier in the present patent application the process flow of an entity enterprise residence etc. may be modularized into one or more horizontal flow blocks or vertical levels generically referred to as process blocks in . In one implementation the process flow and associated blocks may be supported on one or more process flow management servers disposed in the enterprise network wherein appropriate interfacing is effectuated between the process blocks and the application programming interface API space of the application server . Additional interfacing with business software such as Customer Relationship Management CRM Enterprise Resources Planning ERP Material Requirements Planning MRP etc. may also be provided as part of the capabilities of the application server . Furthermore the overall structure and function of the application server may be distributed among a plurality of servers disposed as part of a service delivery network.

By way of an example of a process integrated service delivery application a bid review process is set forth immediately hereinbelow. Conventionally as an illustration sales department of an enterprise receives a Request For Proposal RFP or a Request For Information RFI from a customer which is submitted to proposals division that coordinates independently with multiple Business Divisions BDs . A proposal manager is assigned who schedules communications calls for meetings establishes communication conference bridges follows up with the project plan coordinates response and reviews in an iterative process. Upon arriving at a final packaging the response is submitted back to the customer.

On the other hand in a process integrated communication service embodiment the RFI RFP is submitted to a secure hosted server in the service provider SP network e.g. a Local Exchange Carrier LEC . It queries the sales department personnel about the deadline basic bid information and starts the process flow. Based on the company process and its employee database the SP server automatically schedules time on key personnel calendars notifies via a messaging service e.g. SMS and sends a secure link to the web host. Thereafter at the appropriate time or times the server is operable to search for employee s and their location along with their service profiles e.g. preferred communications device and notifies them via IM email about upcoming meetings. Subsequently a web based conference bridge is effectuated to which the key personnel are connected. At the end of the teleconference the process integrated application server is operable to gather followup meeting actions and coordinate the process till completion. In the many meetings and teleconferences the personnel may dial in via handheld devices mobile phones softphones et cetera and the server is capable of adapting the communication stream s to the device capability. For example if most of the key personnel to be involved in a particular conference are capable of video conferencing while the remaining personnel are capable of audio only a video bridge may be set up for video conferencing for the majority of the participants with audio bridge connectivity for the remaining personnel. If the RFI requires risk assessment and or contingency planning by senior management or other departments e.g. financial department the process integrated server has the functionality to interface with the appropriate personnel and other resources as described in the previous sections of the present patent application so as to effectuate personalized meeting s video chats presence based communications and the like in similar fashion. Where new business critical data is generated during the processing of the RFI RFP the server can automatically effectuate data backup preferably based on the enterprise s backup management policy.

In essence accordingly an embodiment of the process integrated service delivery platform is operable to schedule establish notify and tear down appropriate communication bridges within the context of the process flow in an enterprise. It also links process to personnel and adapts various communication streams to device and location. Although the process integrated server has been exemplified as a service provider node e.g. a LEC node it needn t necessarily be so. As alluded to hereinbefore an embodiment of the process integrated service provider application server may be disposed within an enterprise network with the appropriate interfacing to a process flow which in turn may be managed by one or more process flow management servers of the enterprise.

Those skilled in the art should recognize that other business processes such as auditing shareholder analyst communications product development and design review et cetera can also be modularized and integrated within an embodiment of the ICE service delivery scheme as described above. With respect to small businesses and startups service providers can provide pre tailored integrated hosted secure business process flow management as a shrink wrapped solution that may be customized on a case by case basis. Additionally residential service offerings may also be integrated within the context of a process flow for effectuating contextualized services.

Based on the foregoing Detailed Description it should be appreciated that the present invention advantageously provides a process integrated service delivery mechanism that supports delivery of value added services by a service provider to its subscribers. The end user enterprises gain value due to simplification automated coordination and process driven communication.

Since the services offered by the service provider are not only tailored to fit the enterprise s needs and budgetary constraints but are embedded within the process flows of an enterprise it is envisaged that the subscribers will be reluctant to migrate to other service providers.

Although the invention has been described with reference to certain exemplary embodiments it is to be understood that the forms of the invention shown and described are to be treated as exemplary embodiments only. Accordingly various changes substitutions and modifications can be realized without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims.

