---

title: Integrating portable electronic devices with electronic flight bag systems installed in aircraft
abstract: An electronic flight bag apparatus includes an electronic flight bag (EFB) system installed in an aircraft and which interfaces with a ground network, and a portable EFB device connectible with the EFB system via a trusted secure connection. This apparatus makes it possible for a flight crew member to remove the portable device from the aircraft, enter flight information into the device in a convenient manner, and transfer the information to the installed EFB system. Auxiliary crew members may use the portable device during flight to assist the flight crew.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08732233&OS=08732233&RS=08732233
owner: The Boeing Company
number: 08732233
owner_city: Chicago
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050713
---
The present invention relates to communications systems and particularly but not exclusively to a portable electronic flight bag device that can interface with an electronic flight bag system installed in an aircraft.

Electronic flight bags EFBs are computing display devices and systems that may be used by airplane cockpit flight deck crews for a variety of functions. Using EFBs can reduce or eliminate a need for paper and other reference materials in the cockpit. The Federal Aviation Administration FAA currently classifies EFB devices and systems as Class 1 Class 2 or Class 3 hardware systems. A Class 1 EFB is typically a portable laptop computer that may be used on the ground and during flight as a source of supplemental information. A Class 1 device does not have data link connectivity to other aircraft systems and generally is required to be stowed when the aircraft is below an altitude of 10 000 feet. A Class 2 EFB typically is a semi portable device e.g. a pen tablet computer mounted in the aircraft. A Class 3 EFB is a system installed in the aircraft and can be used as a typical avionics computer system to communicate with various avionics systems.

It would be desirable for a flight crew member to be able to remove a portable Class 1 EFB from an aircraft develop information and store it in the Class 1 device while away from the aircraft and subsequently transfer the information to a Class 3 EFB system on the aircraft. It also would be desirable for auxiliary flight crew members to be able to assist the flying crew by using a Class 1 device to perform at least some EFB functions in conjunction with the installed Class 3 system.

The present invention in one implementation is directed to an electronic flight bag apparatus. The apparatus includes an electronic flight bag EFB system installed in an aircraft and which interfaces with a ground network and a portable EFB device connectible with the EFB system via a trusted link and secure connection.

In another implementation the invention is directed to an apparatus for transferring information between a portable electronic flight bag EFB device and an EFB system installed in an aircraft. The EFB system includes a plurality of electronic flight bags EFBs . The apparatus includes a processor of the EFBs configured to provide a trusted link and secure connection between the portable EFB device and the EFB system. A messaging client of at least one of the EFBs and a messaging client of the portable EFB device are configured to provide messaging via the secure connection between a module for an application of at least one of the EFBs and a module of the portable EFB device for the same application.

In yet another implementation the invention is directed to a method of providing information to an electronic flight bag EFB system installed in an aircraft. The information is entered into a portable EFB device. The entering is performed while the portable device is not connected with the EFB system. The method also includes connecting the EFB portable device with the EFB system via a trusted link and secure connection and transferring the information to the EFB system using the EFB portable device.

The features functions and advantages can be achieved independently in various embodiments of the present inventions or may be combined in yet other embodiments.

The following description of various embodiments is merely exemplary in nature and is in no way intended to limit the invention its application or uses. To any extent that FAA classification of electronic flight bags EFBs may be referenced herein such description is included to enhance understanding and not to limit configurations of the invention.

An aviation system according to one configuration of the invention is indicated generally in by reference number . The system includes one or more aircraft all or some of which may be operated by one or more airlines. One aircraft is shown in . The aircraft includes an electronic flight bag EFB apparatus . Included in the apparatus are an EFB system installed in the aircraft and one or more portable EFB devices connectible with the EFB system as further described below. In the exemplary configuration shown in the EFB apparatus includes two portable devices for example one for each of two flight crew members on the aircraft . The portable devices may be used by the two flight crew members during pre flight and other low workload phases and may also be used during flight by up to two auxiliary crew members. As shown in one of the portable EFB devices has been removed from the aircraft .

The EFB apparatus receives information from one or more aircraft systems for use in various applications. For example information from onboard geo referencing equipment e.g. Global Positioning System may be used with an electronic airport taxi map to indicate a current position of the aircraft relative to the airport map. In the present configuration the EFB apparatus interfaces with aircraft system s via the installed EFB system .

The EFB apparatus uses one or more communications systems of the aircraft to interface with a ground network . Communication system s may include for example GPRS General Packet Radio Service VHF satellite networks wireless IEEE 802.11 communication and or services such as ACARS Airplane Communications and Recording System . ACARS is provided by ARINC Inc. of Annapolis Md. In the present configuration the EFB apparatus interfaces with the ground network via the installed EFB system which may communicate with the ground network via Internet Protocol based satellites.

The ground network may include one or more airport communication systems securely linked with one or more airline communication systems . The ground network may also include one or more information repositories for providing online aviation information for example to users of the airline system s . Information repository s may also be available to a flight crew of the aircraft via the EFB apparatus . In the present configuration the flight crew may use the EFB apparatus to access a repository through an airline system . One known information repository is MyBoeingFleet.com a secure Internet website providing information as to aircraft maintenance performance parts etc. It should be noted that ground network components could differ in number and or type in other configurations. For example some configurations might not include information repository s . In some other configurations a repository may be mirrored in the airline system . In yet other configurations a repository may be included only in the airline system .

One configuration of an EFB apparatus in accordance with principles of the invention is indicated generally in by reference number . The apparatus includes an EFB system installed in an aircraft not shown . The system includes two installed EFBs and for example for use respectively by a captain and first officer of the aircraft. The system also includes a pair of EFB portable devices for use for example by auxiliary crew members to assist the captain and first officer.

Each EFB may be configured to perform various functions and or applications including but not necessarily limited to various applications currently allowed by FAA rules to be performed by Class 3 EFB devices. Such applications may include but are not limited to the taxi positioning application mentioned above an electronic logbook ELB application a performance application and or an electronic documents EDOCS application. A terminal charts application allows a flight crew to search and assemble aviation charts needed to support takeoff and landing operations. A flight deck entry surveillance system application interfaces with a camera system allowing the flight crew to see anyone requesting entry to the flight deck. Additionally or alternatively each EFB is configured to perform one or more applications which may include one or more of the foregoing applications in cooperation with the portable EFB devices as further described below.

Each EFB includes a flight deck mounted display unit DU an electronic unit EU connected with the DU and a keyboard not shown . The EUs may be installed in an equipment bay of the aircraft. The EUs provide to the DUs displays associated with various applications operating in the EUs . The EUs allow the transfer of such displays between the DUs via connections for example so that flight crew members can view each other s displays. The DUs are placed for convenient access and viewing by the flight crew but typically are not conveniently accessible by auxiliary crew members during flight.

Each EU includes two computers and each of which may have a dedicated disk drive and memory. For each EU the computer runs an operating system OS A and controls various applications which run on the computer . The computer also may control displays associated with the applications. Thus for example the computer may control displays associated with the taxi map positioning application described above. The computer provides application programming interfaces APIs for various applications and includes an operating system OS B which may be different from the operating system of the computer . For example a computer may run a Linux operating system and a computer may run a Windows operating system. Computers and of an EU communicate with each other through an Ethernet connection .

The EUs may communicate with each other for example through a plurality of Ethernet connections . More specifically a computer or can communicate via a connection with its offside peer computer or . Each EU also may host cabin to flight deck video feeds via links thus providing for flight deck entry surveillance. A card in each EU reads aircraft system busses and serializes the data for input to the computers and .

The computer of the EFB includes an Ethernet port whereby for example an ARINC 615A data loader may be used to load data from the ground network shown in into the EFB . The computer of the EFB includes an Ethernet port whereby applications running on the computer may interface with the ground network via communications system s of the aircraft e.g. by means of a terminal wireless local area network unit TWLU .

The EFB includes spare ports . Thus all communications by EFBs and with the ground network are directed through the EFB . It should be noted however that in the present configuration the EFBs and are configured in essentially the same manner and can communicate with each other via Ethernet connections . Thus the EFBs may include essentially the same software and hardware. Accordingly for example the spare ports of the EFB may be used instead of the ports and of the EFB so that the EFB may be used in place of the EFB to perform functions associated with the ports and . Other configurations are possible however wherein functions and or capabilities of the EFBs may differ in some respects.

Referring again to the EFBs and each EFB includes security software whereby the EFB may be authenticated to the ground network for communication with the ground network . Thus an EFB may be configured to communicate with the ground network via a secure connection for example a virtual private network VPN .

A router switch is connected with the EFBs by one or more connections . For example as shown in the router switch is connected with the computer of the EFB and thereby is connected with both EFBs via a connection at an Ethernet port . The connection may be for example a 100 Base T copper connection. In some configurations for example as shown in further described below the router switch is directly connected with both EFBs through two connections . The router switch may be for example an ARINC 763 compliant Ethernet Gateway Manager. This may be implemented as a simple switch or as part of a larger system such as a File Server Unit. In some configurations Core Network a network and server system by the Boeing Company is used. The switch allows an EFB to be connected via Internet protocols to a single network domain such as a flight deck domain. A File Server Unit includes both a router and an Ethernet switch. The EFB can thereby become part of a multi domain network e.g. a network including a flight deck domain and a cabin domain. Thus the EFB may utilize devices outside the flight deck domain for example while protecting against intrusion from the cabin domain.

The portable EFB devices can be reversibly connected with the EFB system at ports of the router switch . The portable devices are powered by a power source . Each portable device includes a processor and memory and may be for example a laptop computer or a pen tablet computer although other types of personal computing devices PEDs could be used in other configurations. Generally a device may be configured and or classified in various ways. For example and not by way of limitation in some configurations a device may be mounted near observer seats of the aircraft and may be classified as a Class 2 device.

Although the router switch is connected with the EFB the router alternatively could be connected with the EFB . Further although in the present embodiment the router switch is connected with the computer in some embodiments the router switch is connected with the computer . In some other configurations the router switch may be omitted and the devices can be connected directly with one or more of the computers and . Additionally or alternatively when connected and authenticated to the EFB system as further described below each portable EFB device can communicate with each EFB and may address either or both EFBs .

A portable device may be configured with the same operating system OS B as the computers which in the present exemplary configuration is a Windows operating system. The portable device also is configured to perform various functions and or applications including but not necessarily limited to applications currently allowed by FAA rules to be performed by Class 1 and or Class 2 EFB devices. Additionally or alternatively a portable device is configured to execute a security software application and the EFBs are configured to execute a corresponding security application for authenticating a portable device for operation in connection with the EFB system .

When a user connects a portable EFB device at a port of the router switch the EFB detects the connection and requests the connected portable device for a digital certificate or key in accordance e.g. with a preconfigured trust procedure and or infrastructure. If for example the EFB receives and authenticates a certificate from the connected portable device the computer of the EFB establishes a trusted link with the device . A secure connection for example a virtual private network VPN then is established between the EFB and the device . If the certificate authentication fails the computer denies connection and blocks access by that device through the router switch . Additionally or alternatively the portable device itself could block access through its router switch port.

When a trusted link and secure connection are established between the EFB and the connected portable device software clients may be enabled on the EFBs and on the portable device s which provide for application to application communication. A conceptual diagram of selected elements of the apparatus and various exemplary software application modules is indicated generally in by reference number . In the configuration each device is connected with each EFB through the router switch and two connections . Each computer of the EFBs includes a plurality of application modules and a messaging client . Each portable device includes a plurality of application modules and a messaging client . A messaging client of an EFB may communicate with the messaging client s of each portable device via the router switch . It can be appreciated by those skilled in the art that a plurality of software arrangements could be used to provide the features described herein.

A software module for a given application when executing on an EFB can send messages to and receive messages from a corresponding module for the same application on the portable device . Similarly when a module for a given application is executing on the portable device the module can send messages to and receive messages from a corresponding module for the same application executing on an EFB . Such applications may include but are not limited to terminal chart electronic logbook ELB performance and or electronic documents EDOCS applications.

In the present exemplary configuration application to application communication is the only type of communication enabled between an EFB and a portable device . Other configurations are contemplated however in which other or additional types of communication are permitted. In the present implementation application to application communication is provided by a general purpose software interface layer that facilitates the inclusion of various applications in the apparatus .

When for example an application is invoked on a portable device the application typically communicates with its corresponding application on an EFB so that both applications may validate their compatibility with each other. The applications also communicate to validate the compatibility of any data files to be used in the applications. Additionally or alternatively validation of application compatibility and or data file compatibility may be performed for some or all applications upon establishing a trusted link and secure connection between the device and EFB as previously described.

In the present configuration the EFB system does not accept data from a portable EFB device unless an EFB application requests such data. Other configurations are contemplated however in which a portable device may push data to the EFB system for one or more applications. In some configurations the portable device may pull data from the EFB system for one or more applications.

In the present configuration the portable devices can be used to provide support for the EFB system . Thus for example a portable device may include an electronic logbook application module that can be used to create modify and or delete electronic logbook records. Logbook records may be referred to by the flight crew and or sent by the EFB system to the ground network for example to generate fault reports and or maintenance requests.

In one exemplary implementation during a flight an auxiliary crew may connect portable device s with the EFB system and enter logbook entries on behalf of the flying crew. An electronic logbook application module running in one of the EFBs may request the logbook updates from a logbook application module on a portable device . The logbook entries may be sent from the device to the EFB s . The flight crew may review the entries and enter digital signatures to approve the entries. The EFB s may then send the entries to the airline system for update to the repository . The EFB system may also update the portable device logbook client with any logbook record updates introduced by users into the EFB system logbook application module . In one implementation a logbook database maintained in the EFB system is the authoritative logbook data repository for the EFB apparatus . It should be noted generally that applications are contemplated in which an application module may send a message via an EFB application module to the ground network with or without flight crew interaction.

Other applications that may be run on both the EFB system and a portable EFB device include an electronic documents EDOCS application by which a crew member may search various documents e.g. flight crew operating manuals information manuals etc. In one implementation a user of a portable device may execute an EDOCS module to send a bookmark to an EDOCS module of an EFB noting results of a search for use by another crew member.

In some implementations a portable device may include a terminal charts application module . A flight crew member could for example use the device to review charts in his her hotel room select needed charts and put them into a chart clip . The chart clip could be sent to the EFB system after the device is connected with the EFB system prior to flight departure. Additionally or alternatively an auxiliary crew member could create chart clips during flight and provide them to the EFB system .

It can be appreciated that a wide variety of applications may be implemented on a portable EFB device and on an EFB system in accordance with principles of the present invention. Coordinating various applications of an installed EFB system with those of a portable EFB device makes it possible for example for an aircraft crew member to remove the portable device take it home or to a hotel room enter flight information into the device in a convenient manner and transfer the information to the installed EFB system. The foregoing apparatus and methods also make it possible in a multi crew flight for a non flying crew member to participate in the administration of the aircraft for example by filling out logbook entries.

While various preferred embodiments have been described those skilled in the art will recognize modifications or variations which might be made without departing from the inventive concept. The examples illustrate the invention and are not intended to limit it. Therefore the description and claims should be interpreted liberally with only such limitation as is necessary in view of the pertinent prior art.

