---

title: Service routing and web integration in a distributed, multi-site user authentication system
abstract: A computerized method and system for routing between network servers. A central database coupled to a central server on a data communication network stores information for identifying locations of a plurality of network servers on the network. Each network server provides at least one service via the network. The central server receives a request from the user for a selected service including a carry through keyword for controlling routing of the user to the selected service. The central server retrieves location information from the central database to identify the location of the network server providing the selected service and attaches the carry through keyword to the retrieved location information. The central server then routes the user with the carry through keyword to the network server, which directs the user to the selected service based on the carry through keyword.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07810136&OS=07810136&RS=07810136
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07810136
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050110
---
This is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 823 324 filed Mar. 30 2001 which is incorporated by reference herein for all purposes.

The invention relates generally to service routing and particularly to automatically routing a user from one web site to an affiliated site with a multi site user authentication system for the user to obtain a desired web service.

The recent growth in popularity of the Internet has significantly increased the number of Internet users and the number of Internet sites also referred to as web sites . Web sites may provide various types of information to users offer products or services for sale and provide games and other forms of entertainment. Many web sites require users to register by providing personal information before the web server grants access to the site. This registration information may include the user s name account number address telephone number e mail address computer platform age gender or hobbies. The registration information collected by the web site may be necessary to complete transactions such as commercial or financial transactions . Additionally information can be collected which allows the web site operator to learn about the visitors to the site to better target its future marketing activities or adjust the information provided on the web site. The collected information may also be used to allow the web site to contact the user directly e.g. via e mail in the future to announce for example special promotions new products or new features of the web site.

When registering with a web site for the first time the web site typically requests that the user select a login ID and an associated password. The login ID allows the web site to identify the user and retrieve the user s information during subsequent user visits to the web site. Generally the login ID must be unique to the web site such that no two users have the same login ID. The password associated with the login ID allows the web site to authenticate the user during subsequent visits to the web site. The password also prevents others who do not know the password from accessing the web site using the user s login ID. This password protection is particularly important if the web site stores private or confidential information about the user such as financial information or medical records.

If a user visits several different web sites each web site may require entry of similar registration information about the user such as the user s name mailing address and e mail address. This repeated entry of identical data is tedious when visiting multiple web sites in a short period of time. Many web sites require the user to register before accessing any information provided on the web site. Thus the user must enter the requested registration information before they can determine whether the site contains any information of interest.

After registering with multiple web sites the user must remember the specific login ID and password used with each web site or other Internet service. Without the correct login ID and password the user must re enter the registration information. A particular user is likely to have different login IDs and associated passwords on different web sites. For example a user named Bob Smith may select smith as his login ID for a particular site. If the site already has a user with a login ID of smith or requires a login ID of at least six characters then the user must select a different login ID. After registering at numerous web sites Bob Smith may have a collection of different login IDs such as smith smith bsmith smithb bobsmith bob smith and smithbob. Further different passwords may be associated with different login IDs due to differing password requirements of the different web sites e.g. password length requirements or a requirement that each password include at least one numeric character and or at least one uppercase character . Thus Bob Smith must maintain a list of web sites login IDs and associated passwords for all sites that he visits regularly.

Computer based services such as Web portals instant messaging e mail and the like often require routing the user to one or more collaborating affiliate web sites to obtain desired services. Each site may require user authentication as described above. Typically web sites expose shortcut links to common web services. For example a web site may provide a clickable link to send an e mail to your friend when a user who subscribes to a partnering e mail service visits the particular site. Unfortunately conventional systems do not effectively route a user from one web site to another for performing web services. Although shortcut links to web services are known the use of a conventional link requires that the uniform resource locator URL for each web service be known and maintained by the source web site i.e. where the link is displayed . Moreover a conventional link is limited to a single web service. For these reasons improved routing is desired to permit a web site to provide a clickable link for the user s e mail or other web service even though the source web site does not know the URL of the destination site providing the service. Such a system is further desired for providing effective automatic routing even though the source web site does not know either the user s login status such as whether the user is signed into the destination service or the specific application programming interface API for the service. Such a system is particularly desirable with a multi site user authentication system where the site that provides a particular service for the user may depend on the user s domain e.g. e mail at hotmail.com vs. msn.com .

The invention meets the above needs and overcomes the deficiencies of the prior art by providing improved service routing. According to one aspect of the invention a multi site user authentication system provides a federated environment in which locations of web services are centrally looked up. The look up service can be part of the user sign in handshake as implemented in such an authentication system. The invention also provides automatic routing to a particular page at the web service site without additional navigation at the site. Moreover service routing as described herein is economically feasible and commercially practical.

Briefly described a computerized method embodying aspects of the invention performs routing between network servers coupled to a data communication network. The method includes storing information in a central database coupled to a central server for identifying locations of a plurality of network servers on the data communications network. The central server is also coupled to the data communication network. The network servers each provide at least one service via the data communication network and the method includes receiving a request from the user for a selected service to be provided by one of the network servers. The central server receives the request which includes a carry through keyword for controlling routing of the user to the selected service. The method further includes retrieving location information from the central database to identify the location of the network server providing the selected service attaching the carry through keyword to the retrieved location information and routing the user to the network server providing the selected service. The network server then directs the user to the selected service based on the carry through keyword.

In another embodiment a computerized system routes a user between network servers coupled to a data communication network. The system includes a central server coupled to the data communication network and a central database coupled to the central server. The central database stores information for identifying locations of a plurality of network servers on the data communications network each providing at least one service via the data communication network. The central server receives a request from the user for a selected service to be provided by one of the network servers. In this embodiment the request includes a carry through keyword for controlling routing of the user to the selected service. The central server retrieves location information from the central database to identify the location of the network server providing the selected service and attaches the carry through keyword to the retrieved location information. The central server then routes the user with the carry through keyword to the network server providing the selected service. In turn the network server directs the user to the selected service based on the carry through keyword.

In yet another embodiment a computer readable medium stores a data structure embodying aspects of the invention. The data structure has a first field containing location information identifying locations of a plurality of network servers on a data communications network. The network servers each provide at least one service via the data communication network and maintain the location information in the first field. A second field contains keyword information relating the location information to the services provided by the network servers. In response to a request from a user for a selected service to be provided by one of the network servers a central server coupled with the data structure retrieves the location information from the first field to identify the location of the network server providing the selected service. The central server also attaches the keyword information to the retrieved location information for routing the user to the selected service based on the keyword information.

Referring now to the drawings the present invention relates to cross internet collaboration between web sites as part of a distributed multi site user authentication system e.g. Microsoft Passport sign in service . A portal web site for instance offers computer based services such as e mail instant messaging calendar and portfolio tracking and routes the user to affiliated web sites for performing the desired services. A system according to a preferred embodiment of the invention routes a user from one web site to another web site for performing these services also referred to as web services using a clickable link. This is possible even without the source web site i.e. the site where the link is displayed having knowledge of the uniform resource locator URL of the destination site providing the service. Moreover the source web site need not know whether the user is signed into the service or what the specific application programming interface API is for the service. This is particularly useful with a multi site user authentication system where the destination site that provides a particular service for the user may depend on the user s domain e.g. e mail at hotmail.com vs. msn.com .

An authentication database is coupled to authentication server . The authentication database contains information necessary to authenticate users and also identifies which elements of the user profile information should be provided to a particular affiliate server when the user accesses the affiliate server. Although the authentication database is shown separately from authentication server in other embodiments of the invention authentication database is contained within authentication server . It is also contemplated that the routing mechanism described herein need not be coupled with the authentication mechanism while still achieving the stated functionality. In this regard illustrates an optional routing server and routing database separated from authentication server and authentication database . In a preferred embodiment of the invention authentication server and authentication database constitute a central server and a central database respectively.

The authentication process as described below authenticates a user of client computer seeking access to an affiliate server or . Authentication server authenticates the user of client computer by requesting authenticating information such as the user s login ID and password. If the user is successfully authenticated then authentication server routes client computer to the appropriate affiliate server for performing a desired service for the user. Additional details regarding the routing are provided below.

As part of the user authentication process authentication server may provide certain user profile information to the affiliate server such as the user s e mail address user preferences and the type of Internet browser installed on client computer . This user profile information is associated with the user s login ID so that each time the user logs into an affiliate server the associated user profile information is available to provide to the affiliate server. This user profile allows the user to enter the information once and use that information during subsequent logins to new affiliate servers.

In a preferred embodiment an affiliate server is a web server that has registered or otherwise established a relationship or affiliation with authentication server . Each affiliate server and includes a code sequence not shown that allows the affiliate server to communicate with authentication server when a user who is also registered with the authentication server requests access to the affiliate server. Additional details regarding the authentication process and the interaction between client computer affiliate servers and authentication server are provided below.

Computer preferably has one or more processors or processing units and a system memory . In the illustrated embodiment a system bus couples various system components including the system memory to the processors . The bus represents one or more of any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus an accelerated graphics port and a processor or local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus.

The computer typically has at least some form of computer readable media. Computer readable media which include both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media may be any available medium that can be accessed by computer . By way of example and not limitation computer readable media comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media include volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. For example computer storage media include RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium that can be used to store the desired information and that can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embody computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and include any information delivery media. Those skilled in the art are familiar with the modulated data signal which has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. Wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media are examples of communication media. Combinations of the any of the above are also included within the scope of computer readable media wireless media are examples of communication media. Combinations of the any of the above are also included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory preferably includes computer storage media in the form of removable and or non removable volatile and or nonvolatile memory. In the illustrated embodiment system memory includes read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. For example illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media. also shows a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a non volatile memory interface such as interface .

The drives or other mass storage devices and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies.

A user may enter commands and information into computer through input devices such as a keyboard and a pointing device e.g. a mouse trackball pen or touch pad . Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are connected to processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers often include other peripheral output devices not shown such as a printer and speakers which may be connected through an output peripheral interface not shown .

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to computer . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and global computer networks e.g. the Internet .

When used in a local area networking environment computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a wide area networking environment computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external is connected to system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to computer or portions thereof may be stored in a remote memory storage device not shown . By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on the memory device. It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Generally the data processors of computer are programmed by means of instructions stored at different times in the various computer readable storage media of the computer. Programs and operating systems are typically distributed for example on floppy disks or CD ROMs. From there they are installed or loaded into the secondary memory of a computer. At execution they are loaded at least partially into the computer s primary electronic memory. The invention described herein includes these and other various types of computer readable storage media when such media contain instructions or programs for implementing the steps described below in conjunction with a microprocessor or other data processor. The invention also includes the computer itself when programmed according to the methods and techniques described below.

For purposes of illustration programs and other executable program components such as the operating system are illustrated herein as discrete blocks. It is recognized however that such programs and components reside at various times in different storage components of the computer and are executed by the data processor s of the computer.

Prior to executing the authentication process described below both the user of client computer system and the operator s of affiliate servers register with authentication server . This registration is a one time process that provides necessary information to the authentication server. The user of client computer system registers with authentication server by providing for example the user s name mailing address and e mail address and or other information about the user or client computer system . As part of the user registration process the user is assigned or selects a login ID which is a common login ID used to access any affiliate server e.g. server . The login ID may also be referred to herein as a user name or login name . Additionally the user selects a password associated with the login ID that is used for authentication purposes. After registering and logging into the authentication server the user can visit any affiliate server i.e. affiliate servers that are also registered with the same authentication server without requiring any additional authentication and without re entering user information that is already contained in the associated user profile.

The operator s of affiliate servers register with authentication server by providing information about the affiliate server e.g. server name and Internet address . Additionally each affiliate server provides information regarding its authentication requirements. The requirements for authentication may be specified in terms of a maximum time allowed since the last login and entry of authentication information by the user. These requirements may also be specified by the maximum time allowed since the last refresh of the authentication information by the user. Refreshing the authentication information refers to the process of having the user re enter the password to be certain that the appropriate user is still operating client computer system . This periodic refreshing of authentication information is useful if the user leaves his or her computer system without logging out of authentication server thereby allowing another individual to access affiliate servers using the login ID of the previous user. If a user requests access to one of the affiliate servers after the maximum allowed time has lapsed then authentication server re authenticates i.e. refreshes the user. Thus although there is a central authentication server affiliate servers can establish their own authentication requirements to be enforced by the authentication server. After registering with authentication server affiliate servers can use the authentication server to authenticate any user that has also registered with the authentication server.

In the exemplary process flow of the user of client computer system begins at by accessing a portal service e.g. MSN network of Internet services at http www.msn.com available via affiliate server . At the user selects one of the services available through the portal. For example the user may select an e mail service by clicking on a link to Hotmail e mail service or another e mail service available through the portal. See A . A web service typically has many features. Among other things the Hotmail e mail service mentioned above allows the user to compose a message display his or her inbox or address book or set various preferences. The service routing originating application may request the destination service to present a particular feature e.g. compose e mail or inbox as part of the routing process. If an option for compose e mail is available past experience may indicate that the user prefers showing a Hotmail e mail service compose page so the user can immediately compose e mail without additional navigation at the Hotmail e mail service web site. The use of one or more keywords enables this routing. As described below this particular example is implemented by using a carry through keyword rru to enable the specific routing.

Proceeding to the portal service at affiliate server redirects client computer system to the multi site user authentication system provided by authentication server e.g. Microsoft Passport sign in service . According to the invention affiliate server redirects client computer system with one or more service routing request keywords in addition to the carry through keyword. In this example the service routing request keyword svc email and the carry through keyword rru query parameter. See B . In this instance authentication database stores information for identifying the locations of a plurality of affiliate servers . When authentication server receives a request from the user for the selected service the request includes a carry through keyword for controlling routing of the user to the selected service.

The client computer system follows the redirect command issued by the portal at . See C . At authentication server prompts the user to enter login information e.g. e mail user name and password for verification with the information stored in authentication database . See D . In a preferred embodiment of the invention client computer system communicates confidential information such as the login ID and password to authentication server using a secure protocol e.g. secure sockets layer SSL . Various other secure protocols or encryption mechanisms can be used to communicate confidential information between authentication server and client computer system .

The client computer system posts the user s credentials e.g. user name password to authentication server at . See E . The authentication server then validates the user name password provided by the user at and if successful looks up the desired web service location at before redirecting client computer system to the appropriate service e.g. Hotmail e mail service attaching the rru carry through parameter at . See F . In other words authentication server retrieves the appropriate location information from authentication database to identify the location of server or providing the selected service. The authentication server then attaches the carry through keyword to the retrieved location information to create a new URL. A key question addressed by the present invention is where to find the user s web service such as e mail calendar etc. Inasmuch as this question is answered after the user identification is known the solution is a very well suited for use in conjunction with a multi site user authentication system.

In operation a preferred embodiment of the present invention redirects the user to the authentication system to look up the location of a selected web service for a given user e.g. based on the user s domain . The user s member name as part of the multi site user authentication system identifies the user the service routing request keyword identifies the category of desired web service and the carry through keyword controls the specific routing process. Authentication server preferably uses the service routing request to look up the appropriate location for the selected service for the user based on the user s domain e.g. bobsmith hotmail.com . Proceeding to client computer system follows the redirect to the selected service with rru query parameter. See G . Authentication server instructs the selected service which page to display with the carry through keyword or carries through another command for the service web site .

In a preferred embodiment the invention is at the heart of cross web service integration in a federated environment. The invention provides the ability to centrally look up the location of a web service for a given user. As an example selecting the e mail link directs the user to the authentication system e.g. Microsoft Passport sign in service with a service routing request for e mail and a carry through keyword to the desired service e.g. compose new e mail at Hotmail e mail service . After retrieving the necessary data authentication server automatically sends the user to the final destination i.e. the Hotmail e mail web service together with the carry through keyword and displays Hotmail e mail service s page for composing new messages.

The authentication database provides a central medium for storing routing configuration information. Additional destination services can be dynamically added changed at the multi site user authentication system without additional operational procedures at the affiliate sites. The added benefit is that the affiliate sites can change their respective URLs without maintaining the previous URL for performing an HTTP redirect for example. Affiliate servers require less maintenance while end users enjoy improved performance.

At in the alternative authentication server redirects client computer system to affiliate server where the user selected a different service e.g. a calendar Web service instead of Hotmail e mail service . See H . Returning to if the user entered information is not correct i.e. it does not match the information stored in authentication database then at authentication server generates and communicates a web page to the user indicating the login ID and password combination was not valid. In the event of user name and or password failure the svc and rru parameters may still be carried for a certain number of tries according to a preferred embodiment of the invention. Security concerns for example may limit the number of times the user can attempt to login. As a specific example if the user attempts to access the options page of his or her e mail service http login.hotmail.passport.com cgi bin login rru options svc mail the user will be routed to the login page with svc mail and rru options values carried through. In this example even if the user forgets his or her password and must try a number of times before successfully entering the password the server keeps the svc and rru values for a number of login attempts and eventually directs the user to the desired options page.

The exemplary process flow diagrams of illustrate the general idea of service routing by carrying through a parameter which facilitates cross web integration. Although it is contemplated that aspects of the process flow may vary the operations labeled G and H are generally fundamental to the various scenarios.

Referring now to a computer readable medium namely authentication database has a data structure stored thereon embodying aspects of the invention. The data structure preferably includes a first field a second field and a third field . In this embodiment the first field contains location information identifying locations of network servers . As described above network servers preferably maintain this location information in first field . The second field contains keyword information that relates the location information to the services provided by network servers . In this instance the central server i.e. authentication server uses the keyword information for routing the user to the selected service. Authentication server retrieves the location information from the first field to identify the location of the network server providing the selected service as a function of the keyword information in the second field . As described above authentication server attaches a carry through keyword to the retrieved location information for routing the user to the selected service based on the keyword information. The third field preferably contains authentication information for comparison to login information from the user.

The following provides an example of routing configuration information stored in authentication database as expressed in an extensible markup language XML format 

Service routing also applies to non e mail sign ins and dictates what user profile data gets sent to the destination web service. If a user has multiple credentials for instance the user can sign in with alternative login names e.g. a phone number and still request access to an end user service such as e mail. As an example a cell phone with a micro browser can authenticate the user through the use of a phone number and personal identification number PIN before the user is routed to his or her e mail service. In this routing process user data such as user name are looked up based on a need of the given service and is sent to the destination service. Moreover service routing is contemplated as a separate service. Its integration into a user authentication handshake has the performance benefit of fewer round trips between the client and the server.

In an alternative embodiment it is to be understood that a particular web service may not be unique to a domain. For example there may be several financial web sites that offer a portfolio tracking service. If these sites are user domain agnostic the routing service of authentication server will simply return a list of choices for the user to make a final decision. This decision can be tracked in a user profile to automate the routing the next time the user logs on and requests the service. In other words one embodiment of the present invention includes per user routing to allow the user to select one of the services and store the information in the central database associated with authentication system e.g. the user chooses which location to use for a portfolio tracking service . This is an alternative to the service request being dependent on the user s domain.

In another embodiment multiple contending web services may exist for the same user domain. In this case authentication server returns a list for the user to make a decision and as before the decision can be tracked in user profile. In other words multiple destinations are available for the same domain e.g. user chooses to check e mail at home or at work . Again this provides an alternative to the service request being dependent on the user s domain. This is also related to yet another preferred embodiment of the present invention in which a plurality of service keywords are used. For example a Web site may be an aggregation portal e.g. mobile.msn.com on a cell phone . When the user accesses the aggregation portal he or she is really accessing a number of services. The aggregation portal preferably requests that multiple service locations be looked up in a single transaction and then does not need to ask for location look up again.

In yet another embodiment the present invention includes the use of a general keyword carry through. This advantageously allows arbitrary names and numbers of keywords to be designated for carrying through as an alternative to the specific keyword described above .

Although described in connection with an exemplary computing system environment including computer the invention is operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. The computing system environment is not intended to suggest any limitation as to the scope of use or functionality of the invention. Moreover the computing system environment should not be interpreted as having any dependency or requirement relating to any one or combination of components illustrated in the exemplary operating environment. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

The invention may be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules executed by one or more computers or other devices. Generally program modules include but are not limited to routines programs objects components and data structures that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

When introducing elements of the present invention or the preferred embodiment s thereof the articles a an the and said are intended to mean that there are one or more of the elements. The terms comprising including and having are intended to be inclusive and mean that there may be additional elements other than the listed elements.

In view of the above it will be seen that the several objects of the invention are achieved and other advantageous results attained.

As various changes could be made in the above constructions and methods without departing from the scope of the invention it is intended that all matter contained in the above description and shown in the accompanying drawings shall be interpreted as illustrative and not in a limiting sense.

