---

title: Systems and methods for playing games of chance or skill using an alternate method of entry
abstract: The present invention relates to methods of and systems for playing tournament-style games, such as the World Series of Poker, and other games of skill or chance. The present invention additionally is systems and methods for using an alternate method of entry to enable a player to participate in a wagering game of skill or chance.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08147325&OS=08147325&RS=08147325
owner: Scientific Games Holdings Limited
number: 08147325
owner_city: Ballymahon, Co. Longford
owner_country: IE
publication_date: 20050202
---
This application is a continuation in part of and claims priority under 35 U.S.C. 120 to U.S. application Ser. No. 10 728 727 entitled GAME OF CHANCE SYSTEM AND METHOD FOR PLAYING GAMES OF CHANCE filed on Dec. 5 2003 which claims priority to U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 431 036 filed Dec. 5 2002. Both of these applications are herein incorporated by reference in their entirety.

The present invention relates to methods of and systems for playing tournament style games such as the World Series of Poker and other games of skill or chance.

Legalized public and private wagering games of chance and or skill abound in the United States and throughout the world. A game that has been growing in popularity is known as the World Series of Poker or WSOP. The WSOP is a poker tournament style game that typically uses Texas Hold em rules of play. The standard method of entry into a tournament style game is a buy in of some amount to get a seat at a table. For example a seat at a high level table may require a buy in of about 10 000. Another method of entry includes entry of a player into a satellite tournament where players pay a lower amount of money lower buy in for a seat at the satellite table and the winner of the satellite round gets a seat at a WSOP tournament table. It is also possible to play an online poker game a winner of which may be awarded a ticket to play at a WSOP tournament table. The ticket may include airfare the buy in amount hotel reservations etc. These online offerings and satellite table games offer people a way to possibly play in a WSOP tournament without having to pay the 10 000 or more buy in amount.

Aspects and embodiments of the invention are directed to using an alternate method of entry to enable players to participate in a game of chance or skill. Particularly aspects of the invention are directed to using an alternate method of entry to enter players into a tournament style game such as the World Series of Poker game. In one example the alternate method of entry may be applied to allow players to enter a sweepstakes for example by entering information online or by mailing in a form the winner of which will be given a seat at a WSOP table. In another example the alternate method of entry may be applied to allow a player to enter another game such as a game of chance or other game of skill. The winner of the game of chance or skill may win a seat at a WSOP table.

According to one aspect of the present invention a method for conducting a tournament style game is provided. The method comprises acts of providing for an entry of at least one player into the tournament style game and providing to the at least one player an alternative method of entry AMOE into the tournament style game. According to one embodiment of the invention the tournament style game is a wagering game of skill. According to another embodiment the wagering game of skill is one of poker blackjack dominoes bridge and mahjongg. According to another embodiment the tournament style game has fixed odds of winning the tournament style game. According to another embodiment the tournament style game has non fixed odds of winning the tournament style game.

According to one embodiment of the invention the method further comprises an act of conducting the tournament style game over a communication network. According to another embodiment the act of providing an entry of the at least one player in the tournament style game includes an act of entering the at least one player in a game session following a processing of an entry request of the at least one player by the alternative method of entry AMOE . According to another embodiment the method further comprises an act of providing to the at least one player an indication of a game session to be entered by the alternative method of entry AMOE . According to another embodiment the act of providing for the alternative method of entry AMOE includes providing for an entry of the at least one player in at least two game sessions.

According to one embodiment of the invention the AMOE is performed by an act of submitting an entry to the wagering game by mail. According to another embodiment the AMOE is performed by an act of submitting an entry to the wagering game over the Internet. According to another embodiment the entry fee for the AMOE entry is taken from either the total purse or the game operator s purse. According to another embodiment the winner s purse is reduced due to the AMOE entry. According to another embodiment the entry fee for the AMOE entry is paid for by no party with no moneys or goods exchanged between any parties for this transaction.

According to one aspect of the invention a wagering game of skill is provided wherein a game player is eligible to play the wagering game of skill through the use of an alternative method of entry AMOE . According to one embodiment of the invention the wagering game of skill is available to be played on a communication network. According to another embodiment the communication network includes at least one of a cable system the Internet or wireless network. According to another embodiment the AMOE is performed by an act of submitting an entry to the wagering game of skill by mail. According to another embodiment the AMOE is performed by an act of submitting an entry to the wagering game of skill over the Internet. According to another embodiment a game session associated with the wagering game of skill is provided with an entry by AMOE. According to another embodiment the game session entered is the next starting game session after the AMOE is received and logged by the game operator. According to another embodiment the game session entered is the next starting game session designated for AMOE game players after the AMOE is received and logged by the game operator. According to another embodiment the wagering game of skill is one of poker blackjack dominoes bridge and mahjongg. According to another embodiment the wagering game is played in a tournament. According to another embodiment the alternative method of entry AMOE includes an entry of the at least one player in at least two game sessions.

According to another aspect of the invention a computer readable medium is provided having computer readable signals stored thereon that define instructions that as a result of being executed by a computer instruct the computer to perform a method for conducting a world series of poker WSOP game. The method comprises acts of providing for an entry of at least one player into the WSOP game and providing to the at least one player an alternative method of entry AMOE to the WSOP game. According to one embodiment of the invention the method further comprises an act of conducting the WSOP game over a communication network. According to another embodiment the act of providing an entry of the at least one player in the WSOP game includes an act of entering the at least one player in a WSOP game session following a processing of an entry request of the at least one player by the alternative method of entry AMOE . According to another embodiment the method further comprises an act of providing to the at least one player an indication of a WSOP game session to be entered by the alternative method of entry AMOE . According to another embodiment the alternative method of entry AMOE includes an entry of the at least one player in at least two WSOP game sessions. According to another embodiment the AMOE includes implementing a method which comprises acts of entering a player into a game entering a winner of the game into the WSOP game. According to another embodiment the game is a game of chance.

Further features and advantages of the present invention as well as the structure of various embodiments of the present invention will be more fully understood from the examples described below with reference to the accompanying drawings. The following examples are intended to illustrate the benefits of the present invention but do not exemplify the full scope of the invention. All references cited herein are expressly incorporated by reference.

Aspects and embodiments of the present invention are related to alternate methods of entry into games of skill such as a tournament style game. As is known tournaments are used with various types of games to determine a winner among a number of players. Tournaments generally are competitions between players to decide a winner by playing a series of games. One example of such a tournament style game is the World Series of Poker WSOP tournament. Other aspects of the invention relate to a new game that includes elements of the well known wagering games of chance known as bingo and keno and can be applied to online gaming.

Various illustrative embodiments and aspects thereof will now be described in detail with reference to the accompanying figures. It is to be appreciated that this invention is not limited in its application to the details of construction and the arrangement of components set forth in the following description or illustrated in the drawings. The invention is capable of other embodiments and of being practiced or of being carried out in various ways. Also the phraseology and terminology used herein is for the purpose of description and should not be regarded as limiting. The use of including comprising or having containing involving and variations thereof herein is meant to encompass the items listed thereafter and equivalents thereof as well as additional items.

Disadvantages associated with WSOP tournaments include the difficulty of gaining access to a table because the buy in amount is typically very high and thus not affordable for most people and the number of seats are limited. The present invention provides increased accessibility to WSOP games for players thereby enabling more players to participate in WSOP and other tournament style games.

According to one embodiment of the invention a game is provided which has a fixed odds of winning through the drawing of a predetermined number of winning cell content but is unlike keno in that a winning pattern must be obtained on a game card from the matches between the game card cell content and the drawn winning cell content.

Prior to a game session a game player may need to pay for playing. For example a game player may pay using money or loyalty points. In particular a game player may pay using money by debit card credit card check cash or from an account credit either with the gaming operator or an affiliated organization. Alternatively a game player may pay using loyalty points from an account held either by the gaming operator or by an affiliated organization. Loyalty points may be obtained from any type of organization but are generally associated with loyalty programs such as frequent flier programs for airlines frequent stay programs for hotels or frequent visitor programs for casinos. The game player may pay in person e.g. by using a cashier or by other remote methods including telephone handheld device kiosk computer through the Internet or other network and mail. Payment may be in any form that is legal in the particular jurisdiction.

In one embodiment of the invention players may subscribe to play multiple consecutive game sessions. That is the player pays at one time to play many consecutive game sessions. According to one embodiment such players may subscribe to multiple games e.g. fixed odds or non fixed odds games using a computer based interface e.g. a personal computer cell phone PDA set top box or other interface . These subscribed games may be automatically played e.g. by a computer system without the need to interact with the game provider as discussed more fully below. In another embodiment the player may also choose to have his or her subscription automatically renewed.

According to one embodiment of the invention players may also enter to play this or any other wagering game of skill or chance using an alternative method of entry AMOE . Conventionally AMOE is a required available method of entry into a sweepstakes that does not require a purchase. Sweepstakes are usually used as a promotional or marketing tool. Any company or organization offering a sweepstakes ticket in exchange for a purchase is typically required to also offer an AMOE to the sweepstakes that is not linked to a purchase. A common AMOE method includes sending by an individual interested in entering the sweepstakes to the sweepstakes offer or a postcard with his or her name address or other contact information. Another AMOE method includes signing on by the individual to a free Internet website and submitting the required information for free. Numerous other methods may be used for AMOE. Most sweepstakes limit the number of times one individual or family may enter a sweepstakes by AMOE. An individual entering a sweepstakes by AMOE is required by law to have the same odds of winning each of the available prizes as do individuals who have paid for entry e.g. by making a purchase of a product or service .

According to one embodiment of the invention it is realized that an AMOE alternative method of entry may be used to enter a game of chance. More particularly it is possible to develop implement and run wagering games of chance including the inventive games described herein with an AMOE method of entry. AMOE methods are conventionally used to enter a player in a sweepstakes which is not considered wagering or gambling. Thus according to one embodiment of the invention an individual may enter a wagering game of chance by AMOE using for example the postcard or the online method outlined above. The wagering game of chance player entering by AMOE may also have the same odds to win the payout associated with the game session in which they are entered. The wagering game of chance player entering by AMOE may also be limited to a small number of game sessions within a given period of time. For example the player may be limited to one game session in one year two game sessions in one month or other limited number of games in a defined period. It should be appreciated that a player may be limited to any number of sessions and defined periods and that the invention is not limited to any particular implementation.

According to one embodiment of the invention other wagering games of skill or chance include well known games of skill or chance as well as novel or proprietary games of skill or chance. Examples of well known games of skill or chance include poker blackjack dominoes mahjongg bridge slots and bingo any type of poker game may be played this way including Texas Hold em Pai Gow and 5 or 7 card stud or draw. The AMOE entry may be used by a player to enter a game against the house or against other players. An entry to play against other players may include entry into a tournament where the house retains part of all paid entry fees the retained house fees may be used to pay the entrance fee at a full or reduced rate for AMOE entries in the tournament. According to another embodiment the prize pool may be diluted by having the entry fee for the AMOE entry go unpaid.

According to one embodiment the game session that the game player entering by AMOE is entered into may be determined by the game player on the AMOE entry form. For example the post card AMOE may be required to state the date and the time of the game session that the game player wants to enter. Alternatively the game session entered may be the next starting game session after the AMOE is received and logged. As another alternative AMOE entries may be assigned to a specific game session s each hour day week or other time interval.

Referring to a game card includes a number of cells . Each player in a game session has at least one game card with the same pattern see of for an example of a pattern or matrix of cells . In one embodiment each cell of each game card has a cell content . In one embodiment the cell content is one of a predetermined set of cell content for that game session e.g. integers from 1 to 75 or English letters from A to Z or a mixture of the two. The cells of the game card in each session may be subdivided into groups each of which includes a subset of possible cell content e.g. a first column e.g. item of includes integers to a second column e.g. item of includes integers to on up to a fifth column item having integers to just as in the traditional game of bingo. Preferably every game card is unique in a game session although duplicate cards may exist.

According to one embodiment of the invention the object of a game of chance is to match cell content of a particular game card with the drawn winning cell content item and to have the matched cell content cover at least the predetermined winning pattern . In for example the winning pattern is denoted by the gray shading. Initially because no winning cell content has yet been drawn each game card does not have matching cell content unless the cell content is a free or wild spot . The winning cell content is drawn from the predetermined set of cell content e.g. item of . In one embodiment winning cell content may be drawn one at a time up to a predetermined fixed number of drawn winning cell content item of .

Because it may be possible to have more than one game card per game piece a winning pattern may also cover more than one game card. For example the winning pattern may be W on the first card I on the second card and N on the third card for a game piece containing three game cards for a game piece containing three game cards. Alternatively for a game piece containing three game cards the winning pattern may be obtained by a standard 5 in a row on any of three cards.

According to one embodiment a game session also includes an associated predetermined payout table e.g. item of . Payout table may include a listing of the ways to obtain a payout and its payout amount. Possible ways to obtain a payout include for example matching at least the winning pattern matching only the winning pattern matching part or none of the winning pattern and matching none of the game card.

A payout table may also be applied to tournament style games such as for example a WSOP game. Because poker is a game of skill and the total dollar amount to be won in any round depends on the bets the players make a payout table may be constructed based on percentages of the total dollar amount in play. The payout may be constructed to award certain percentages based on a players final position in the tournament and those percentages may depend on the number of players in the tournament. For example in a tournament of ten to twenty players the payout table may award 50 to the player in first place 30 to the player in second place and 20 to the player in third place with all other players receiving nothing. In tournament style poker first place is awarded to the last player left with money second place is awarded to the last player eliminated and so on.

The payout amount for each method of winning various games may depend at least in part upon the odds of obtaining the particular way to obtain a payout. For example in the cell based game described above the odds of matching a winning pattern with thirty winning cell content drawn may be twice that for twenty winning cell content drawn but the payout may be only one and one half times higher for matching the winning pattern in twenty versus thirty winning cell content drawn. Thus the payout amount may be varied e.g. increased if the winning pattern was obtained in less than the predetermined fixed number of drawn winning cell content. For example if the predetermined number of drawn winning cell content is thirty and the payout for that is thirty credits then if the winning pattern is obtained within the first twenty drawn winning cell content then the payout for obtaining that may be forty five credits. Other payout schemes may be used and the invention is not limited to any particular scheme. Also a game card may have in one embodiment only one payout per game session .

A payout table item of may also include adjustments for a player s subscription. For instance the payout may be adjusted according to their subscription level. For example a payout to a particular player may be increased for example if the player has a multiple game subscription multiple card subscription high payment per game card or any combination of the three. The payout may also be adjusted for numerous other criterion including for example frequent player credits. Of course payout adjustments generally must meet any legal requirements for the gaming jurisdiction in which the game is played.

The payout table for each game session may also be supplemented by a jackpot that transfers from game session to game session. These types of jackpots are commonly called rolling or progressive jackpots. A rolling jackpot may be for example the same amount that transfers from game session to game session until it is paid out. A progressive jackpot is a rolling jackpot that increases as more game sessions game cards or other criterion are played. Rolling or progressive jackpots are typically paid out for a difficult way to match the drawn winning cell content. For example in the case of the conventional game of bingo if all cells of a five by five 5 5 matrix are covered in the first twenty five drawn winning cell content or no cells are covered after fifty drawn winning cell content the rolling jackpot may be paid out.

The final payout may also be affected as to whether the game has a fixed payout for a win or whether the payout is shared e.g. item of . If the payout is fixed for a win according to one embodiment all players that have a game card winner for a certain type of win will be paid the amount listed in the payout table for the win. In this instance each player is playing solely against the game operator. If the payout is shared then all players that have a game card winner for a certain type of win will be paid a total of the amount listed in the payout table. Each player may receive a share of the total payout depending upon how much he or she paid for the game or any other legal criteria.

The final payout may also be affected by bonus play which is well known in the gaming industry. Bonus play works to increase some payouts by offering the player a chance to multiply a payout.

Alternative to a subscription a player may be entered in a tournament style game. As discussed above one aspect of the present invention relates to allowing a player to enter a tournament style game via an AMOE entry. Payout to a player in a tournament style game may for example be performed by awarding a jackpot funded by buy in fees paid for by the players. The jackpot may be paid for example only after there is a single winning player remaining in the tournament after all game sessions in the tournament have been played.

One or more game sessions may proceed concurrently. Parameters of the concurrent game sessions may be the same similar or different. For example drawn winning cell content may be used for one or more concurrent sessions if for example the predetermined set of cell content is the same for the one or more concurrent sessions. As a further example the game card pattern of cells may be different in all the game sessions. In another example several tournament style games of a particular round may be played simultaneously the winner of each game from that round then playing in a second round tournament against each other. This principle may of course be extended to apply to numerous rounds and is not limited to two rounds. Additionally game sessions may run continually i.e. one after another. When one game session ends another session will begin immediately or in a short period of time. The game sessions may follow a precise time schedule so that players know when games will begin. For example if game play in a session requires four and a half 4.5 minutes to complete then the next game may start immediately or in a defined period e.g. thirty seconds to maintain to a schedule of games every five minutes for instance at 00 05 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 of each hour . Because according to on embodiment the game sessions may run continually it may be possible that a particular game session will have no game player or game card that is being played within the particular game session.

In the case of a tournament style game where players are eliminated during head to head matches e.g. totaling all players winnings at the end of a round the player with the highest total may move on to a next round such game sessions may be untimed or may be limited to a predetermined time limit. As discussed players may be permitted to play against one another in a satellite tournament e.g. an online satellite tournament with one or more winners advancing onto a seat in a final tournament or one or more intermediate tournaments. Such tournaments may include a poker style game such as the well known Texas Hold em game. However it should be appreciated that other poker style games may be played in a tournament format.

Prior to a game session cell content on at least one game card may be chosen by a game player from the predetermined set of cell content for a particular game session. A game player may choose the cell content of a game card manually or may use a computer system to select the cell content for a particular game session. Alternatively according to one embodiment of the invention a computer system may automatically choose the cell content on at least one game card for a game player. Because according to one embodiment a computer system can both choose the cell content and play the game a player need not configure and attend each game playing session as discussed further below.

Referring to the cell content may be a free spot a blank spot or a wild spot. A free blank or wild spot may be in any cell of the game card . Preferably in one embodiment there is only one free blank and or wild spot per game card. It is also possible that there is no free blank or wild spot on a game card.

Besides a free blank or wild spot the cell content may be any letter or character number symbol color logo shape drawing or other item that may be represented in the cell. The cell content may be for example a letter or character of any language e.g. English Russian Japanese Chinese Greek etc. Cell content may also be any random combination of letters or characters including words and phrases. Cell content may also be a number expressed in any language e.g. English Chinese Roman etc. The number may be represented by items e.g. the number of stars in the cell or the dots on the face of a die or dice . The number may be negative zero positive integer fraction decimal real or imaginary. Preferably according to one embodiment the number is a positive integer. Cell content may also be a symbol. For example astrology religion printing and computer fonts road signs or law symbols may be used. Cell content may be any color including black white or shade of gray. Cell content may also be a logo of a company or product name or trademark. Any type of cell content may be used and the invention is not limited to any particular type.

Preferably cell content of each cell is unique for the game card to maximize the different possible cell content to match the drawn winning cell content for a game session. Also preferably each game card in a game session is a unique combination of cell content and cell position for that game session.

Cells e.g. item of the game card are generally arranged in a pattern. The pattern includes three components shape of the cells cell connectivity or how the cells are connected to each other and the size of the total pattern. For example in the cells are square and are attached to each other side to side in a five by five 5 5 matrix. shows examples of some of the numerous other possible cell shape cell connectivity and pattern size combinations. These are just examples and the invention may implement other shape connectivity and size combinations.

Referring to and cells on a game card all have the same shape and size as shown in and or cells may have a different shape or size such as a combination of octagons and squares as in

Shape of the cells may be any shape including but not limited to a circular triangle square pentagon or hexagon shape. Also it is possible that all cells have different shapes. For example various aspects of the invention may be implemented with a game card having cells with irregularly shaped walls as shown in . The cells may be connected to each other side to side corner to corner point to point or any other method.

Patterns may also have holes in them. For example in square cells are connected to make a larger square having a hole in the middle. Alternatively the pattern of has a pattern with a large square cell in the center. Another example pattern shown in includes a combination of octagonal and square cells as described above or may include a matrix of octagonal cells with square holes in the middle. In another example pattern shown in includes a pattern of circular cells having four sided holes or a pattern having circular and four sided cells. Further holes may be the same size and shape as the cells. For instance in three internal triangles of the pattern may be holes among six exterior triangles. It should be appreciated that other patterns may be used and the invention is not limited to any particular pattern.

The winning pattern for a game session may be any subset of all the cells in the associated game card pattern. The winning pattern may be for example a random subset of all cells that may not appear to have a pattern. Preferably the winning pattern may be a recognizable pattern of cells. The winning pattern may have only one way of being achieved and as shown in the winning pattern may or may not include the cell with the free blank or wild spot. The winning pattern may also be achieved in a number of different ways. For example a five in a row winning pattern in a five by five matrix as in bingo can be achieved twelve different ways as demonstrated by the shaded lines shown in . A winning pattern known as small kite has four possible configurations as shown in . Also more than one winning pattern may be possible for a particular game session. For example a winning pattern may include the triangles of six points of the pattern shown in or six internal triangles.

Winning cell content may be randomly drawn by hand or by computer system from the predetermined set of cell content for a game session. When the drawing is performed by hand the winning cell content may be chosen for example from pieces of paper out of a hat or drum by using balls or discs in a rotating or air blown sphere or any other method that can be used for drawing content for a game session e.g. for the games of keno or bingo . Hand drawn winning cell content may then be displayed or entered into a computer system. Preferably the winning cell content is randomly drawn by computer system from the predetermined set of cell content for a particular game session.

After a winning cell content is drawn a player may manually daub his or her game card s on paper or by whatever means the player is viewing the game proceedings e.g. by daubing a game card in an interface of a computer system . The game player may view the game proceedings using television wireless or line telephone with display handheld device kiosk computer or in person. For example the game player may operate a computer system that has an Internet enabled interface e.g. using Macromedia Flash or Java and the computer system may display streamed game information within that interface. It should be appreciated that any interface may be used to display game proceedings and that the invention is not limited to any particular interface. Depending upon the viewing medium it may be necessary to download game information prior to viewing while another viewing medium may allow viewing of the streamed game information.

When a player matches enough winning cell content to obtain a winning pattern for a game session the player informs the game operator that they are a winner. If the game player is playing the game in person this act of informing may include raising one s hand or visually indicating that he or she has a winner. The game operator then verifies that the game player won by checking the daubed game card cell content against the drawn winning cell content. If the game player plays the game remotely for instance over the web or interactive television or if the game operator is a computer system then other electronic or voice indication method may be necessary to authenticate and verify the game player and the winning game card. Such methods are well known in the remote and electronic gaming industry.

In one embodiment a computer system e.g. a personal computer PC set top box PDA phone may automatically daub the matching cell content of each game card being played in a game session after each drawn winning cell content. The game player may view the game proceedings using any interface including a television a wireless or other type of telephone having a display a handheld device a kiosk or computer. However because the computer is adapted to automatically daub matching cell content the game player may decide not to observe the drawing of winning cell content.

The computer system may then automatically determine when a game card is a winner. Such a result may be automatically authenticated and verified by the computer system. In this instance the computer system may then notify the game player that he or she has won and what the winnings are after the computer has consulted a predetermined payout table e.g. item of as described above . The computer may also determine if the winning needs to be shared with other winning game cards. Notification of winning to a game player may occur by mail e mail computer web or network telephone television pager fax kiosk or any other method.

When the computer system daubs matching cell content on one or more game cards the computer system may also determine the game card s and the associated player identity ies that are closest to winning after each drawn winning cell content. The computer system may then display the game card s or the identity of the game player s closest to winning to all game players observing the game session. The computer system may also choose to display only one or a subset of all the game cards or identities of players closest to winning to a particular game player observing the game session.

After a winner is authenticated and verified the computer system may then notify all game players observing the game session that a win has occurred. Additionally the computer system may display the winning game card the winning player s identity or the payout. Because the game session does not end until a predetermined fixed number of winning cell content is drawn it is possible for this notification to occur several times each time for a different game card during a particular game session.

As stated above it may also be possible that a game card may be a winner because the game card does not match the drawn winning cell content. For example in a game session having forty drawn winning cell content out of a predetermined set of cell content of seventy five items a game card that has no matches may be a winning card. Such a card may have a payout equivalent to a game card having a five in a row matching pattern.

In another embodiment the computer system may be used to conduct a tournament style game such as a WSOP game. Players may enter the tournament game through a computer interface such as a web page or other software user interface. Game sessions may be conducted locally i.e. on the machine at which the player is playing or may be conducted online over the Internet. The player may play against computer generated players or against other live players for example over the Internet. The computer may indicate through the user interface the ongoing status of the game whether the player is winning or losing etc. and may keep track of bets placed by the player and or entry fees paid by the player. For example a computer payment method such as Paypal may be used to debit and or credit a player s account based on the number of games a player enters bets won and lost etc. as is discussed below.

During a period of time between game sessions a game operator may make announcements rest or perform any number of actions. If the game is played using a computer system advertisements sponsorships public service announcements or any visual or auditory content may be inserted into these periods. Advertisements and other content may also be inserted into the game display during a game session.

In the configuration where the computer automatically daubs the game cards for the players it may be beneficial to allow a game player to remotely access information indicating the results of a game session after the session has completed. In this manner a player may not need to attend a particular game session as results of each session may be accessed at a later time. Further the player need not access the game session results from a same interface at which the game was played or subscribed. Remote access may be gained for example by kiosk telephone television computer handheld device or any other device or system that is appropriate. Information that may be accessed regarding a past game session may include whether the player won or lost what the player s payout was or other information relating to the past game session.

A game player may also be able to replay or review a past game session using a video enabled device. For instance a kiosk telephone having a display television computer or handheld device may be used to replay a past game session. By accessing a selected game session in the computer system a game player may be able to see a past game session as it occurred the winning cards and winning game player identity ies the drawn winning cell content or possibly any other aspect of the game session of interest.

Preferably the game its game sessions and the game play are partially or fully automated using one or more computer systems. More preferably the game its game sessions and the game play are fully automated. A computer system may be a single computer that may be a supercomputer minicomputer or a mainframe or personal computer. A computer system used to run a game and its associates sessions and may also include any combination of computer system types that cooperate to accomplish system level tasks. Multiple computer systems may also be used to run a game. The computer system also may include input or output devices displays or storage units. It should be appreciated that any computer system or systems may be used and the invention is not limited to any number type or configuration of computer systems.

A computer system that executes a game according to various embodiments of the invention may include for example three system components. One system component may handle payment subscription and or AMOE by players to enter the game sessions. Another system component may handle playing and viewing the game and a third system may handle payouts. Such a game system may also be connected e.g. by direct line or network to other computer systems including systems for handling casino or hotel loyalty programs reservations in room television viewing gambling floor kiosks or other systems. Connections to other computer systems may be performed using one or more of the system components described below. The computer system may be adapted to handle entry by players into a variety of games including games such as those described above and tournament style games including but not limited to WSOP games.

A payment component may include one or more of a number of well known systems. For example a player may be able to pay to play one or more games using a telephone and speaking with a call center representative who inputs player payment and subscription information manually into a computer using a user interface. In the computer data may be stored in a data which is stored in a memory of the computer system. As used herein a data structure is an arrangement of data defined by computer readable signals. These signals may be read by a computer system stored on a medium associated with a computer system e.g. in a memory on a disk etc. and may be transmitted to one or more other computer systems over a communications medium such as for example a network. Also as used herein a user interface or UI is an interface between a human user and a computer that enables communication between a user and a computer. Examples of UIs that may be implemented with various aspects of the invention include a graphical user interface GUI a display screen a mouse a keyboard a keypad a track ball a microphone e.g. to be used in conjunction with a voice recognition system a speaker a touch screen a game controller e.g. a joystick etc and any combinations thereof.

Player information may also be entered into a payment system component. Player information that may be input includes name address telephone number and age and payment information may include credit or debit card number or loyalty account information. Also as discussed above various aspects of the present invention relate to subscription gaming for wagering games of chance. Subscription information may be input including for example a first game session date and time a number of game sessions to be played a number of game pieces to be played per game session and bet per game piece. Based upon the payment and subscription information the call center representative may verify that the payment information is valid and that enough credit or funds is available for the player s desired subscription.

A similar system may exist for players entering using the mail or a post card AMOE except the call center may be replaced by a mail center having representatives that enter information into one or more computers via a user interface. For example a cashier that works at a casino directly with players that pay cash or credit to play may also have the ability to input player account and subscription information for AMOE players using a user interface of computer.

Computer systems or pay engines for handling electronic or online payment and subscriptions may also be used. Such systems are well known and include such systems as Paypal iKobo Verisign and other systems. Using such a system a player interacts with a user interface to input information into a payment data structure that may be transferred to one or more payment systems e.g. PayPal .

Various pay systems and one or more user interfaces may be located on computer systems coupled by a network with the computer system s storing data having player account and subscription information. As used herein a network or a communications network is a group of two or more devices interconnected by one or more segments of transmission media or active communications equipment on which communications may be exchanged between the devices.

The above examples are merely illustrative embodiments of a pay system component. It should be appreciated that an illustrative embodiment is not intended to limit the scope of the invention as any of numerous other implementations of the pay system for example variations of online payment are possible and are intended to fall within the scope of the invention. For example the payment system may include using pay per view systems associated with interactive television or the pay engine may additionally deliver a receipt to the player by either e mail or mail. None of the claims set forth below are intended to be limited to any particular implementation of a pay system unless such claim includes a limitation explicitly reciting a particular implementation.

Payout systems are also well known. Any of a number of standard systems or payout engines for making payouts for winning may be used. For example a standard application programming interface such as Quicken Intuit Inc. Mountain View Calif. USA may be used to write and mail checks or credit a debit card credit card if legal in the jurisdiction of play or loyalty account. Quicken may obtain the payout information by accessing a payout data structure across a network. As used herein an application programming interface or API is a set of one or more computer readable instructions that provide access to one or more other sets of computer readable instructions that define functions so that such functions can be configured to be executed on a computer in conjunction with an application program.

 Quicken is merely an illustrative embodiment of the payout system. Such an illustrative embodiment is not intended to limit the scope of the invention as any of numerous other implementations of the payout system for example variations of online payout are possible and are intended to fall within the scope of the invention. Additionally a cashier may also have access to payout information using a user interface to the payout data structure through a network the cashier then makes a payment to the winning player based upon the accessed information. None of the claims set forth below are intended to be limited to any particular implementation of a pay system unless such claim includes a limitation explicitly reciting a particular implementation.

A game playing and viewing system according to one embodiment of the invention may comprise of a number of components for performing specific functions. These components may include for example storage means that store data structures having information relating to game configuration and game play. For example such information may include game variation information present game session information game session history and win history. A game playing and viewing system may also include components to access payment and payout data structures.

From a predetermined number of winning content to be drawn and set of cell content a game session has associated with it winning cell content that identifies the content necessary to determine a winning card. As discussed content may be drawn by hand or by the computer system. Further the specific draw order of the winning content may be stored for later reference e.g. for replay at a later time . A game session may also have one or more associated winners . According to another embodiment it is possible that a particular session may have no winners.

The game playing and viewing system may also include a game engine. A game engine may perform for example functions according to process as shown in . Referring to a game session may proceed for a player e.g. player with a game piece e.g. game piece having a game card e.g. game card . At block the player pays for a game piece in the game session. At block the computer chooses a game piece having one game card and the card cell content. At block the computer draws the first winning cell content. The computer then checks the game card for a match and daubs the matching cell content if necessary at block . At block the computer then checks the game card daubed cells to determine if the card matches the predetermined winning pattern. If the card is not a winner the computer may proceed to draw another winning cell content and continue the cycle until the predetermined number of winning cell content has been drawn or until a winner is found. When all the winning cell content has been drawn at and the game card is not a winner then the computer may notify the player that the card is not a winner invite the player to play again or any number of actions.

If the card is a winner at then the computer may proceed to notify the player that he or she is a winner as well as possibly determine the payout amount and also notifying the player of the payout amount e.g. in a game play interface e mail etc. .

The computer may also display the winning game card and or player information to all the game players. Winning player information that may be displayed may include name city state and country and or any other identifying information. If multiple winners occur simultaneously all winners or winning game cards may be displayed at one time or sequentially. It may also be possible that winners or winning game cards may be selectively displayed to particular game players. For instance if numerous winners occur at one time a player in Bismarck N. Dak. may be shown only the winning player information or game card that occurred closest to him or her say in Pierre S. Dak. versus some other location e.g. Boston Mass. .

After a game card is found not to be a winner the computer may also determine whether the card is the closest to winning if there have been no winners at block . Any of a number of criteria may be used for determining the card closest to winning. For example a computer may determine that a card is the closest to winning based upon having the highest number of matching cell content or the least number of cells to match to make the winning pattern. A card determined to be closest to winning may then be displayed to all game players.

It should be appreciated that game play process may include more or less acts as shown in and that the invention is not limited to any particular number of order of acts. e.g. the order illustrated in as the acts may be performed in other orders may include additional acts and one or more of the acts of process may be performed in series or in parallel to one or more other acts or parts thereof. For example acts and or parts thereof may be performed in parallel and act may be performed at any point during performance of process .

Process is merely an illustrative embodiment of a method for performing game play using a game engine. Such an illustrative embodiment is not intended to limit the scope of the invention as any of numerous other implementations for performing game play using a game engine. None of the claims set forth below are intended to be limited to any particular implementation of a method of game play for a game engine unless such claim includes a limitation explicitly reciting a particular implementation.

Process acts thereof and various embodiments and variations of these methods and acts individually or in combination may be defined by computer readable signals tangibly embodied on a computer readable medium for example a non volatile recording medium an integrated circuit memory element or a combination thereof. Such signals may define instructions for example as part of one or more programs that as a result of being executed by a computer instruct the computer to perform one or more of the methods or acts described herein and or various embodiments variations and combinations thereof. Such instructions may be written in any of a plurality of programming languages for example Java Visual Basic C C or C Fortran Pascal Eiffel Basic COBOL etc. or any of a variety of combinations thereof. The computer readable medium on which such instructions are stored may reside on one or more of the components of a general purpose computer described above and may be distributed across one or more of such components.

The computer readable medium may be transportable such that the instructions stored thereon can be loaded onto any computer system resource to implement the aspects of the present invention discussed herein. In addition it should be appreciated that the instructions stored on the computer readable medium described above are not limited to instructions embodied as part of an application program running on a host computer. Rather the instructions may be embodied as any type of computer code e.g. software or microcode that can be employed to program a processor to implement the above discussed aspects of the present invention.

It should be appreciated that any single component or collection of multiple components of a computer system for example the computer system described below in relation to that perform the functions described above with respect to describe or reference the method can be generically considered as one or more controllers that control the above discussed functions. The one or more controllers can be implemented in numerous ways such as with dedicated hardware or using a processor that is programmed using microcode or software to perform the functions recited above.

Another component of the game playing and viewing system may include a software component e.g. a driver that streams video via a broadband satellite or wireless medium to a user interface. If the game is played completely automatically the user interface may be merely a video terminal including television with no user input means. Viewing access may be controlled by standard methods for conditional access including using set top box addresses telephone numbers or internet protocol IP addresses.

The above is merely an illustrative embodiment of a game playing and viewing system. Such an illustrative embodiment is not intended to limit the scope of the invention as any of numerous other implementations of a game playing and viewing system for example variations of conditional access are possible and are intended to fall within the scope of the invention. None of the claims set forth below are intended to be limited to any particular implementation of a game playing and viewing system unless such claim includes a limitation explicitly reciting a particular implementation.

System and components thereof such as the payment payout and game engines may be implemented using software e.g. C C C Java or a combination thereof hardware e.g. one or more application specific integrated circuits processors or other hardware firmware e.g. electrically programmed memory or any combination thereof. One or more of the components of may reside on a single system e.g. the payment subsystem or one or more components may reside on separate discrete systems. Further each component may be distributed across multiple systems and one or more of the systems may be interconnected.

Further on each of the one or more systems that include one or more components of each of the components may reside in one or more locations on the system. For example different portions of the components of may reside in different areas of memory e.g. RAM ROM disk etc. on the system. Each of such one or more systems may include among other components a plurality of known components such as one or more processors a memory system a disk storage system one or more network interfaces and one or more busses or other internal communication links interconnecting the various components.

System is merely an illustrative embodiment of the game system. Such an illustrative embodiment is not intended to limit the scope of the invention as any of numerous other implementations of the game system for example variations of are possible and are intended to fall within the scope of the invention. For example a parallel system for viewing by interactive television may include one or more additional video streamers specific for interactive television. None of the claims set forth below are intended to be limited to any particular implementation of the game system unless such claim includes a limitation explicitly reciting a particular implementation.

Various embodiments according to the invention may be implemented on one or more computer systems. These computer systems may be for example general purpose computers such as those based on Intel PENTIUM type processor Motorola PowerPC Sun UltraSPARC Hewlett Packard PA RISC processors or any other type of processor. It should be appreciated that one or more of any type computer system may be used to partially or fully automate play of the described game according to various embodiments of the invention. Further the software design system may be located on a single computer or may be distributed among a plurality of computers attached by a communications network.

A general purpose computer system according to one embodiment of the invention is configured to perform any of the described game functions including but not limited to player subscription or payment game piece or card selection drawing winning cell content daubing matching cell content on game cards determining winners and paying winners. It should be appreciated that the system may perform other functions including network communication and the invention is not limited to having any particular function or set of functions.

For example various aspects of the invention may be implemented as specialized software executing in a general purpose computer system such as that shown in . The computer system may include a processor connected to one or more memory devices such as a disk drive memory or other device for storing data. Memory is typically used for storing programs and data during operation of the computer system . Components of computer system may be coupled by an interconnection mechanism which may include one or more busses e.g. between components that are integrated within a same machine and or a network e.g. between components that reside on separate discrete machines . The interconnection mechanism enables communications e.g. data instructions to be exchanged between system components of system . Computer system also includes one or more input devices for example a keyboard mouse trackball microphone touch screen and one or more output devices for example a printing device display screen speaker. In addition computer system may contain one or more interfaces not shown that connect computer system to a communication network in addition or as an alternative to the interconnection mechanism .

The storage system shown in greater detail in typically includes a computer readable and writeable nonvolatile recording medium in which signals are stored that define a program to be executed by the processor or information stored on or in the medium to be processed by the program. The medium may for example be a disk or flash memory. Typically in operation the processor causes data to be read from the nonvolatile recording medium into another memory that allows for faster access to the information by the processor than does the medium . This memory is typically a volatile random access memory such as a dynamic random access memory DRAM or static memory SRAM . It may be located in storage system as shown or in memory system not shown. The processor generally manipulates the data within the integrated circuit memory and then copies the data to the medium after processing is completed. A variety of mechanisms are known for managing data movement between the medium and the integrated circuit memory element and the invention is not limited thereto. The invention is not limited to a particular memory system or storage system .

The computer system may include specially programmed special purpose hardware for example an application specific integrated circuit ASIC . Aspects of the invention may be implemented in software hardware or firmware or any combination thereof. Further such methods acts systems system elements and components thereof may be implemented as part of the computer system described above or as an independent component.

Although computer system is shown by way of example as one type of computer system upon which various aspects of the invention may be practiced it should be appreciated that aspects of the invention are not limited to being implemented on the computer system as shown in . Various aspects of the invention may be practiced on one or more computers having a different architecture or components that that shown in .

Computer system may be a general purpose computer system that is programmable using a high level computer programming language. Computer system may be also implemented using specially programmed special purpose hardware. In computer system processor is typically a commercially available processor such as the well known Pentium class processor available from the Intel Corporation. Many other processors are available. Such a processor usually executes an operating system which may be for example the Windows 95 Windows 98 Windows NT Windows 2000 Windows ME or Windows XP operating systems available from the Microsoft Corporation MAC OS System X available from Apple Computer the Solaris Operating System available from Sun Microsystems or UNIX available from various sources. Many other operating systems may be used.

The processor and operating system together define a computer platform for which application programs in high level programming languages are written. It should be understood that the invention is not limited to a particular computer system platform processor operating system or network. Also it should be apparent to those skilled in the art that the present invention is not limited to a specific programming language or computer system. Further it should be appreciated that other appropriate programming languages and other appropriate computer systems could also be used.

One or more portions of the computer system may be distributed across one or more computer systems not shown coupled to a communications network. These computer systems also may be general purpose computer systems. For example various aspects of the invention may be distributed among one or more computer systems configured to provide a service e.g. servers to one or more client computers or to perform an overall task as part of a distributed system. For example various aspects of the invention may be performed on a client server system that includes components distributed among one or more server systems that perform various functions according to various embodiments of the invention. These components may be executable intermediate e.g. IL or interpreted e.g. Java code which communicate over a communication network e.g. the Internet using a communication protocol e.g. TCP IP .

It should be appreciated that the invention is not limited to executing on any particular system or group of systems. Also it should be appreciated that the invention is not limited to any particular distributed architecture network or communication protocol.

Various embodiments of the present invention may be programmed using an object oriented programming language such as SmallTalk Java C Ada or C C Sharp . Other object oriented programming languages may also be used. Alternatively functional scripting and or logical programming languages may be used. Various aspects of the invention may be implemented in a non programmed environment e.g. documents created in HTML XML or other format that when viewed in a window of a browser program render aspects of a graphical user interface GUI or perform other functions . Various aspects of the invention may be implemented as programmed or non programmed elements or any combination thereof.

Having now described some illustrative embodiments of the invention it should be apparent to those skilled in the art that the foregoing is merely illustrative and not limiting having been presented by way of example only. Numerous modifications and other illustrative embodiments are within the scope of one of ordinary skill in the art and are contemplated as falling within the scope of the invention. In particular although many of the examples presented herein involve specific combinations of method acts or system elements it should be understood that those acts and those elements may be combined in other ways to accomplish the same objectives. Acts elements and features discussed only in connection with one embodiment are not intended to be excluded from a similar role in other embodiments. Further for the one or more means plus function limitations recited in the following claims the means are not intended to be limited to the means disclosed herein for performing the recited function but are intended to cover in scope any means known now or later developed for performing the recited function.

Use of ordinal terms such as first second third etc. in the claims to modify a claim element does not by itself connote any priority precedence or order of one claim element over another or the temporal order in which acts of a method are performed but are used merely as labels to distinguish one claim element having a certain name from another element having a same name but for use of the ordinal term to distinguish the claim elements.

