---

title: Method of containing and at least partially remediating contaminants in soils, including sediments
abstract: In one application for containing and remediating contaminants in sediments, employing a geocomposite eliminates the need for a thick cap or removal and subsequent ex situ treatment of the sediment. A geocomposite with at least one layer of reactive material is placed over the area to be remediated. A layer of available surcharge materials such as sand, gravel, or riprap covers the geocomposite. The weight of the surcharge materials causes pore water to flow from the sediment through the reactive layer or layers. Contaminants may be trapped in this reactive layer or layers. A top or bottom layer, or both a top and bottom layer, may be provided to inhibit incursion from outside the sediment layer, while permitting appropriate flow direction of pore water into the reactive layer or layers.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07128498&OS=07128498&RS=07128498
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07128498
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050802
---
This application claims the benefit of prior co pending U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 283 291 Reactive Geocomposite For Remediating Contaminated Sediments by Sheahan et al. filed Apr. 11 2001 and is a division of prior co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 115 088 An Installation Incorporating a Reactive Layer for at Least Partially Remediating Contamination by Sheahan et al. filed Apr. 4 2002.

Under paragraph 1 a of Executive Order 10096 the conditions under which this invention was made entitle the Government of the United States as represented by the Secretary of the Army to an undivided interest in any patent granted thereon by the United States. This and related patents are available for licensing. Please contact Jeff Walaszek at 703 428 6724 or Phillip Stewart at 601 634 4113.

Conventional isolation or treatment of contaminated soils and sediments is by either capping or removal. Capping may use natural materials such as soils or gravel or geosynthetic layers or a combination of any of these.

Capping systems comprised of soil or gravel layers are relatively thick and prone to erosion and disturbance. This may cause mixing with the adjacent contaminated soil or sediment. In sub aqueous applications such as harbors or shipping channels thick caps may present obstructions to ships. The cap may be damaged by the turbulence caused by ship traffic as well as by direct contact. Additionally these thick caps are not designed to interact with any contaminant chemicals that may be in the pore fluid.

Contaminated sediment sub aqueous or otherwise may be removed for ex situ treatment simple off site storage or both. However sub aqueous sediment removal is expensive and can result in significant contaminant re suspension in the overlying water column during removal of the sediment.

In select embodiments of the present invention at least one chemically reactive layer is sandwiched between layers of geosynthetic material that may comprise multiple additional layers. The resultant composite is a barrier that may also treat contaminants e.g. contaminants in sediment. The reactive layer or layers constitutes an active clean up element that concentrates contaminants in a very thin zone neutralizes contaminants or does both. Simultaneously contaminated sediment is isolated from overlying water or the atmosphere by a structure comprising the sandwiched reactive layer or layers itself and a cover or surcharge layer. This inhibits erosion from movement of either moisture or air while also inhibiting re suspension of contaminants. Because the sandwiched structure is thin compared to conventional caps it is suited for use in sub aqueous applications such as shipping channels and harbors. Further select embodiments of this invention may be removed or rejuvenated to achieve further interaction with pore fluids containing dissolved contaminants or chemicals sorbed onto small particles.

In select embodiments of the present invention a geosynthetic structure or system is used for remediating contaminated sediments. Embodiments of the structure may include a top layer of geosynthetic material one or more middle layers of reactive material and a bottom layer of geosynthetic material. Depending on site conditions the top or bottom layer or both the top and bottom layers of geosynthetic material may be omitted and achieve the same functionality. The geosynthetic material may be selected from that commercially available i.e. commercial off the shelf COTS products and may be woven or non woven. Likewise the reactive material may be chosen from that commercially available including activated carbon zeolites particulate polymers granular forms of commercially available chemical adsorption materials activated carbon fabric commercially available in sheets and geosynthetic drainage net incorporating pores for holding granular reactive material and combinations of these.

In select embodiments of the present invention a method is provided for remediating contaminated sediments. When configurations used with embodiments of the present invention are employed to treat contaminants a layer of surcharge materials may be overlaid to facilitate flow of pore water from sediment through the configuration. Configurations of the present invention may be employed horizontally such as laying a geocomposite over sediments in a harbor or ship channel or vertically such as pressing the multi layered configuration into soft soil to capture horizontally flowing pore water.

Refer to . In select embodiments of the present invention methods are employed to inhibit dispersal of harmful environmentally mobile chemicals in areas likely to hold them such as sediments . While inhibiting movement select methods of the present invention may also chemically neutralize or physically immobilize one or more of these mobile chemicals.

Select embodiments of the present invention employ a reactive sandwich structure incorporating at least one reaction layer that may be an inner or middle layer. In one configuration the structure also comprises two layers of geotextiles one being a top layer and the other being a bottom layer . Conventional geotextiles may be employed. These generally are fabricated as synthetic sheets of material that may be woven or non woven. The reactive layer may comprise activated carbon zeolites particulate polymers and granular forms of available chemical adsorption materials. Commercially available products i.e. COTS products that may facilitate fabrication include activated carbon fabric available in sheets and geosynthetic drainage net incorporating pores for holding granular reactive material.

In one application the structure separates contaminated sediments from adjacent uncontaminated material . Pore fluid and some small solid particles not separately shown contained therein are induced to flow through the structure . One method of inducing flow of the pore fluid is by applying an overlying surcharge layer to the employed sandwiched geosynthetic configuration . The combination of the surcharge layer and the sandwiched geosynthetic configuration comprises the structure . The weight of the surcharge materials facilitates consolidation within the targeted sediment . Employed in a horizontal configuration as depicted in the bottom layer retards passage of at least some suspended particles so that pore fluid and dissolved chemicals enter the geocomposite structure s reactive layer or layers . Depending on the makeup of this bottom layer very fine solid particles may pass to the reactive layer . The reactive layer interacts with chemicals in the contaminated sediment that pass through the bottom layer the pore fluid itself within the structure or both. The top layer prevents overlying particles not separately shown from engaging the middle or reactive layer while allowing the pore fluid to pass completely through the structure into the overlying surcharge layer .

Referring again to in one configuration the fabricated material layers used in the structure may be fabricated in large sheets e.g. rolls of 30 m 100 ft in length or more by 3 4.6 m 10 15 ft in width. These sheets may be deployed on the surface of a sediment deposit . The deposit may be saturated or near saturated sub aqueous or terrestrial. After emplacement of the material layers a layer of surcharge materials such as riprap gravel or sand is placed on the material layers to facilitate consolidation of the sediment .

Subsequent consolidation of the sediment expulses pore fluid that contains targeted harmful chemicals or small particles upon which the chemicals may be sorbed. As the pore fluid flows through the geocomposite structure the reactive material in the reactive layer or layers interacts with the chemicals in the fluid . For example the reactive material may simply adsorb them. Alternatively it may also chemically neutralize them. This both isolates and concentrates the targeted chemicals within the reactive layer or layers. In addition this reactive layer or layers may retain fine particles on which chemicals may have sorbed.

Refer to . An embodiment of the present invention may also be employed as a structure sandwiching one or more reactive layers oriented vertically having an outer layer or layers and at least one middle reactive layer . This embodiment may be emplaced vertically by pressing it into the ground. A surcharge layer of material such as gravel sand or riprap may be emplaced above the soil adjacent to the vertically oriented sandwiched reactive layer and the consolidation of the sediment may occur both horizontally and vertically due to the weight of the surcharge layer . In a configuration installed vertically the structure now essentially the reactive layer may employ a sleeve surrounding the reactive layer thus forming a continuous outer layer for the structure much like a sack used to protect a mattress when moving. One or more layers of reactive material may be emplaced inside the sleeve i.e. the continuous outer layer or layers .

Although specific methods for employing configurations sandwiching geosynthetic material are discussed similar methods including those that may have only some of the steps used in the above described examples may be suitable for containment remediation or both using a method that falls within the ambit of a preferred embodiment of the present invention as provided in the claims herein.

