---

title: Providing meeting information from a meeting server to an email server to store in an email database
abstract: Provided are a method, system, and program for providing meeting information from a meeting server to an email server to store in an email database. A meeting database has information on scheduled meetings. A meeting server manages access to the meeting database. The meeting server calls an email server to provide information on meetings from the meeting database to an email database including email accounts and calendars of scheduled events for users. The email server manages access to the email database. The email server stores the provided information on the meetings in the email database in response to the call from the meeting server. The email server updates the calendar of scheduled events in the email database for one of the users to include information from the email database on at least one meeting.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08433753&OS=08433753&RS=08433753
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 08433753
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051215
---
The present invention relates to a method system and program for providing meeting information from a meeting server to an email server to store in an email database.

When scheduling a meeting with a group of users the organizer of the meeting may send an email to invitees or potential participants. The invitees may then respond via a reply email indicating whether or not they will attend the meeting. The email to the invitees may include controls to allow the invitee to indicate whether they will accept decline etc. When the invitee selects the control to accept or attend the meeting the scheduled meeting may be added to the user s calendar. The organizer may keep track of the attendees through the email program.

Notwithstanding there is a need in the art for improved techniques to organize meetings over a network and to enable users in the network to access information about scheduled meetings

Provided are a method system and program for providing meeting information from a meeting server to an email server to store in an email database. A meeting database has information on scheduled meetings. A meeting server manages access to the meeting database. The meeting server calls an email server to provide information on meetings from the meeting database to an email database including email accounts and calendars of scheduled events for users. The email server manages access to the email database. The email server stores the provided information on the meetings in the email database in response to the call from the meeting server. The email server updates the calendar of scheduled events in the email database for one of the users to include information from the email database on at least one meeting.

In a further embodiment the meeting server calls the email server to provide information on one meeting from the meeting database in response to creating information in the meeting database for the meeting.

In a further embodiment the information on the meeting provided to the email server includes message addresses of invitees to the meeting. The message address identifies an email account and associated calendar in the email database. The meeting server submits email invitations including information on one of the meetings to the message addresses of the invitees to the meeting. The email invitation includes a user selectable call that invokes the email server to schedule the meeting. The email server stores the received emails in the email accounts of the invitees in the email database. The email server receives invitee invocation via the user selectable call to schedule the meeting. The email server updates the calendar for the invitee to indicate the meeting as scheduled for the invitee in response to receiving the invitee invocation to schedule the meeting.

In a further embodiment the information on the meeting includes message addresses of invitees to the meeting that are directed to an email server maintaining the email accounts and calendars in the email database. The email server transmits a message to the user accounts of the invitees of the meeting in response to the call from the meeting server. The email server receives invocation from one of the invitees that received the message to schedule the meeting. The email server updates the calendar for the invitee to indicate the meeting as scheduled for the invitee in response to receiving the invocation to schedule the meeting.

In a further embodiment the message includes a user selectable call that when selected by the invitee invokes the email server to schedule the meeting.

In a further embodiment the meeting server receives an update to the information for one of the meetings in the meeting database. The meeting server calls the email server to provide the update for the meeting added to the meeting database to the email database to store in the email database. The email server updates the calendars of users whose calendars include information on the updated meeting to indicate the update to the information in response to the call by the meeting server.

In a further embodiment the email server transmits a message to the users whose calendars are scheduled with the updated meeting providing notification of the update to the calendar.

In a further embodiment the email server receives indication that the message was viewed by one user. The calendar of the user that viewed the message is updated with the update to the information for the meeting in response to receiving the indication that the message was viewed.

In a further embodiment the meeting database includes identifiers for meetings created in the meeting database. The meeting server creates identifiers for the information on the meetings stored in the email database in response to storing the information on the meetings in the email database. The email server provides for each of a plurality of meetings stored in the email database an association of one identifier in the meeting database and one identifier in the email database for one meeting.

In a further embodiment the meeting server calls the email server to provide an update to the information for one of the meetings in the meeting database including the identifier in the meeting database of the updated meeting. The email server determines from the associations the identifier in the email database associated with the received identifier of the updated message in the meeting database in response to the call from the email server to provide the update. The email server uses the determined identifier in the email database to update the information in the email database for the identified meeting with the received update.

In a further embodiment the information for the updated meeting in the email database indicates users whose calendars are scheduled with the updated meeting. The email server updates the calendars of the indicated users with the received update.

Certain of the components shown in the meeting server such as the meeting database and forms and may be stored in a storage device to which the meeting server is connected and loaded into a memory not shown of the meeting server for access by the meeting manager .

The computers . . . may comprise computing devices known in the art such as a server mainframe workstation personal computer hand held computer laptop telephony device network appliance etc. The meeting server may comprise a server class machine capable to process and service meeting related requests from multiple computers . . . . The network may comprise a Storage Area Network SAN Local Area Network LAN Intranet the Internet Wide Area Network WAN a wireless network peer to peer network etc. The meeting database may comprise a relational or other type of database system. The meeting database and other information used by the meeting manager may be stored in a storage system separate from the meeting server .

A meeting may comprise a scheduled event such as a technical presentation training session corporate meeting or presentation personal meeting etc. In certain embodiments the meeting is an event for which materials are to be presented and that may be recorded such that through the meeting server users may access the soft copies of the presentation materials as well as a recording that may be downloaded over the network such as a video or audio file recording of the presentation.

The forms and pages the meeting manager transmits to the user or organizer computers . . . to render in the user interface . . . may comprise a structured document page such as encoded in a hypertext markup language HTML Extended Markup Language XML etc. The meeting server and computers . . . may use a file transfer protocol such as the Hypertext Transport Protocol HTTP or other suitable file transfer protocols known in the art to transfer electronic pages and entry forms.

The meeting manager may transmit at block an electronic invitation message to the message addresses of the invitees providing information enabling the invitees to transmit information to the meeting server to register as an attendee and record the registered user as an attendee in the meeting database information . The electronic invitation message may comprise an email sent to the email message address for the attendee that includes a graphical control such as a hypertext link that when selected transmits a message to the meeting server to add the invitee as an attendee to the attendees information . In further embodiments the message sent to the invitees may include a function to update an electronic calendar of the invitee to include a scheduled event for the meeting. The meeting manager may further generate at block a meeting page of information on the meeting added to the database accessible at a network address URL . The URL of the meeting page is also added as field to the meeting database information .

In certain embodiments the user may obtain search results including meetings in which the user doing the search is not an invitee and in which the user is an indicated invitee. For those meetings indicated in the search results for which the user was not designated as an invitee by the organizer the user may select to be added as an invitee to the meeting.

In certain embodiments the user may perform from a received search results form the operations of adding themselves as attendees of one or more meetings and having their electronic calendar s updated with information on meetings for which they have registered through the search results form in the manner described below. Thus by selecting the register button users may perform in a single click or multiple clicks the operations of adding themselves as an attendee and having their calendar updated with information on the event for which they registered without having to perform any additional intervening operations.

In further embodiments the meeting manager may transmit an electronic form to the message address of one of the invitees to enable attendees to remove themselves as an attendee for the meeting in the database .

In still further embodiments the meeting manager may transmit a form to the organizer computer . . . to enable the organizer to update information in the database for the meeting such as the information . After the information for the meeting in the meeting database is updated the meeting manager may generate and transmit electronic messages to the message addresses of the invitees and or attendees for the meeting indicating the updated information.

The email database may comprise the email database updated with information on a meeting in the meeting database in response to a registration request according to the operations described in such as in response to a registration request initiated by selection of the register button in .

In one embodiment the meeting and email databases may be implemented with different database technologies such as databases from different vendors. Further the meeting server and email server may be implemented in different application environments. For instance the meeting server may be implemented in application programming interfaces APIs developed and implementing using the Java 2 Platform Enterprise Edition J2EE programming model and platform C C or other suitable application programming languages. The email server may be implemented in APIs in another application model such as a Java or other syntax specific to the email server environment which may differ from the programming model used to implement the meeting server . The email server may comprise an integrated email and calendaring program such as Lotus Notes Microsoft Exchange etc. Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation and Lotus Notes is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corp. . The email server may also be capable of handling electronic messages in different formats such as including a messenger server component to handle instant messages. In one embodiment the meeting server APIs cannot directly interact with the email database to provide meeting information from the meeting database to store in the email database . In such case the meeting server must call email server APIs to provide meeting information to the email database . In certain embodiments the meeting server may call the email server APIs to directly provide meeting information to store as meeting information in the email database and to user calendars in the email database . In an alternative embodiment the meeting and email database may be implemented using a same database product or within the same database but in different tables in the database.

In an embodiment where the meeting system and email system are operating in a same host or runtime environment then the meeting server may invoke the email server APIs by direct system calls. In additional embodiments where the meeting server and email server execute on different hosts or within different runtime environments in the same host then the meeting server may use a remote procedure call to invoke the email server APIs such as a Java Remote Method Invocation RMI .

The called email server API calls database commands to store at block the provided information on the meeting in the email database using an identifier of the meeting in the email database . For instance the called email server API may create a new entry in the email database having an identifier to store the provided meeting information. The email server further adds at block to the meeting ID map an association of the identifier in the meetings database and the identifier in the email database of the new meeting. As discussed the meeting information includes information on the invitees . The email server may further transmit at block a message to the user accounts of the invitees of the meeting. Thus the call from the meeting server invokes a series of operations by the email server to update the email database and provide a message to invitees notifying them of the meeting. In an alternative embodiment the meeting server may send emails to the invitees notifying them of the event. In one embodiment the meeting server through the email server API calls may transmit information on meetings directly to the email of user accounts without having to transmit the information in a message over a network through which emails are normally transmitted. In an additional embodiment the meeting server and email server may communicate over an internal network.

In response to receiving at block invocation from one of the invitees that received the message to schedule the meeting i.e. add the invitee as an attendee the email server updates at block the calendar for the invitee generating the invocation to indicate the meeting as scheduled. In one embodiment the message sent to the user account of the invitees may comprise an email message or an event message stored in an event inbox of the user account . Further in the embodiment of the email server provides the message notifying the invitee of the meeting without requiring additional calls by the meeting server to send the notification message.

The notification message may include a user selectable command such as a graphical button that invokes the email server to add information on the meeting to the invitee s calendar as a scheduled or accepted event. Upon invoking the email server from the message the user may be added as an attendee to the meeting information for the meeting. The meeting server may be notified by the email server when the user becomes an attendee so the meeting database may update the attendees information for the meeting to indicate the invoking invitee as an attendee.

In an additional embodiment the meeting server may call the email server to update a user s calendar at block with information on one or meetings for which the user registers through a search results form by selecting the register button . Thus the meeting server may perform the operation at block in by calling an email server API to cause the email server to add information on a selected one or more registered meetings which may have been registered through the search results form to the user s calendar

In response to the call the email server determines at block from the associations in the meeting ID map the identifier in the email database associated with the received identifier of the updated message in the meetings database . The email server uses at block the determined identifier in the email database to update the information in the email database for the identified meeting with the received update. The email server uses at block the determined identifier in the email database to determine users having the updated meeting scheduled in their calendar which may comprise those users indicated as attendees in the attendees information for the updated meeting in the email database . The attendees information in the email database may be accessed using the determined identifier for the updated meeting in the email database .

The email server transmits at block a message to the determined users i.e. the users whose calendars are scheduled with the updated meeting providing notification of the update to the meeting information. In one embodiment the email server may receive at block indication that the update notification message was opened read by a user. In response to receiving this indication that the notification message was opened the email server may in response automatically update at block the calendar of the user indicated as opening the update notification with the update information on the meeting. For instance the email server may update the meeting information in the scheduled meeting page in the calendar . In an alternative embodiment the email server may automatically update the calendar with the updated meeting information of attendee users without waiting for acknowledgment that the user attendee opened the notification message. In such case the notification indicates updates to the calendar that have already occurred.

Described embodiments provide techniques for a meeting server to provide information on a meeting to an email server to provide to invitees of the meeting and store in an email database and in the calendar of invitees selecting to accept the scheduled meeting.

The described operations may be implemented as a method apparatus or article of manufacture using standard programming and or engineering techniques to produce software firmware hardware or any combination thereof. The described operations may be implemented as code maintained in a computer readable medium where a processor may read and execute the code from the computer readable medium. A computer readable medium may comprise media such as magnetic storage medium e.g. hard disk drives floppy disks tape etc. optical storage CD ROMs DVDs optical disks etc. volatile and non volatile memory devices e.g. EEPROMs ROMs PROMs RAMs DRAMs SRAMs Flash Memory firmware programmable logic etc. etc. The code implementing the described operations may further be implemented in hardware logic e.g. an integrated circuit chip Programmable Gate Array PGA Application Specific Integrated Circuit ASIC etc. . Still further the code implementing the described operations may be implemented in transmission signals where transmission signals may propagate through space or through a transmission media such as an optical fiber copper wire etc. The transmission signals in which the code or logic is encoded may further comprise a wireless signal satellite transmission radio waves infrared signals Bluetooth etc. The transmission signals in which the code or logic is encoded is capable of being transmitted by a transmitting station and received by a receiving station where the code or logic encoded in the transmission signal may be decoded and stored in hardware or a computer readable medium at the receiving and transmitting stations or devices. An article of manufacture comprises computer readable medium hardware logic and or transmission signals in which code may be implemented. A device in which the code implementing the described embodiments of operations is encoded may comprise a computer readable medium or hardware logic. Of course those skilled in the art will recognize that many modifications may be made to this configuration without departing from the scope of the present invention and that the article of manufacture may comprise suitable information bearing medium known in the art.

The terms an embodiment embodiment embodiments the embodiment the embodiments one or more embodiments some embodiments and one embodiment mean one or more but not all embodiments of the present invention s unless expressly specified otherwise.

The terms including comprising having and variations thereof mean including but not limited to unless expressly specified otherwise.

The enumerated listing of items does not imply that any or all of the items are mutually exclusive unless expressly specified otherwise.

Devices that are in communication with each other need not be in continuous communication with each other unless expressly specified otherwise. In addition devices that are in communication with each other may communicate directly or indirectly through one or more intermediaries.

A description of an embodiment with several components in communication with each other does not imply that all such components are required. On the contrary a variety of optional components are described to illustrate the wide variety of possible embodiments of the present invention.

Further although process steps method steps algorithms or the like may be described in a sequential order such processes methods and algorithms may be configured to work in alternate orders. In other words any sequence or order of steps that may be described does not necessarily indicate a requirement that the steps be performed in that order. The steps of processes described herein may be performed in any order practical. Further some steps may be performed simultaneously.

When a single device or article is described herein it will be readily apparent that more than one device article whether or not they cooperate may be used in place of a single device article. Similarly where more than one device or article is described herein whether or not they cooperate it will be readily apparent that a single device article may be used in place of the more than one device or article or a different number of devices articles may be used instead of the shown number of devices or programs. The functionality and or the features of a device may be alternatively embodied by one or more other devices which are not explicitly described as having such functionality features. Thus other embodiments of the present invention need not include the device itself.

The illustrated operations of and show certain events occurring in a certain order. In alternative embodiments certain operations may be performed in a different order modified or removed. Moreover steps may be added to the above described logic and still conform to the described embodiments. Further operations described herein may occur sequentially or certain operations may be processed in parallel. Yet further operations may be performed by a single processing unit or by distributed processing units.

The foregoing description of various embodiments of the invention has been presented for the purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed. Many modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teaching. It is intended that the scope of the invention be limited not by this detailed description but rather by the claims appended hereto. The above specification examples and data provide a complete description of the manufacture and use of the composition of the invention. Since many embodiments of the invention can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention the invention resides in the claims hereinafter appended.

