---

title: Operationally adaptable chemical-biological mask
abstract: A chemical-biological protective mask having a weight distribution that imparts a balanced center-of-gravity to the wearer of the mask, and is adaptable for different operational requirements by adjusting or altering the air flow through the mask. The protective mask includes a head covering to fully cover the wearer's head including a hood, a face piece having a visor contoured to the wearer's face, ducting within the mask connected to a filtering system mounted at the rear of the head covering and a purge airflow through the hood. Additional side or front mounted filters can be added to provide either parallel or series filtration with the rear mounted filters. A blower system may also be used to impart an airflow into the mask and improve breathing resistance.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07028688&OS=07028688&RS=07028688
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07028688
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050405
---
This present invention relates to chemical biological protective equipment. More particularly the present invention relates to improved gas masks for protection from chemical biological hazards wherein said masks can be tailored or adapted for different operational capabilities.

Problematic with current chemical and or biological protective masks is the lack of comfort and balance. Previously chemical and or biological combat masks were generally fitted with face mounted filters for providing filtered air to the mask face piece. Such combat mask filtration systems are capable of filtering particulate gas and vapor hazards. In addition some commercial masks are designed to permit the incorporation of additional face mounted filters by stacking the filters in series i.e. so that air flow passes through each filter before reaching the user as required based on the hazard. Typically these masks use canisters which may be connected to one another in series. However these face mounted filters adversely affect the center of gravity of the mask reduce downward field of view and interfere with weapon and display sights. Furthermore stacking face mounted filters in series further exacerbates these problems and also adds breathing resistance to the wearer. Still other masks include the addition of a face mounted blower to assist with breathing resistance. However such face mounted blowers also exacerbate the aforementioned problems. In contrast chemical biological aircrew and combat vehicle masks generally have body mounted filters for providing air to the mask. As with the masks referred to above additional body mounted filters may be incorporated by stacking the filters in series or a body mounted blower may be added. However these body mounted filters require a hose assembly that adds bulk restricts movement and interferes with body mounted systems. Stacking filters with these body mounted blowers also further exacerbates these problems. For example stacking filters in series adds breathing resistance to the wearer which has already been increased with the addition of a hose assembly.

Thus there is a need for improved chemical biological protective masks which can provide a balanced center of gravity greater field of view and comfort and decreased breathing resistance and stress on the wearer. The present invention addresses these and other needs.

The present invention provides a chemical biological protective mask having a head covering effective for fully covering the wearer s head wherein the aft top section of the head covering comprises a hood and the front section of said head covering comprises a face piece having at least one visor and wherein said hood and said face piece are integrally connected an air supply port positioned at the rear of the head covering or hood for permitting air supply into the head covering one or more filters mounted in combination with the rear mounted air supply port to cleanse air flowing into the head covering and ducting from the rear mounted air supply port to the face piece conductively adjacent to the head covering for transfer of the filtered air into the face piece. In a most preferred embodiment one or more additional filters are mounted within the side of the head covering. Advantageously the present invention may also include blowers or other like systems to aid in the flow of ambient air through the filters and into the head covering and face piece.

The present invention increases the comfort balance and visual field of view of the wearer over known protective masks by shifting the center of gravity from the front of the protective mask to a point closer to the center of the wearer s head and over the shoulders.

The present invention provides improvements in the art of chemical biological protective masks. In particular the chemical biological protective mask of the present invention comprises a mask having improved head comfort and center of gravity while maintaining chemical biological protection for the wearer also referred to herein as the user and reducing breathing resistance by providing alternative filtered airflow patterns.

As seen in the chemical biological protective mask includes a head covering that covers the wearer s head with the head covering having a hood section within the aft top section of the head covering . The head covering further includes a face piece having a visor integrated therein to provide a visual field of view to the wearer out of the head covering . Breathing by the wearer is facilitated by a filter incorporated within the head covering . With the filter mounted in the rear of the head covering the chemical biological mask of the present invention effectively improves the center of gravity on the wearer s head by changing the weight distribution within the head covering such that the center of gravity is centered over the shoulders of the wearer. After air enters the filter located at the back of the hood section the air passes to the wearer through a ducting system not shown in to the face piece the air enters the face piece through a duct in the face seal passes over the visor and is drawn into the nose cup through nose cup inlet valve not shown in and exhaled air is then passed through exhalation valve in the front of the mask or the exhaled air is directed back into the hood . Exhalation air valve may comprise a slide valve which can be closed such that exhaled air is directed into the hood through purge valve rather than being directly exhaled to ambient. This redirection of exhaled air to the hood may be done as required in order to over pressurize the hood and provide improved protection. Exhalation valve may comprise any type of valve which can be manually closed by the wearer to redirect exhaled air to the hood . Such valves may comprise louvered slide valves iris valves or a sliding gate valve among others.

In one preferred embodiment where no filters are located at the front of the head covering the elimination of filters from the front of the head covering permits the visor part of the head covering to remain unobstructed by any forward filters. As such the visor provides an improved and substantial visual field of view for the wearer. Additionally the removal of the forward filters allow for the incorporation of an expanded visor when desired to further expand the field of view. This field of view may include views in downward or lateral directions or combinations of these directions. A substantial visual field of view includes views to the wearer without the interference of a filter located in the front part of the head covering . As such views may be increased significantly over views hindered by such forward filter configurations for example improving the viewing area through the visor with increases of 10 to 20 or more. The visor may be appropriately configured for a given purpose for example with a configuration of a contoured shape with a contour related to the wearer s facial contours preferred. A contoured configuration of the visor allows for the lens portion of the visor to be positioned closer to the wearer s eyes while eliminating the normally obstructed field of view caused when individual lenses are clamped or bonded into a mask. Additionally the visor may be specifically contoured for particular uses. Visor contours may accommodate eye glasses special operational equipment such as navigational or gun sights and the like and other such uses that are determinable by those skilled in the art in light of the present disclosure.

The mask system preferably contains a face seal for sealing the face piece and integral visor to the face of the wearer and thereby protecting the face and eyes of the wearer. A standard strap suspension system attached to said face piece may be used to secure the face seal to the face of the wearer. Assembly of the visor to the face piece and face seal can be readily accomplished as the assembly interface area is generally away from the lens of the visor . Possible assembly techniques for attaching the visor to the seal include bonding insert casting co casting insert molding co molding and or other similar attaching techniques well known to those of ordinary skill in the art and combinations thereof. Visor construction materials include appropriate transparent materials that isolate the wearer from outside elements with durability to adverse environments in which the mask is used such as for example polycarbonate polyurethane and the like. Face seal construction materials include compositions such as silicone and thermoplastic elastomers and other appropriate elastomeric or rubber materials. Representative transparent materials for visor include for example without limitation Sim 2058 optical polyurethane manufactured by Simula Technologies of Phoenix Ariz. Representative face seal materials include for example without limitation Rhodorsil 1556 manufactured by Rhodia Silicone of Cranbury N.J. Representative bonding adhesives for attaching visor to face seal include for example without limitation NuSil Med I 4013 heat cure silicone adhesive manufactured by NuSil Silicone of Carpinteria Calif.

Exhalation valve preferably located within a nose cup is used to exhaust air from the interior of the head covering to the ambient outside environment. On the other hand air directed into the hood is used to over pressurize the hood and after doing so ultimately leaks to ambient. As shown in in most embodiments nose cup includes an inlet valve through which air is drawn into the nose cup from the face piece . In addition to the rear filter side filters may be included within the present invention rear filter and side filter are collectively referred to herein as filters .

Filters which are integrated into hood are preferably designed to provide low breathing resistance. One particularly desirable filter media includes a combination of carbon loaded composite media for vapor and gas filtration and electrostatic media for particulate filtration. As such the sorbent layers used for vapor and gas filtration of the filters may be made from a carbon loaded composite media. Representative composite media for carbon loading includes for example without limitation the composite media manufactured by KX Industries under the tradename PLEKX. Representative carbon loading materials include for example without limitation ground carbon manufactured by Calgon under the tradename ASZM TEDA carbon. This combination of carbon and composite media offers excellent sorbent filtration and low pressure drop characteristics. Preferably the media is loaded to at least 1000 grams mof carbon and layered to provide the needed operational chemical protection such as functioning within set safety standards. Use of four 4 layers is preferred for the redundant protection that is afforded to the wearer. Carbon mesh sizes can be varied to improve filter capacity or to reduce breathing resistance. The filter surface area for the mask of the present invention may comprise appropriate surface area for effective filtration of contaminants with typical surface areas of the filters ranging from about 50 cmto about 500 cm more preferably from about 100 cmto about 350 cm still more preferably from about 150 cmto about 300 cm and most preferably from about 200 cmto about 250 cm.

In addition the filters include particulate layers made from an electrostatic media. Particulate filtration media are included as an additional layer along with the carbon loaded web structure. Representative electrostatic media include for example without limitation Advanced Electret Media manufactured by 3M of Minneapolis Minn. This material offers excellent aerosol and particulate filtration and very low pressure drop characteristics. Preferably the electrostatic media is optimized to provide near HEPA performance as determinable by one skilled in the art such as at a depth of approximately 0.1 inches. As seen in the filter cut away shown in layering the sorbent carbon structure and the particulate media produces one such desirable filter assembly. shows the carbon composite layered with particular media on both the outside and inside of the filter .

Additional features may be incorporated into the mask of the present invention such as front filters or low profile contoured filters on the side and or back of the mask . Although placement of front and or side filters on the mask or additional filters to the back adds additional bulk to the mask it also provides a significant increase in filtering surface area. Increases in surface area over the original filter system may be doubled or more. With this extension of the original filter surface area additional filter capacity is available or thinner filters and may be used in one or more of the filter locations e.g. the front and back or side and back locations. In addition using the additional contoured filters breathing resistance into the mask may be further reduced to nearly half the resistance of a mask using only the rear mounted filters . Optionally the separate front and or side filters may be used as primary or secondary filters in combination with the back filters i.e. they may be used in parallel or series airflow patterns with the rear filter.

In a preferred embodiment the present invention includes the head covering with only rear mounted filters as shown in . The use of the rear mounted filters greatly improves the stability of the head covering for the wearer by creating a center of gravity which is centered over the shoulders of the wearer. The filters are used to cleanse air drawn or forced into the head covering which is then directed to the face piece for respiration. In addition to the filters mounted at the rear of the head covering as shown in and additional side filters such as those shown in and other filters may be mounted at other positions on the head covering such as the front of the head covering . Preferably the filters are detachably inserted into openings in the head covering by snap fit or other means and with the placement of the filters therein protect the interior environment of the head covering from the exterior environment. Alternatively more permanent edge sealing can be accomplished either with a silicone adhesive sealant or a thermoplastic edge seal adhesive. In either set of rear and side filters a plurality of filters elements may be used for a given entry point into the head covering . Multiple filters are desirable to provide redundant protection against single or multiple chemical biological threats or may be used to facilitate the replacement of used filters. The plurality of filters may be incorporated into the mask such that airflow through the filters is in parallel in series or a combination thereof.

Various air flow configurations within the mask provide operational flexibility to the present invention with one or more air flow configurations being possible for a given mask of the present invention. A combination of the features may also be incorporated into a single mask . For example in addition to the rear mounted filters the mask may include either or both front and or side filters for extra capacity and different airflow configurations may be used through the mask . In addition a small fan or motor blower may be used to force air into mask through the rear filters thereby greatly reducing breathing resistance. As previously discussed added features generally incorporate additional bulk to one portion of the mask but provide advantages such as additional filter capacity or protection in the mask .

As seen in airflow can be conducted directly to the face piece or to the hood as needed to provide cooling and pressurization to the hood . Ducting within the head covering preferably provides a conduit for airflow through the interior of the head covering . As shown in a conformal ducting system that transits across the top of the head covering and includes a duct through face seal is preferably used to connect the interior of the face piece and visor to the rear mounted filter . Although over the head ducting as seen in is preferred alternative embodiments of ducting are available such as having the ducting passing under the ears or next to the chin of the wearer. Ducting may be aligned and or attached to the inside or outside of the head covering or be structurally within the head covering material. Referring to airflow may be drawn through the rear mounted filter into the mask face piece and is then drawn into the nose cup through inlet valve and discharged through air exhalation valves in the nose cup . This inhalation airflow pattern aids in the defogging of the visor . Exhaled air can be directed through the exhalation outlet valve to the outside environment or optionally directed into the hood as overpressure to aid in purging the hood assembly. Exhalation valve preferably comprises a louvered sliding valve such that the wearer can close the exhalation valve and force exhaled air through purge valve into the hood shown as .

In the airflow configuration represented in airflow is drawn concurrently i.e. in parallel through the rear mounted filters and side mounted filters into the mask face piece . From the face piece the air is then drawn into nose cup through inlet valve and discharged through exhalation air valve in the nose cup . In this configuration ducting directly connects side filters to face piece for airflow. The addition of the secondary filters in parallel with the primary rear mounted filters both enhances the filtration capacity of the mask and reduces the breathing resistance due to the added surface area. Similar to the configuration shown in exhaled air can be directed through an outlet valve to the outside environment or optionally directed into the hood as overpressure to aid in purging the hood by closing valve and directing air through purge valve .

In the airflow pattern shown in airflow is drawn through rear mounted filters that are in series with side mounted filters and then into the mask face piece . Addition of the secondary filters in series enhances the filtration capacity of the mask but also increases the breathing resistance due to the added filter bed area. This addition of the secondary filters in series provides a stacking effect that is particularly useful for environments having multiple types of toxic substances such as toxic industrial chemicals. In the configuration shown in stacking is possible without adversely affecting the center of gravity of the mask since the combined filter weight is distributed at the rear and side of the mask . Airflow can be forced directly to the face piece and then drawn into nose cup through inlet valve and exhaled from nose cup through outlet valve or redirected to the hood through purge valve by closing valve as needed to provide cooling and pressurization for the hood . This approach provides an additional hood purging effect within the mask to enhance protection to the wearer from contaminants.

As further seen in the airflow configuration in airflow is pushed through the rear mounted filters by a small head mounted fan or blower through ducting and into the mask face piece . Air is then drawn into nose cup through inlet valve and discharged through air exhalation valve in the nose cup also using the small fan or blower system . The addition of the small fan or blower provides some overpressure to the face piece to improve protection and reduce the breathing resistance. The high surface area and low resistance of the rear mounted filters allows for the use of a fairly small blower unit . Representative blowers include for example without limitation the Micronel C301 fan manufactured by Micronel U.S. of Vista Calif. Airflow provided by the blower should be sufficient for pressurization of the mask and or cooling to the wearer with representative airflow being from about 0.5 CFM to about 5 CFM including a preferred airflow of from about 1 CFM to about 2 CFM. As shown in previous embodiments exhalation valve may be closed to force exhaled air through purge valve and provide a purge and overpressure airflow to hood .

In airflow is pushed through the rear mounted filters into the mask face piece using a small head mounted fan or blower system while airflow is also drawn through the side mounted filters and ducted directly to face piece . The air in the face piece can then be drawn into the nose cup through inlet valve . In this configuration airflow can be balanced to provide enhanced protection and filtration capacity as well as reduced breathing resistance. Here again as shown in previous embodiments exhalation valve may be closed to force exhaled air in the nose cup out through purge valve and provide a purge and overpressure airflow to hood .

Another alternative embodiment as shown in uses an airflow pattern that provides higher protection performance. After the airflow is pushed through the rear mounted filters into the mask face piece using a small head mounted blower system the airflow bypasses the nose cup and is purged directly into the hood using a secondary valve . In this embodiment no nose cup inlet valve is required. In airflow for breathing is drawn through the side mounted filters only and is directed directly into nose cup . Although filter capacity is not increased in this configuration protection is significantly improved by purging both the face piece and hood . A diverter may be used to redirect the airflow from the blower within the head covering such as redirecting the airflow between the face piece and the hood of the head covering .

The airflow pattern shown in shows airflow drawn through the side filters and then the rear mounted filters in series then into the mask face piece using a small head mounted blower system . Air can then be drawn into the nose cup through inlet valve . Here again exhaled air can be directed through an outlet valve to the outside environment or optionally directed into the hood through purge valve as overpressure to aid in purging the hood by closing outlet valve .

Alternative configurations allow for the incorporation of a head mounted blower and or additional front mounted filters. This provides the wearer with options to tailor the protection and filter capacity to suit the mission. It is envisioned that the wearer could engage the filters collectively or as a primary and secondary filter option. It is also envisioned that the wearer could redirect blown air directly to the face piece or to the hood for additional cooling and protection. Unlike previously known mask systems the present invention may be effectively adapted to utilize multiple filter configurations.

The chemical biological protective mask of the present invention provides a balanced system for dealing with contamination through improved center of gravity forces imparted onto the wearer that occurs with the adjustment of the weight distribution within the mask . The present invention provides the wearer of protective equipment an expanded visual field of view lower breathing resistance improved protection and improved compatibility. Because much of the facial bulk is removed the lens or visor system can be expanded to improve visual field of view. Compatibility with external sighting systems and rifle firing is improved since the filters have been moved from the front of the mask. A larger filter surface area provides for lower breathing resistance and the potential for higher filter capacity. Protection is also improved by removing the weight of the filters from the face which minimizes torque of the face piece and allows for use of a softer seal material. Finally alternative airflow patterns allow the mask to be tailored for particular applications and the mask provides the ability for the user to modify the airflow as required. For example the mask can be adjusted so that exhaled air is directed to the hood for over pressurization rather than being exhaled to the outside environment.

The foregoing summary description and examples of the present invention are not intended to be limiting but are only exemplary of the inventive features which are defined in the claims. Alternative materials and configurations to those described herein for the present invention may be used.

