---

title: High-blast explosive compositions containing particulate metal
abstract: High performance aluminized explosive compositions for high performance, high blast, low sensitivity explosive applications are disclosed. The compositions include Cl-20, HMX, RDX, or another material as the explosive ingredient, a binder system of cellulose acetate butyrate and bis-dinitropropyl acetyl and bis-dinitropropyl formal, and aluminum. The explosive is preferably pressable and or/mixable to permit formation into grains suitable for ordnance and similar applications including grenades, warheads, landmines, demolition, etc. The aluminum fully participates in the detonation of said explosive, manifesting its energy into fully useable metal pushing energy suitable for shaped charges, explosively formed penetrators, fragmentation warheads, enhanced blast warheads, multipurpose warheads, and the like. The aluminum is substantially reacted at two volume expansions of the expanding gas, and fully reacted prior to seven volume expansions of the expanding gas.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08168016&OS=08168016&RS=08168016
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 08168016
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050407
---
This Application claims benefit under 35 USC 199 e of Provisional Application No. 60 521 350 filed Apr. 7 2004 the entire file wrapper contents of which provisional application are herein incorporated by reference as though fully set forth at length.

The invention described herein may be made used or licensed by or for the United States Government for Government purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore.

The present invention relates to high blast explosive compositions containing a particulate metal. In particular the present invention relates to explosives containing a metal such as aluminum wherein the metal fully participates in the detonation of said explosive fully manifesting the energy into fully useable metal pushing energy suitable for shaped charges explosively formed penetrators fragmentation warheads enhanced blast warheads multipurpose warheads and the like.

Explosive molding powders are known in the art and are used in various types of ordnance such as grenades land mines missile warheads and demolition explosives. The explosive molding powder is castable extrudable or pressable into a desired shape for use in the ordnance. Typically metals such as Al Mg B are added to the explosive to increase blast energy and total energy.

One problem with adding aluminum or other metals to explosive molding powders is that although total energy increases most of the energy derived from the added metal is typically wasted as thermal energy. Relative to the time domain of the energy released from the typical energetic filler such as a nitramine like RDX HMX CL 20 or other organic energetic compounds such as PETN TATB etc. the energy from the metal is released later. Therefore addition of aluminum or other metals is not practical for applications requiring very high metal pushing acceleration performance such as a shaped charge explosively formed penetrator or high performing fragmentation warhead.

Recently there has been interest in understanding the role of fine less than 10 microns and ultra fine nanometric aluminum and other metals in high explosives. It has been theorized by many that very fine particles of aluminum mainly nanometric aluminum or other metals may react in the relevant time domain of the detonation reaction and contribute substantially to the metal pushing performance property of the explosive. However although under investigation by the energetic materials community this effect has not been reported or reduced to practice.

It is therefore desirable to demonstrate and provide an aluminized explosive where the aluminum fully reacts in the early time of detonation and substantially contributes to the metal pushing energy of the explosive formulation. This would allow for a higher performance explosive suitable for use in shaped charge and EFP warheads multimode warheads multipurpose warheads fragmentation warheads and other applications desiring high performance and or high blast. A warhead could be designed that takes advantage of both the extra metal pushing energy and blast energy. Furthermore having less explosive filler in the formulation may improve impact thermal and shock sensitivity properties with improved performance. This would be a significant contribution since these properties are usually diametrically opposed.

Explosive molding powders are known in the art and are used in various types of ordnance such as grenades land mines missile warheads and demolition explosives. The explosive molding powder is castable extrudable or pressable into a desired shape for use in the ordnance. Typically metals such as Al Mg B are added to the explosive to increase blast energy and total energy.

One problem with adding aluminum or other metals to explosive molding powders is that although total energy increases most of the energy derived from the added metal is typically wasted as thermal energy. Relative to the time domain of the energy released from the typical energetic filler such as a nitramine like RDX HMX CL 20 or other organic energetic compounds such as PETN TATB etc. the energy from the metal is released later. Therefore addition of aluminum or other metals is not practical for applications requiring very high metal pushing acceleration performance such as a shaped charge explosively formed penetrator or high performing fragmentation warhead.

Recently there has been interest in understanding the role of fine less than 10 microns and ultra fine nanometric aluminum and other metals in high explosives. It has been theorized by many that very fine particles of aluminum mainly nanometric aluminum or other metals may react in the relevant time domain of the detonation reaction and contribute substantially to the metal pushing performance property of the explosive. However although under investigation by the energetic materials community this effect has not been reported or reduced to practice.

It is therefore desirable to demonstrate and provide an aluminized explosive where the aluminum fully reacts in the early time of detonation and substantially contributes to the metal pushing energy of the explosive formulation. This would allow for a higher performance explosive suitable for use in shaped charge and EFP warheads multimode warheads multipurpose warheads fragmentation warheads and other applications desiring high performance and or high blast. A warhead could be designed that takes advantage of both the extra metal pushing energy and blast energy. Furthermore having less explosive filler in the formulation may improve impact thermal and shock sensitivity properties with improved performance. This would be a significant contribution since these properties are usually diametrically opposed.

It is therefore an object of this invention to provide an explosive formulation that addresses the aforementioned problems associated with the related art and realizes the advancement expressed above.

The primary object of the invention is to provide an aluminized explosive formulation whereby the aluminum reacts in the early time of the detonation thereby contributing to the explosive formulations ability to drive metal or other materials.

In accordance with the principles of this invention these and other objects are attained by providing an explosive formulation prepared from polymers and plasticizers combined with high performance explosives comprising CL 20 HMX and RDX and aluminum. Generally this formulation includes about 60 80 explosive filler 10 30 metals and the balance being the binder system. The binder system comprises at least one binder preferably cellulose acetate butyrate CAB at least one plasticizer preferably bis dinitropropyl acetal bis dinitropropyl formal BDNPA F . The metals comprise at least one metal preferably aluminum. The aluminum may be micron size or nanometric size aluminum.

This invention also relates to articles comprising the above discussed formulations. The formulation is preferably sufficiently pressable castable or extrudable to permit it to be formed into grains or billets for example suitable for ordnance and similar applications. The principles of the present invention outlined above are applicable to a variety of explosive articles but have particular applicability to pressed or injection loaded ordnances such as grenades land mines missile warheads and demolition explosives.

These and other objects features and advantages of the present invention will become apparent from the accompanying drawing and following detailed description which illustrate and explain by way of example the principles of the present invention.

The other objects features and advantages of the present invention will become more apparent in light of the following detailed description of the preferred embodiment thereof.

According to the present invention there is provided a high blast explosive composition containing a particulate metal and wherein said particulate metal fully reacts in the early detonation stage prior to seven volume expansions of the explosive composition.

According to another embodiment of the present invention there is provided a high blast explosive composition containing a particulate metal and wherein said particulate metal fully reacts in the early detonation stage prior to seven volume expansions of the explosive composition and comprising 

Explosive formulations are disclosed for demonstrating reaction of micron size aluminum in the early time detonation zone of the explosive formulation thereby contributing substantially to the ability of the explosive formulation to drive metal and other materials. This particular performance parameter is widely known in the art as the Gurney Energy and generally accepted method used to obtain this particular measurement of performance is commonly referred to as the Cylinder Expansion Test.

The present invention is directed to high energy explosive formulations containing CL 20 HMX RDX HNS TATB PETN other nitramines nitrate esters nitrated aromaticsor mixtures thereof. The formulation of this invention may include about 50 90 explosive filler more preferably 64 77 CL 20 HMX or RDX.

The invention formulation further includes a binder system that makes the formulation less sensitive to external stimuli. The binder system may be selected from the group consisting of cellulose acetate butyrate CAB a fluoroelastomer ethyl vinyl acetate polyisobutylene polymer nylon a thermoplastic polyester elastomer a polyacrylate elastomer a thermoplastic polyurethane a polyvinyl chloride and a polyether block amide. The lacquer system may optionally comprise a plasticizer selected from the group consisting of bis dinitropropyl acetal and bis dinitropropyl formal BDNPA F isodecyl pelargonate IDP dioctyl adipate DOA dioctyl sebecate DOS a glycidyl azide polymer GAP and mixtures thereof. The formulation of this invention may include about 2 15 binder system more preferably the binder system includes at least cellulose acetate butyrate CAB as a non energetic binder and bis dinitropropyl acetal and bis dinitropropyl formal BDNPA F as an energetic plasticizer. The ratio of bis dinitropropyl acetal to bis dinitropropyl formal in the BDNPA F should be selected to provide the mixture in a liquid and substantially free flowing state. Preferably the ratio by weight is between about 45 55 and about 55 45 and more preferably about 50 50. In accordance with the preferred embodiments the formulation contains the CAB binder in a concentration of from about 2.4 wt to about 6.0 wt CAB and the BDNPA F plasticizer in a concentration of from about 3.6 wt to about 9.5 wt . More preferably the formulation includes about 3.2 wt CAB and about 4.8 wt BDNPA F.

The invention formulation further includes metals or metal mixtures such as Al B and Mg. The metals comprise at least one metal preferably aluminum. The aluminum may be micron size or nanometric size aluminum. The aluminum may include concentrations of 5 40 preferably 15 20 .

Additional additives may be included in the formulation such as metal mixtures conductive materials processing aids stabilizers surfactants antioxidants and carbon nanotubes.

The formulations of this invention can be prepared in slurry process. The preparatory process in accordance with one embodiment is conducted using a non aqueous slurry process since a water slurry process may not be suitable for water reactive additives. Other operations used to process these formulations may include but are not limited to vertical mixing pressing machining and extrusion.

Another patent recently filed Improved Explosive Molding Powder Slurry Processing in a Non Aqueous System Medium Using a Mixed Solvent Lacquer System by Akester et. al. fully describes one of the processes used to make the formulations of this invention and is incorporated herein by reference. Another patent describing a version of said formulations containing no metals are also disclosed by Lee et. al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 214 137 High Performance Explosive Containing CL 20 and is also incorporated herein by reference.

The following examples have been selected and are being presented to further describe the principles of this invention. These examples are not intended and should not be interpreted as exhaustive of or as a restriction on the overall scope of this invention.

Examples 1 2 and 3 utilized procedures fully described by another patent recently filed Improved Explosive Molding Powder Slurry Processing in a Non Aqueous System Medium Using a Mixed Solvent Lacquer System by Akester et. al. incorporated by reference herein. These formulations also have been made using other methods such as vertical mixing. Example 4 utilized a vertical mix process but can be made using the processes to make the formulations described in examples 1 2 and 3. These processes are given by way of example and are not intended to imply that other processes cannot be used to make such formulations. It is completely expected that other processes used to make the formulations described herein would have the same end results. For all examples each formulation was subjected to the Cylinder Expansion Test and the Gurney Energy was derived. For each formulation made the resulting powder obtained was then pressed to greater than 99 of the theoretical maximum density machined into pellets measuring approximately 1 diameter by 1.0 long. The pellets were assembled into a 1 ID 1.2 OD by 12 long copper cylinder. 4 additional pellets were used for run up so a total of 16 pellets were used for each test. All tests were run in at least duplicate and triplicate to ensure results were reproducible. A detailed description of the cylinder expansion test can be found in US ARMY ARDEC Technical Report AD E402 695 by B. Fuchs.

The PAX 29 formulation consisting of 77 CL 20 15 micron size Aluminum 4.8 BDNPA F and 3.2 CAB was manufactured pressed machined and tested in the cylinder expansion test. The molding powders lot numbers used to prepare the pellets were RH 1803 42 and RH 1803 43. An additional set of tests were performed utilizing lot s RH 1803 44 and RH 1803 45.

The PAX 29n formulation consisting of 77 CL 20 15 submicron size aluminum 4.8 BDNPA F and 3.2 CAB was manufactured pressed machined and tested in the cylinder expansion test. The molding powders lot numbers used to prepare the pellets were JA 1878 24 JA 1878 25 and JA 1878 26.

The PAX 30 formulation consisting of 77 HMX 15 micron size aluminum 4.8 BDNPA F and 3.2 CAB was manufactured pressed machined and tested in the cylinder expansion test. The molding powders lot numbers used to prepare the pellets were from lot numbers RH 1942 8 RH 1942 10 RH 1942 11 and RH 1942 14.

The PAX 3a formulation consisting of 64 HMX 20 micron size aluminum 4.8 BDNPA F and 3.2 CAB was manufactured pressed machined and tested in the cylinder expansion test.

The PAX 42 formulation consisting of 77 15 micron size aluminum 4.8 BDNPA F and 3.2 CAB was manufactured pressed machined and will be tested in the cylinder expansion test. It is expected that the RDX formulation will also achieve significant energy levels compared to other RDX formulations. The calculated Gurney Constant at V Vo 7 is 3.08.

Set forth below in Table 1 are the formulations from examples 1 4 and measured Gurney energy along with three other high performance explosives and their measured gurney energies for comparison purposes. The table also includes calculated total energy for each formulation. Set forth below in Table 2 are the percentage increase decrease in energy of each formulation relative to LX 14 for both metal pushing and blast energy.

While the invention may be susceptible to various modifications and alternative forms specific embodiments have been shown by way of example and have been described in detail herein. However it should be understood that the invention is not intended to be limited to the particular forms disclosed. Rather the invention is to cover all modifications equivalents and alternatives falling within the spirit and scope of the invention as defined by the following appended claims.

Other features advantages and specific embodiments of this invention will become readily apparent to those exercising ordinary skill in the art after reading the foregoing disclosures. These specific embodiments are within the scope of the claimed subject matter unless otherwise expressly indicated to the contrary. Moreover while specific embodiments of this invention have been described in considerable detail variations and modifications of these embodiments can be effected without departing from the spirit and scope of this invention as disclosed and claimed.

