---

title: Process for treatment of biomass feedstocks
abstract: A method and apparatus for continuously treating a moist biomass feedstock is disclosed. The method includes treating a biomass feedstock with a swelling agent in a pressurized first vessel, transferring the feedstock to a second vessel at a lower operating pressure than the first vessel such that the biomass fibers rupture. At least portions the swelling agent, and/or the moisture are recycled in the process.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07937851&OS=07937851&RS=07937851
owner: Michigan Biotechnology Institute
number: 07937851
owner_city: Lansing
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051109
---
This application claims priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 e of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 627 259 filed on Nov. 12 2004 the disclosure of which is herein incorporated by reference.

This invention was made with Government support under Specific Cooperative Agreement No. 58 5447 2 315 awarded by the United States Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service. The Government has certain rights in the invention.

Biomass materials such as corn stover wheat straw alfalfa grasses rice straw corn fiber distiller s dried grains with solids switchgrass bagasse and the like contain cellulosic material and proteins that may be used in fermentation processes as animal feeds or for other purposes. However the availability of these materials is low in untreated biomass material. Various processes and pretreatments of biomass material have been used to increase the availability of useful materials in biomass. These processes include dry milling wet milling steam explosion and chemical pretreatment such as the ammonia fiber explosion AFEX process.

These processes have several drawbacks. Dry milling is less effective for increasing the availability of the cellulosic materials and proteins in biomass material than other techniques. Wet milling while more effective than dry milling incurs greater energy costs which limits the economic feasibility of the process. Also continuous steam explosion processes are energy intensive and require additional separation steps to recover volatile organics that are stripped from the biomass by the steam. The AFEX process however is a unique chemical pretreatment.

Up to now the AFEX process has been primarily carried out as a batch process which limits the ability to commercially apply the process. In the AFEX process the biomass material is typically contacted with liquid ammonia at an elevated pressure for a sufficiently long time for the ammonia to swell the biomass material. After the biomass fibers have been swollen with liquid ammonia the pressure may be rapidly decreased to a level below the vapor pressure of the ammonia such that the ammonia vaporizes and ruptures the biomass fibers. This makes more of the cellulosic material and proteins available for down stream processes or for animal feed.

Attempts to create a continuous AFEX process have shown that the swelling process may be carried out in extrusion reactors. However these attempts have not effectively provided for the efficient recovery and recycle of the ammonia used to swell the biomass fibers. According to some designs the ruptured biomass is dried and the vapor containing swelling agent and water is condensed and distilled so that purified swelling agent may be recycled to the reactor. This distillation process is expensive both in capital expense and in energy costs.

Accordingly there is a need for a continuous AFEX process that is more commercially feasible than prior designs. Further there is a need for a continuous AFEX process that provides for the effective recovery and purification of vaporized ammonia. Further still there is a need for a continuous AFEX process that provides for efficient recovery of the portion of ammonia that remains with the biomass after the rapid depressurization.

It would be desirable to provide a system and or method that provides one or more of these or other advantageous features. Other features and advantages will be made apparent from the present specification. The present application is directed to those processes and embodiments disclosed herein regardless of whether they accomplish one or more of the aforementioned needs.

The invention relates to processes for increasing the availability of cellulosic and other materials in biomass feedstocks. In particular the invention relates to processes that use a swelling agent to rupture fibrous biomass materials to increase the availability of cellulosic and other materials are described.

One embodiment relates to a method for continuously treating biomass material. The method includes contacting the biomass material and a swelling agent in a first vessel under a pressure at least as great as the vapor pressure of the swelling agent and for a time sufficient to allow the swelling agent to swell fibers within the biomass material. The biomass may then be transferred to a second vessel with an outlet and having a pressure sufficiently less than that of the first vessel such that a portion of the swelling agent vaporizes and exits the second vessel through a vapor outlet causing the biomass fibers to rupture. The ruptured biomass may then be dried to provide a vapor stream and a dry biomass. The vapor stream is then condensed and used to treat the biomass material before the biomass material enters the first vessel.

Another embodiment relates to a method for continuously treating biomass material. The method includes contacting the biomass material and a swelling agent in a first vessel under a pressure at least as great as the vapor pressure of the swelling agent and for a time sufficient to allow the swelling agent to swell fibers within the biomass material. The biomass material may then be transferred to a second vessel having a pressure sufficiently less than that of the first vessel such that a portion of the swelling agent rapidly vaporizes causing the biomass fibers to rupture. The first vessel is pressurized with a stream including vaporized swelling agent to a pressure sufficient to prevent vaporization of the liquid swelling agent in the first vessel.

Another embodiment relates to an apparatus for continuously treating moist biomass material with a swelling agent. The apparatus includes a first vessel capable of operating at a pressure greater than an ambient pressure wherein the biomass material is in contact with a liquid form of the swelling agent for a sufficient time to swell the biomass material. The apparatus also includes a second vessel coupled to the first vessel and capable of operating at a pressure sufficiently lower than the pressure of the first vessel to allow at least a portion of the swelling agent to vaporize. The apparatus also includes a drying section including a dryer wherein at least a portion of the remaining moisture and swelling agent may be removed from the biomass condensed and recycled.

Yet another embodiment relates to an apparatus for continuously treating biomass material with a swelling agent. The apparatus includes a first vessel capable of operating at a pressure greater than an ambient pressure wherein the biomass material is in contact with a liquid form of the swelling agent for a sufficient time to swell fibers of the biomass material. The apparatus also includes a second vessel coupled to the first vessel and operated at a pressure sufficiently lower than the pressure of the first vessel to allow at least a portion of the swelling agent to vaporize. The first vessel is capable of being pressurized by a first stream of vaporized swelling agent.

It is to be understood that both the foregoing summary of the invention and the following detailed description are of exemplary embodiments and not restrictive of the invention or other alternative embodiments of the invention.

The process may include a pressurized reactor in which biomass material is contacted with a swelling agent. The reactor generally includes at least one inlet and one outlet. The inlet receives a mixture of moist biomass material and liquid swelling agent. Alternatively the reactor may include separate inlets for the moist biomass and the liquid swelling agent. An additional inlet may be provided for pressurizing the reactor vessel with swelling agent vapor to at least about the vapor pressure of the swelling agent at the operating temperature of the reactor to prevent vaporization of the liquid swelling agent. This may reduce the amount of liquid swelling agent needed in the inlet streams which in turn may reduce material costs. The reactor vessel is desirably configured to provide a residence time sufficient to allow the liquid swelling agent to swell the biomass material.

The biomass material is transferred from the reactor to a second vessel which is generally operated at a lower pressure than the reactor vessel. The second vessel may be a flash tank with an inlet for the reactor outlet stream a vapor outlet and a bottoms outlet for the biomass material and remaining liquid. The pressure of the flash tank is sufficiently less than that of both the reactor and the vapor pressure of the swelling agent to allow for the rapid vaporization of the swelling agent that has swollen the biomass such that the biomass fibers are ruptured. The flash tank may be pressurized and operated at a temperature such that the vapor stream is substantially composed of a swelling agent and in some embodiments is a relatively pure swelling agent vapor. This configuration unlike depressurizing the reactor outlet to ambient pressure allows for the recovery of a relatively pure swelling agent stream that may be condensed and recycled.

The ruptured biomass material is then commonly dried. The vapor driven off of the ruptured biomass material generally includes swelling agent and water. This vapor may be condensed and recycled in the process e.g. the recycled vapor can be used to presoak the biomass material before it enters the reactor.

According to an exemplary embodiment feeder is a reciprocating plug feeder. Alternatively other feeders such as extruders that are capable of feeding the solid biomass feedstock to a pressurized vessel may be used. The biomass may be milled to a suitable size for use in the equipment. According to an exemplary embodiment the biomass is milled to a grain size of 3 to 5 millimeters. Alternatively the biomass material may be milled such that it can pass a 40 mesh screen. The conveyors used may be belt conveyors augers or other suitable devices. Presoak conveyor transports the biomass from storage bin to feeder . The biomass is soaked with a mixture of swelling agent and water supplied by stream and make up stream to make the biomass feedstock suitable for use in feeder such that the soaked biomass feedstock serves to seal the inlet of the reactor to prevent leaks.

According to an exemplary embodiment the swelling agent includes liquid ammonia. Alternatively other volatile chemicals suitable for the fiber explosion process could be used. Further the biomass feedstock may be presoaked with either water or swelling agent alone. Feeder transports the soaked biomass feedstock to treatment section .

Treatment section includes transition chamber reactor transporter and vessel . The biomass feedstock enters transition chamber from feeder . Stream includes liquid swelling agent and flows into transition chamber where stream and the soaked biomass feedstock are combined prior to being introduced into reactor . Reactor may be pressurized. Alternatively the liquid swelling agent and feedstock may be introduced into reactor separately. Reactor may be an extrusion reactor. Alternatively reactor may be a digester or other suitable device. According to an exemplary embodiment reactor is made of stainless steel such as type 316 stainless steel. Alternatively reactor may be made of other materials suitable for use with the swelling agent. Reactor may be pressurized with vaporized swelling agent supplied by stream .

The operating pressure of reactor is desirably at or above the vapor pressure of the swelling agent to prevent vaporization of the liquid swelling agent supplied by stream . According to an exemplary embodiment reactor may be operated at pressures between about 90 psia and about 350 psia. Alternatively reactor may be operated at other sufficiently high pressures. In some embodiments reactor may be operated at pressures of at least about 250 psig. According to some embodiments reactor may be operated within a temperature range of about 50 C. to about 100 C. Temperatures ranging from about 70 C. to about 90 C. may be particularly suitable for the operation of reactor . The reactor is sized to provide a residence time adequate for the biomass to absorb an amount of the liquid swelling agent sufficient to carryout fiber explosion. Typical residence times in the reactor can range from about 5 minutes to about 30 minutes.

Transporter moves the swollen biomass from an outlet of reactor to vessel . Transporter is shown as a rotary release a.k.a. pocket valve however other devices suitable for transporting the swollen biomass from pressurized reactor to vessel such as extruders may be used. According to an exemplary embodiment transporter is made of stainless steel such as type 316 stainless steel. Alternatively transporter may be made of other materials suitable for use with the swelling agent.

Vessel is operated at a pressure sufficiently less than the operating pressure of reactor such that a portion of the liquid swelling agent rapidly vaporizes causing fibers of the biomass material to rupture. Typically vessel may be operated at pressures ranging from about 1 atm to about 2 atm. According to an exemplary embodiment vessel is a flash tank. Further Vessel is made of type 316 stainless steel. Alternatively vessel may be made of other materials suitable for use with the swelling agent. Vessel may be operated at a temperature and pressure such that the vapor stream consists essentially of pure swelling agent. In some embodiments vessel may be operated at a pressure ranging from about 10 psig to about 30 psig. Also in some embodiments vessel may be operated at a temperature ranging from about 15 C. to about 35 C. In other embodiments vessel may be operated at temperatures ranging from about 35 C. to about 60 C. Vapor stream flows to recovery section . The bottoms stream of vessel includes moist ruptured biomass and a quantity of liquid swelling agent that did not vaporize in vessel . The bottoms stream flows to drying section .

Drying section includes feeder dryer conveyor condenser and tank . The bottoms stream of vessel is carried by feeder to dryer . According to an exemplary embodiment dryer may be an indirect rotary dryer. Alternatively other types of dryers may be used. Typically dryer is operated under a partial vacuum with operating pressures ranging from about 0.1 atm to about 0.9 atm. In some embodiments the dryer may be operated at an ambient pressure. Dryer may be operated at temperatures operated from about 50 C. to about 100 C. Dryer vaporizes a portion of the remaining swelling agent and moisture in the ruptured biomass material. The dried ruptured biomass material is removed by conveyor as the product of the pretreatment process. The product may be used for downstream processes including but not limited to enzymatic hydrolysis fermentation or as a ruminant animal feed. The vapors produced by dryer form stream which is regulated by valve .

Stream flows to condenser . A liquid stream containing water and swelling agent is moved to tank by pump . According to one embodiment tank may be made of 316 stainless steel. Alternatively tank may be made of other materials suitable for use with the swelling agent. Pump draws liquid from tank into stream which in turn is used to presoak the biomass feed at presoak conveyor . Valve regulates the flow of stream . The use of the condensed vapors from dryer to presoak the biomass before it enters feeder allows for a recycle of the swelling agent and water in stream without the need for costly separation processes such as distillation. This reduces energy and capital costs for the pretreatment process while maintaining a high level of swelling agent recovery.

As stated before vapor stream flows from vessel to recovery section . The flow of vapor stream and the pressure of vessel is regulated by valve . Recovery section includes compressor condenser and swelling agent tank . Compressor pressurizes the vapor of vapor stream . The compressed vapor stream flows to condenser where the compressed vapor stream is condensed to a liquid stream . The liquid of stream is moved to swelling agent tank by pump .

The contents of swelling agent tank may be heated by heater such that the upper portion of swelling agent tank contains vaporized swelling agent while the lower portion of swelling agent tank includes liquid swelling agent. The contents of swelling agent tank may be under a pressure greater than the operating pressure of reactor . According to some embodiments the contents of swelling agent tank may be stored at temperatures ranging from about 0 C. to about 100 C. In some of these embodiments the contents of swelling agent tank may be stored a temperature about the operating temperature of reactor . In some embodiments the contents of the swelling agent tank may be stored at pressures ranging from about 30 psia to about 1000 psia. Stream includes vaporized swelling agent from the upper portion of swelling agent tank and flows to reactor . Stream includes liquid swelling agent from the lower portion of the swelling agent tank . Pump moves the liquid swelling agent of stream from swelling agent tank to reactor to transition chamber . Valve which is on stream between pump and reactor controls the flow of stream into transition chamber .

Referring to which depicts a portion of system recovery section may include compressor condenser and swelling agent tank . Vapor stream may extend from an outlet of vessel to a compressor which typically pressurizes the vapor stream. The vapor stream may then flow to condenser which typically cools and condenses the vapor. The condensed vapor may then be placed in swelling agent storage tank . Swelling agent tank may be heated by heater to a temperature above that of the operating temperature of reactor . Swelling agent tank may contain swelling agent in both the liquid and vapor phases at a pressure greater than that of the operating pressure of reactor . A vapor stream may be drawn from swelling agent tank and directed to an inlet in reactor . Valve which may be a pneumatic valve or other suitable device may be used to control the flow of swelling agent vapor to reactor . Using gaseous swelling agent to pressurize reactor prevents vaporization of the liquid swelling agent fed to reactor . This may reduce the amount of liquid swelling agent needed and in turn may reduce costs. A liquid stream may be drawn from swelling agent tank to provide liquid swelling agent for reactor .

Referring to which depicts a portion of system drying section may include feeder dryer conveyor condenser and tank . The ruptured biomass produced in treatment section is moved to dryer by conveyor . Dryer removes a portion of the moisture and swelling agent from the ruptured biomass to provide a vapor stream including swelling agent and water and a dry biomass. The dry biomass is not necessarily completely dry and may well contain water and or swelling agent. The vapor generated by dryer leaves dryer as stream . Stream flows to condenser . The condensed vapor exits condenser as a liquid stream containing swelling agent and water. The liquid condensate is accumulated in tank . Stream includes liquid swelling agent and water and flows from tank to presoak conveyor where the liquid is used to treat the biomass feedstock. The treated biomass exiting the dryer will typically have an ammonia content ranging from about 0 to about 2 based on a dry biomass basis. The treated biomass exiting the dryer may also have a moisture content ranging from about 0 to about 25 .

Referring to which depicts an alternative embodiment of a portion of system recovery section may include compressor condenser swelling agent tank and tank . Vapor stream may extend from an outlet of vessel to a compressor which typically pressurizes the vapor stream. The vapor stream may then flow to condenser which typically cools and condenses the vapor. The condensed vapor may include swelling agent and water and may be placed in tank . Stream flows from an outlet of tank to an inlet on reactor for supplying swelling agent to the reactor. The flow of stream may be controlled by a valve . Alternatively stream may flow from tank to presoak conveyor shown in .

The following examples are presented to illustrate the present invention and to assist one of ordinary skill in making and using the same. The examples are not intended in any way to otherwise limit the scope of the invention.

Corn stover 94 444 kg hr with 10 moisture content can be continuously mixed with a recycled ammonia water mixture 41 851 kg hr ammonia and 109 594 kg hr water in a pre soak conveyor. Steam 8 462 kg hr is added to adjust the dry biomass to water ratio to 1 1.5. The mixture is plug fed into a pressurized AFEX reactor. 43 149 kg hr dry ammonia is added from a storage tank to adjust the biomass to ammonia weight ratio to 1 1 based on a biomass dry weight . The mixture is reacted at 90 C. for 5 30 min at a pressure of 20 atm.

Following the reaction the mixture is transferred by a rotary release valve into a flash tank where it is flashed adiabatically until the final temperature drops to 40 C. and the final pressure reaches 1 atm. The flash vapor contains 42 885 kg hr ammonia and 1 946 kg hr water. The vapors are compressed to 8.5 atm and partially condensed. The residual water is removed in a flash condenser. The vapor is liquefied to ammonia in a second condenser and pumped to an ammonia storage tank.

Solids from the flash tank are dried in an indirect rotary dryer at 90 C. and under a partial vacuum of 0.6 atm. The dryer vapor containing 41 851 kg hr ammonia and 109 594 kg hr water is condensed at 1.4 atm and 30 C. and pumped to a ammonia water storage tank. The treated biomass has 263 kg hr ammonia and 15 960 kg hr water.

Corn stover 94 444 kg hr with 11 moisture can be continuously mixed with a recycled ammonia water mixture 48 365 kg hr ammonia and 80 879 kg hr water in a pre soak conveyor at a temperature of 25 50 C. and a pressure of 30 200 psia. 37 177 kg hr steam is added to adjust the biomass to water weight ratio to 1 1.5 based on a biomass dry weight . The mixture is plug fed into a pressurized AFEX reactor e.g. a continuous digester . 36 635 kg hr dry ammonia is added from a storage tank to adjust the dry biomass to ammonia ratio to 1 1. The mixture is reacted at 90 C. for 5 30 min at a pressure of 20 atm.

Following the reaction the mixture is transferred by a rotary release valve into a flash tank where it is flashed adiabatically until the final temperature drops to 52 C. and the pressure drops to 2 atm. The flash vapor contains 35 304 kg hr ammonia and 1425 kg hr water. The vapors are compressed to 8.5 atm and partially condensed. The residual water is removed in a flash condenser. If desired vapor may be liquefied to ammonia in a second condenser and pumped to an ammonia storage tank.

Solids from the flash tank are dried in an indirect rotary dryer at 70 C. and partial vacuum of 0.4 atm. The dryer vapor containing 48 365 kg hr ammonia and 80 879 kg hr water are condensed at 1.4 atm and 30 C. and pumped back to a ammonia water storage tank. The treated biomass has 1329 kg hr ammonia and 45 196 kg hr water.

In some embodiments a method for continuously treating a moist biomass material comprises rupturing a biomass material by vaporizing a swelling agent drying the ruptured biomass material to provide a first vapor stream and a dried biomass condensing the first vapor stream and using the condensed first vapor stream to treat biomass material before the biomass material is ruptured.

In some of these embodiments the step of rupturing the biomass material comprises contacting the biomass material and the swelling agent in a first vessel under a pressure at least as great as the vapor pressure of the swelling agent and for a time sufficient to allow the swelling agent to swell fibers within the biomass material.

According to some embodiments the step of rupturing the biomass material further comprises transferring the biomass material to a second vessel having a pressure sufficiently less than that of the first vessel such that at least a portion of the swelling agent vaporizes and exits the second vessel through a vapor outlet causing the biomass fibers to rupture.

In some embodiments the biomass may be ruptured by adiabatically flashing the biomass material exiting the first vessel. The m first vapor stream may include ammonia and water. The biomass material may include material selected from the group consisting of corn stover wheat straw alfalfa grass rice straw corn fiber distiller s dried grains with solids switchgrass bagasse and mixtures thereof. The first vessel may be pressurizing with a second vapor stream. The second vapor stream may include vaporized swelling agent to a pressure sufficient to prevent vaporization of the liquid swelling agent in the first vessel. The second stream includes vaporized swelling agent recycled from the vapor outlet.

According to some embodiments the ruptured biomass may be used as a feedstock for an additional process. The additional process may include for example forming an alcohol using the biomass material.

According to some embodiments a method for continuously treating biomass material may comprise contacting the biomass material and a swelling agent in a first vessel under a pressure at least as great as the vapor pressure of the swelling agent and for a time sufficient to allow the swelling agent to swell fibers within the biomass material and transferring the biomass material to a second vessel having a pressure sufficiently less than that of the first vessel such that a portion of the swelling agent rapidly vaporizes causing the biomass fibers to rupture wherein the first vessel is pressurized with a first stream including vaporized swelling agent to a pressure sufficient to prevent vaporization of the liquid swelling agent in the first vessel.

In some of these embodiments the method may further comprise drying the biomass material to provide a second vapor stream and a dry biomass condensing the second vapor stream and using the condensed second vapor stream to treat the biomass material before the biomass material enters the first vessel. The second vapor stream may include ammonia and water. The second stream may include vaporized swelling agent that is at least partially obtained from the second vessel.

In some embodiments a method for continuously treating biomass material may comprise contacting the biomass material and a swelling agent in a first vessel under a pressure at least as great as the vapor pressure of the swelling agent and for a time sufficient to allow the swelling agent to swell fibers within the biomass material transferring the biomass material to a second vessel having a pressure sufficiently less than that of the first vessel such that a portion of the swelling agent rapidly vaporizes causing the biomass fibers to rupture providing a ruptured biomass material pressurizing the first vessel with a first stream including vaporized swelling agent to a pressure sufficient to prevent vaporization of the liquid swelling agent in the first vessel wherein the first stream includes vaporized swelling agent that is at least partially obtained from the second vessel drying the ruptured biomass material to provide a second vapor stream and a dried biomass condensing at least a portion of the second vapor stream and using the condensed second vapor stream to treat the biomass material before the biomass material enters the first vessel.

According to some embodiments an apparatus for continuously treating moist biomass material with a swelling agent may comprise a first vessel capable of operating at a pressure greater than an ambient pressure such that the biomass material is in contact with a liquid form of the swelling agent for a sufficient time to swell the biomass material a second vessel coupled to the first vessel and capable of operating at a pressure sufficiently lower than the pressure of the first vessel to allow at least a portion of the swelling agent to vaporize thereby forming a first vapor stream and a drying section coupled to the second vessel and including a dryer wherein at least a portion of residual moisture and swelling agent may be removed from the biomass condensed and recycled.

In some of these embodiments the apparatus may further comprising a vapor recovery system including a first condenser coupled to the dryer and capable of condensing the residual moisture and swelling agent removed from the biomass. The first condenser may be coupled directly to the dryer and a first storage tank. The first condenser is coupled to a conveyor upstream of the first vessel.

In some embodiments the first vessel is an extrusion reactor. The second vessel may be a flash tank capable of operating at a pressure and temperature sufficient to produce a first vapor stream that consists essentially of the swelling agent.

In some embodiments the apparatus may further comprise a second condenser capable of condensing the first vapor stream and a second storage tank capable of receiving the condensed vapor stream. The second storage tank may be capable of storing both liquid swelling agent and gaseous swelling agent. The second storage tank may capable of providing gaseous swelling agent for pressurizing the first vessel and liquid swelling agent for reacting with the moist biomass.

According to some embodiments an apparatus for continuously treating biomass material with a swelling agent may comprise a first vessel capable of operating at a pressure greater than an ambient pressure wherein the biomass material is in contact with a liquid form of the swelling agent for a sufficient time to swell fibers of the biomass material a second vessel coupled to the first vessel and operated at a pressure sufficiently lower than the pressure of the first vessel to allow at least a portion of the swelling agent to vaporize and wherein the first vessel is capable of being pressurized by a first stream of vaporized swelling agent.

In some of these embodiments the second vessel may be a flash tank capable of operating at a pressure and temperature sufficient to produce a second vapor stream that consists essentially of the swelling agent. The first vessel may be capable of being pressurized by swelling agent vapor provided by the second vapor stream.

The apparatus may further comprise a drying section coupled to the second vessel and including a dryer wherein the drying section is capable of removing at least a portion of residual moisture and swelling agent from the biomass.

The apparatus may also comprise a vapor recovery system including a second condenser coupled to the dryer and capable of condensing the moisture and swelling agent removed from the biomass. The vapor recovery system may be capable of recycling the condensed moisture and swelling agent to a conveyor upstream of the first vessel.

According to yet other embodiments an apparatus for continuously treating moist biomass material with a swelling agent may comprise a first vessel capable of operating at a pressure greater than an ambient pressure wherein the biomass material is in contact with a liquid form of the swelling agent for a sufficient time to swell the biomass material a second vessel coupled to the first vessel and capable of operating at a pressure sufficiently lower than the pressure of the first vessel to allow at least a portion of the swelling agent to vaporize a connection between an outlet of the second vessel and an inlet of the first vessel capable of providing vaporized swelling agent from the second vessel to the first vessel whereby the first vessel may be pressurized to a pressure sufficient to prevent vaporization of the liquid swelling agent in the first vessel a drying section coupled to the second vessel and including a dryer and a condenser wherein at least a portion of residual moisture and swelling agent may be removed from the biomass a vapor recovery system including a first condenser coupled to the dryer and capable of condensing the moisture and swelling agent removed from the biomass and wherein the condensed moisture and swelling agent may be used to treat the biomass before entering the first vessel.

