---

title: Microarray techniques for nucleic acid expression analyses
abstract: Provided are DNA microarray techniques that allow hybridization without RNA amplification, without using cDNA, and without labeling the nucleic acid prior to hybridization. Referred to as the ouble-stranded xonuclease rotection (DEP) assay, the technique permits the sample RNA to be used directly for hybridization, without manipulation in any way. Further provided is a microarray technique for high-throughput miRNA gene expression analyses, termed the NA-primed, rray-based, lenow nzyme (RAKE) assay. The RAKE assay is a sensitive and specific technique for assessing single-stranded DNA and RNA targets, and offers specific advantages over Northern blots.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09145582&OS=09145582&RS=09145582
owner: The Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania
number: 09145582
owner_city: Philadelphia
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050922
---
The present application claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 612 301 filed Sep. 22 2004 the content of which is incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention was supported in part by U.S. National Institutes of Health Training Grant T32 AG00255. The government may have certain rights in the invention.

RNA expression profiling is used to characterize the RNA species present in a sample. Many different techniques are used for this task each having its own strengths and weaknesses. DNA microarrays are one of the best high throughput techniques for RNA expression profiling. However most DNA microarrays require extensive sample manipulation. Specifically sample RNA must be reversed transcribed into cDNA then amplified and labeled with one or more fluorophores prior to array hybridization. As a result biases may be introduced in any of these steps that may artificially skew the results of the microarray analysis. In addition the current microarray technology is limited in that it is designed to detect only mRNAs.

A major fraction of cellular RNAs comprise noncoding RNAs many of which have regulatory functions. Detection of these noncoding RNAs require or would benefit from development of novel microarray technology that would not require sample RNA amplification or labeling. Such technology would be desirable for example in the detection of microRNAs miRNAs .

MicroRNAs are small 22 nucleotide regulatory RNAs that are found in the vast majority of eukaryotic cells. MiRNAs play important roles in plant and animal development apoptosis fat metabolism growth control and hematopoietic differentiation Lee et al. 116 S89 92 81 p following S96 2004 Ruvkun et al. 116 S93 96 92 p following S96 2004 Lagos Quintana et al. 294 853 858 2001 Bartel et al. 116 281 297 2004 Nelson et al. 28 534 540 2003 Carrington et al. 301 336 338 2003 . Dysregulation of miRNAs may contribute to human disease including cancer Calin et al. 99 15524 15529 2002 Michael et al. 1 882 891 2003 Takamizawa et al. 64 3753 3756 2004 .

Many individual miRNAs are conserved across widely diverse phyla indicating their physiological importance. More than 200 miRNAs have been reported thus far from mammals and miRNAs are estimated to account for 1.0 of expressed human genes Bartel et al. 2004 . Most animal miRNAs have the capacity to regulate multiple mRNA targets Kiriakidou et al. 18 10 1165 1178 2004 reviewed in Bartel et al. 2004 . Yet such RNAs cannot be studied using conventional microarray based techniques.

In mammalian cells primary miRNA transcripts pri miRNAs are cleaved sequentially in the cell nucleus and transported to the cytoplasm as pre miRNAs where mature miRNAs are generated Lee et al. 425 415 419 2003 . Mature miRNAs guide regulatory proteins to induce translational repression or degradation of specific target mRNAs Bartel et al. 2004 Murchison et al. 16 223 229 2004 .

High throughput miRNA gene expression analysis has proven to be technically challenging. The short length and uniqueness of each miRNA render many conventional tools ineffective. Very small RNAs are difficult to reliably amplify or label without introducing bias Ohtsuka et al. 81 285 291 1977 Romaniuk et al. 125 639 643 1982 . Prior attempts at systematic gene expression analysis have involved dot blots Krichevsky et al. 9 1274 1281 2003 or Northern blots e.g. Sempere et al. 5 R13 2004 Lim et al. 17 991 1008 2003 . Additional assays for sensitive detection of miRNAs or their precursors have been developed involving realtime quantitative PCR based analysis of pre miRNA expression Schmittgen et al. 32 e43 2004 or a modification of the Invader assay for miRNA detection and quantitation Allawi et al. 10 1153 1161 2004 .

While Northern blots are currently the gold standard of miRNA validation and quantification Ambros et al. 9 277 279 2003 the specificity of the Northern blot technique has received scant critical review. This is surprising considering the widespread use of the method. Short DNA RNA hybrids demonstrate Tand binding dynamics that vary significantly with probe and target nucleotide composition buffer contents and the time and temperature of hybridization Dai et al. 2002 Liu et al 2001 Dorris et al. 2003 Urakawa et al. 69 2848 2856 2003 Guschin et al. 63 2397 2402 1997 . Thus it is highly probable that signal intensity for Northern blots will vary from one miRNA sample to another as well as from one experiment to another. Moreover standard Northern blotting does not provide absolute quantification meaning that each RNA queried must include a standard curve in order to be considered absolutely quantitative and each standard curve must further be run in parallel with each individual experiment Lim et al. 2003 supra .

Because higher throughput techniques involving mature miRNAs are needed to further understand the role s played by miRNAs in normal and disease tissues two groups have reported work on microarrays for miRNAs. Croce and colleagues reported an oligonucleotide microarray for miRNA and pre miRNA profiling Liu et al. 26 9740 9744 2004 Liu et al. 32 11755 11760 2004 wherein the assay involves the use of a biotinylated primer containing a random octamer sequence at the 3 end. The Liu et al. primer is used along with reverse transcriptase to generate a cDNA library from total RNA. The cDNA is isolated and applied to a microarray containing covalently linked DNA oligonucleotide probes corresponding to 245 human and mouse miRNAs Liu et al. 2004 . Horvitz and colleagues also prepared cDNAs from miRNAs using techniques previously employed for the cloning of miRNAs. This was accomplished by ligating adapters to miRNAs using T4 RNA ligase followed by R.T PCR using fluorescently labeled primers complementary to the adapters Miska et al. 5 R68 2004 . However while these reported microarray techniques allow for sensitive specific and high throughput miRNA expression profiling e.g. Miska et al. reported a sensitivity of 0.1 fmoles but the technique also requires PCR amplification of the miRNA sample.

Nevertheless much remains unknown about miRNA biology. For example the miRNA genes expressed in most tissues species and cell lines are not known and the physiological functions and regulation of almost all miRNAs remain to be determined. MiRNAs may also play roles in human disease that have not yet been explored. These and other topics will be easier to address experimentally when miRNA gene expression studies become more feasible and a need in the art has remained until the present invention for simple and reliable DNA microarray techniques that allow for hybridization without RNA amplification or degredation without the cumbersome steps involved in making and using cDNA and without the need to label the nucleic acid prior to hybridization.

The present invention fulfills this need among others by providing DNA microarray techniques that allow hybridization without RNA amplification without using cDNA and without labeling the nucleic acid prior to hybridization. Referred to as the ouble stranded xonuclease rotection DEP assay the technique permits the sample RNA to be used directly for hybridization without manipulation in any way. This eliminates biases introduced during sample RNA manipulation using conventional microarray technology and greatly facilitates experimentation wherein the novel microarray technology may be used for the detection of any RNA including mRNAs and other noncoding RNAs .

Further provided is a second novel microarray technique for high throughput miRNA gene expression analyses termed the NA primed rray based lenow nzyme RAKE assay. The RAKE assay is a sensitive and specific technique for assessing single stranded DNA and RNA targets with specific advantages over Northern blots. Moreover this assay may be modified to have broader applications e.g. RNA profiling including profiling and quantification of viruses. The availability of the novel techniques permits for the first time a robust sampling of miRNAs made from formalin fixed paraffin embedded FFPE pathological samples followed by expression analysis with RAKE.

Additional objects advantages and novel features of the invention will be set forth in part in the description examples and figures which follow all of which are intended to be for illustrative purposes only and not intended in any way to limit the invention and in part will become apparent to those skilled in the art on examination of the following or may be learned by practice of the invention.

The present invention provides DNA microarray techniques that allow hybridization of nucleic acids without RNA amplification without using cDNA and without labeling the nucleic acid prior to hybridization. The term nucleic acid as used herein may include any polymer or oligomer of pyrimidine and purine bases preferably cytosine thymine and uracil and adenine and guanine respectively. See Lehninger at 793 800 Worth Pub. 1982 .

 Nucleic acid refers to a polymeric form of nucleotides of any length either ribonucleotides deoxyribonucleotides or peptide nucleic acids PNAs that comprise purine and pyrimidine bases or other natural chemically or biochemically modified non natural or derivatized nucleotide bases. The backbone of the polynucleotide can comprise sugars and phosphate groups as may typically be found in RNA or DNA or modified or substituted sugar or phosphate groups. A polynucleotide may comprise modified nucleotides such as methylated nucleotides and nucleotide analogs.

Indeed the present invention contemplates any deoxyribonucleotide ribonucleotide or peptide nucleic acid component and any chemical variants thereof such as methylated hydroxymethylated or glucosylated forms of these bases and the like. The polymers or oligomers may be heterogeneous or homogeneous in composition and may be isolated from naturally occurring sources or may be artificially or synthetically produced. In addition the nucleic acids may be DNA or RNA or a mixture thereof and may exist permanently or transitionally in single stranded or double stranded form including homoduplex heteroduplex and hybrid states.

The term nucleic acid library or sometimes array as used herein refers to an intentionally created collection of nucleic acids which can be prepared either synthetically or biosynthetically and screened for biological activity in a variety of different formats for example libraries of soluble molecules and libraries of oligos tethered to resin beads silica chips or other solid supports . Additionally the term array is meant to include those libraries of nucleic acids which can be prepared by spotting nucleic acids of essentially any length for example from 1 to about 1000 nucleotide monomers in length onto a substrate.

The sequence of nucleotides may be interrupted by non nucleotide components. Thus the terms nucleoside nucleotide deoxynucleoside and deoxynucleotide generally include analogs such as those described herein. These analogs are those molecules having some structural features in common with a naturally occurring nucleoside or nucleotide such that when incorporated into a nucleic acid or oligonucleoside sequence they allow hybridization with a naturally occurring nucleic acid sequence in solution. Typically these analogs are derived from naturally occurring nucleosides and nucleotides by replacing and or modifying the base the ribose or the phosphodiester moiety. The changes can be tailor made to stabilize or destabilize hybrid formation or enhance the specificity of hybridization with a complementary nucleic acid sequence as desired.

The term hybridization as used herein refers to the process in which two single stranded polynucleotides bind non covalently to form a stable double stranded polynucleotide triple stranded hybridization is also theoretically possible. The resulting usually double stranded polynucleotide is a hybrid. The proportion of the population of polynucleotides that forms stable hybrids is referred to herein as the degree of hybridization. 

Hybridizations are usually performed under stringent conditions for example at a salt concentration of no more than 1 M and a temperature of at least 25 C. For example conditions of 5 SSPE 750 mM NaCl 50 mM NaPhosphate 5 mM EDTA pH 7.4 and a temperature of 25 30 C. are suitable for allele specific probe hybridizations. For stringent conditions see for example Sambrook et al. 2nd Ed. Cold Spring Harbor Press 1989 herein incorporated by reference in its entirety.

The term hybridization conditions as used herein will typically include salt concentrations of less than about 1M usually less than about 500 mM and preferably less than about 200 mM. When the term effective amount is used herein it refers to an amount sufficient to induce a desired result. Hybridization temperatures can be as low as 5 C. but are typically 22 C. more typically 30 C. and preferably 37 C. Longer sequence fragments may require higher hybridization temperatures for specific hybridization. Other factors may affect the stringency of hybridization including base composition and length of the complementary strands presence of organic solvents and extent of base mismatching as a result the combination of parameters is more important than the absolute measure of any one alone.

The term hybridization probe as used herein refers to an oligonucleotide capable of binding in a base specific manner to a complementary strand of nucleic acid. Such probes include peptide nucleic acids as described in Nielsen et al. 254 1497 1500 1991 and other nucleic acid analogs and nucleic acid mimetics. The term hybridizing specifically to as used herein refers to the binding duplexing or hybridizing of a molecule only to a particular nucleotide sequence or sequences under stringent conditions when that sequence is present in a complex mixture for example total cellular DNA or RNA.

The term target as used herein refers to a molecule that has an affinity for a given probe. Targets may be naturally occurring or man made molecules. Also they can be employed in their unaltered state or as aggregates with other species. Targets may be attached covalently or noncovalently to a binding member either directly or via a specific binding substance. Examples of targets which can be employed by this invention include but are not restricted to antibodies cell membrane receptors monoclonal antibodies and antisera reactive with specific antigenic determinants such as on viruses cells or other materials drugs oligonucleotides nucleic acids peptides cofactors lectins sugars polysaccharides cells cellular membranes and organelles. Targets are sometimes referred to in the art as anti probes. As the term targets is used herein no difference in meaning is intended. A probe to target pair is formed when two macromolecules have combined through molecular recognition to form a complex also referred to in the art a receptor to ligand binding .

The term complementary as used herein refers to the hybridization or base pairing between nucleotides or nucleic acids such as for instance between the two strands of a double stranded DNA molecule or between an oligonucleotide primer and a primer binding site on a single stranded nucleic acid to be sequenced or amplified. Complementary nucleotides are generally A and T or A and U or C and G. Two single stranded RNA or DNA molecules are said to be complementary when the nucleotides of one strand optimally aligned and compared and with appropriate nucleotide insertions or deletions pair with at least about 80 of the nucleotides of the other strand usually at least about 90 to 95 and more preferably from about 98 to 100 .

Alternatively complementarity exists when an RNA or DNA strand will hybridize under selective hybridization conditions to its complement. Typically selective hybridization will occur when there is at least about 65 complementary over a stretch of at least 14 to 25 nucleotides preferably at least about 75 more preferably at least about 90 complementary. See e.g. Kanehisa 12 203 1984 incorporated herein by reference.

The microarray assay process is referred to herein as a ouble stranded xonuclease rotection DEP assay. The term array as used herein refers to an intentionally created collection of molecules which can be prepared either synthetically or biosynthetically. The molecules in the array can be identical or different from each other. The array can assume a variety of formats such as for example libraries of soluble molecules libraries of compounds tethered to resin beads silica chips or other solid supports. The term solid support support and substrate as used herein are used interchangeably and refer to a material or group of materials having a rigid or semi rigid surface or surfaces. In the exemplified embodiment the substrate is a glass slide. In many embodiments at least one surface of the solid support will be substantially flat although in some embodiments it may be desirable to physically separate synthesis regions for different compounds with for example wells raised regions pins etched trenches or the like. According to other embodiments the solid support s will take the form of beads resins gels microspheres or other geometric configurations. See e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 5 744 305 for other exemplary substrates.

DEP employs DNA oligonucleotides oligomers for spotting on glass slides to establish the microarrays. The DNA oligonucleotides referred to simply as an oligonucleotide or oligomers as used herein means a nucleic acid ranging from at least 2 preferable at least 8 and more preferably at least 10 15 and more preferably at least 20 30 nucleotides in length or a compound that specifically hybridizes to a polynucleotide. Polynucleotides of the present invention include sequences of deoxyribonucleic acid DNA or ribonucleic acid RNA which may be isolated from natural sources recombinantly produced or artificially synthesized and mimetics thereof. A further example of a polynucleotide of the present invention may be peptide nucleic acid PNA . The invention also encompasses situations in which there is a nontraditional base pairing such as Hoogsteen base pairing which has been identified in certain tRNA molecules and are postulated to exist in a triple helix. Polynucleotide and oligonucleotide are used interchangeably in this application.

The oligonucleotides used in the present invention can be individually prepared by one of ordinary skill in the art or they may be purchased since many are commercially available. In the present invention the preferred oligonucleotides include biotinylated thymidine residues.

The term monomer as used herein refers to any member of the set of molecules that can be joined together to form an oligomer or polymer. The set of monomers useful in the present invention includes but is not restricted to for example poly peptide synthesis the set of L amino acids D amino acids or synthetic amino acids. As used herein monomer refers to any member of a basis set for synthesis of an oligomer. For example dimers of L amino acids form a basis set of 400 monomers for synthesis of polypeptides. Different basic sets of monomers may be used at successive steps in the synthesis of a polymer. The term monomer also refers to a chemical subunit that can be combined with a different chemical subunit to form a compound larger than either subunit alone.

The term isolated nucleic acid as used herein mean an object species invention that is the predominant species present i.e. on a molar basis it is more abundant than any other individual species in the composition . Preferably an isolated nucleic acid comprises at least about 50 80 or 90 on a molar basis of all macromolecular species present. Most preferably the object species is purified to essential homogeneity contaminant species cannot be detected in the composition by conventional detection methods . The term mixed population or complex population as used herein refers to any sample containing both desired and undesired nucleic acids. As a non limiting example a complex population of nucleic acids may be total genomic DNA total genomic RNA or a combination thereof. Moreover a complex population of nucleic acids may have been enriched for a given population but also include other undesirable populations. For example a complex population of nucleic acids may be a sample which has been enriched for desired messenger RNA mRNA sequences but still includes some undesired ribosomal RNA sequences rRNA . The oligonucleotide spots are preferably isolated nucleic acids.

The term primer as used herein refers to a single stranded oligonucleotide capable of acting as a point of initiation for template directed DNA synthesis under suitable conditions for example buffer and temperature in the presence of four different nucleoside triphosphates and an agent for polymerization such as for example DNA or RNA polymerase or reverse transcriptase. The length of the primer in any given case depends on for example the intended use of the primer and generally ranges from 15 to 30 nucleotides. Short primer molecules generally require cooler temperatures to form sufficiently stable hybrid complexes with the template. A primer need not reflect the exact sequence of the template but must be sufficiently complementary to hybridize with such template. The primer site is the area of the template to which a primer hybridizes. The primer pair is a set of primers including a 5 upstream primer that hybridizes with the 5 end of the sequence to be amplified and a 3 downstream primer that hybridizes with the complement of the 3 end of the sequence to be amplified.

In practice each spot on the microarray slide contains one oligonucleotide arranged in the following orientation 

The present microarray based technique is effective on any single stranded ss molecule including single stranded DNA or RNA but collectively is referred to herein as an RNA sample specifically including mRNAs. The term mRNA or sometimes refer by mRNA transcripts as used herein include but not limited to pre mRNA transcript s transcript processing intermediates mature mRNA s ready for translation and transcripts of the gene or genes or nucleic acids derived from the mRNA transcript s . Transcript processing may include splicing editing and degradation. As used herein a nucleic acid derived from an mRNA transcript refers to a nucleic acid for whose synthesis the mRNA transcript or a subsequence thereof has ultimately served as a template. Thus a cDNA reverse transcribed from an mRNA an RNA transcribed from that cDNA a DNA amplified from the cDNA an RNA transcribed from the amplified DNA etc are all derived from the mRNA transcript and detection of such derived products is indicative of the presence and or abundance of the original transcript in a sample. Thus mRNA derived samples include but are not limited to mRNA transcripts of the gene or genes cDNA reverse transcribed from the mRNA cRNA transcribed from the cDNA DNA amplified from the genes RNA transcribed from amplified DNA and the like.

As the term RNA is used herein it is further intended that the term also encompasses other single stranded nucleic acids including ss DNA. Likewise although the process referred to is RNA expression profiling it is further intended to include other single stranded nucleic acids including ss DNA.

When the microarray assay is used for RNA expression profiling in accordance with the present invention the hybridization solution is applied to the slide without prior amplification or labeling. Hybridization occurs in standard hybridization buffers and conditions. During incubation of the hybridization treated slide the RNA hybridizing to the antisense portion 3 portion of the oligonucleotide will produce a double stranded DNA RNA hybrid or series of short double stranded DNA RNA hybrids . By comparison spots that contain single stranded antisense DNA oligonucleotides are not hybridized thus those oligonucleotides remain single stranded.

Following hybridization the slide is washed. Then using a buffer solution that has been modified slightly from the commercial recommendations the slide is incubated overnight with Exonuclease I New England Biolabs . Exonuclease I catalyzes the hydrolysis of single stranded DNA oligonucleotides to form free nucleotide residues. Hence for the non hybridized single stranded oligonucleotide containing microarray spots the biotinylated thymidine residue will be cut away from the microarray whereas the hybridized double stranded oligonucleotide RNA containing microarray spots continue to include the biotinylated thymidine residue i.e. the exonuclease digests the single stranded DNA oligonucleotide .

Following incubation with Exonuclease I the slides are again washed and then incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature with a solution containing streptavidin conjugated Alexa fluor dye SCAF Molecular Probes . The SCAF binds avidly to the biotinylated residues in the microarray bound oligonucleotides. As a result SCAF only binds to those oligonucleotides that bound to the RNA sample i.e. those that were protected from the single stranded DNA specific Exonuclease I . Consequently in the DEP assay only the SCAF bound oligonucleotide spots are fluorescent when the slide is evaluated by the detection device e.g. the slide scanner machine.

Of course Exonuclease I is used only as an example of an effective exonuclease in the DEP assay. In fact any exonuclease that effectively catalyzes hydrolysis of non hybridized single stranded oligonucleotides in the spot to form free nucleotide residues may be used provided that they 1 satisfy the basic criteria of strictly catalyzing 3 5 directed nucleotide hydrolysis 2 are independent of nucleotide identity and 3 work under conditions in which stable DNA RNA hybrids are retained.

SCAF is also used only as an example of an effective marker. Other streptavidin conjugated fluorophores or other luminescent labels may also be used so long as the labeling method is combined with the essential step of using the double stranded DNA hybridized RNA as a protection assay in the presence of an exonuclease. This preserves a residue that can be labeled by the fluorophore or other luminescent label. In general the term label as used herein refers to a luminescent label a light scattering label or a radioactive label. Fluorescent labels include inter alia the commercially available fluorescein phosphoramidites such as Fluoreprime Pharmacia Fluoredite Millipore and FAM ABI . See also U.S. Pat. No. 6 287 778.

Furthermore in an alternative embodiment the present technique could be augmented by co hybridization with a probe that recognizes the spacer portion of the oligonucleotide. Such a probe would employ a fluorescent or luminescent marker that is different from SCAF i.e. red vs. green to allow for a rigorous normalization of the amount of oligonucleotide DNA present in each spot. It also allows for good compensation for spot to spot heterogeneity.

The term probe as used herein refers to a surface immobilized molecule that can be recognized by a particular target. See e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 6 582 908 for an example of arrays having all possible combinations of probes with 10 12 and more bases. Examples of probes that can be investigated by this invention include but are not restricted to agonists and antagonists for cell membrane receptors toxins and venoms viral epitopes hormones e.g. opioid peptides steroids etc. hormone receptors peptides enzymes enzyme substrates cofactors drugs lectins sugars oligonucleotides nucleic acids oligosaccharides proteins and monoclonal antibodies.

As previously noted the Northern blot is considered the standard method for miRNA validation and quantification Ambros et al. 2003 . The Northerns are theoretically straightforward and their use has been well established in biomedical research. Northern blots offer both quantitative and qualitative information and unlike a microarray experiment a Northern blot confirms the length of the hybridized transcripts. The Northern blots are however laborious making them less useful or well suited for high throughput expression profiling.

Accordingly the present invention further provides a microarray platform that enables high throughput gene expression analyses of small RNAs. Termed the NA primed rray based lenow nzyme RAKE assay this embodiment of the invention provides a new tool with high sensitivity and specificity for miRNA profiling.

By comparison the present RAKE assay is quite simple involving minimal steps and it is particularly suited for high throughput expression profiling. The RAKE assay also provides unique qualitative data because the 3 end of the miRNA primer hybridizes specifically to the oligonucleotide template. As a result RAKE appears to be superior to Northern blots in discriminating the exact 3 end of the sample miRNAs offering a significant advantage because for many mature miRNAs the paralogs differ at the 3 end. These miRNAs derived from different genes would be expected to cross react adversely in Northern blots and in standard microarray methods using labeled target pools but such adverse reactions do not usually occur in the RAKE assay. As shown in data from hsa miR 23a 23b SEQID Nos 1 and 2 respectively and two other pairs of paralogous miRNAs support the hypothesis that the RAKE assay is superior to Northern blots for discriminating miRNA paralogs.

Advantageously RAKE requires no sample RNA manipulation. Possible biases which may be introduced during enzymatic labeling or cDNA generation or amplification of the sample RNA prior to hybridization to the glass microarray are thus avoided. Thus RAKE allows for rapid and simultaneous detection of all known miRNAs from the same sample. Moreover RAKE advantageously permits the complete automation of all steps from sample hybridization to detection. This is achieved by using a number of existing technologies and equipment previously used for traditional mRNA microarrays and allows for highly consistent performance.

RAKE involves the generation of microarray containing spotted oligonucleotides wherein each DNA oligonucleotide is oriented on the slide essentially as set forth above for the DEP assay. The constant portion directly adjacent to the slide is the 5 end of m13 spacer 20 nucleotides including thymidine residues next to that is the variable portion comprising the antisense sequence 3 .

The RAKE technique involves a two stage reaction. First the microarray is incubated along with Klenow enzyme enzyme buffer containing Mg conjugated dATPs for labeling and an RNA sample. Some of the RNA sample hybridizes to the antisense 3 sequence of the DNA oligonucleotide. Sequences that bind tightly and are hybridized at the 3 end can act as primers for the Klenow DNA polymerase it has been demonstrated that Klenow enzyme can act as a RNA primer directed DNA polymerase . In the present case the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I is applied to catalyze the addition of biotin conjugated dNTPs such as dATPs using the miRNA as a primer and the spotted probe as template. Since the incorporation of dideoxyNTPs ddNTP rather than dNTP is a random event the reaction will produce DNA fragments varying in length. In a preferred embodiment the ratio of dNTP to ddNTP is selected to generate DNA fragments of a predetermined size range. For example DNA fragments sized may range from 20 to 50 35 75 or 50 to 200 bases. Hence the dATPs that can be labeled only hybridize to oligonucleotide spots on the microarray that are antisense to RNAs present in the sample.

Technical tweaks could greatly enhance broaden the potential applications for RAKE. For example longer RNAs including mRNAs for transcript splice variant profiling may be assessed in the microarray assay using a nuclease that cleaves non hybridized RNA. The potential applications for these techniques are very broad but include expression analyses of microRNAs any species siRNAs experimentally introduced or endogenous and other small regulatory RNAs. Other potential RNA applications include profiling and quantification of viruses as well as other RNA profiling.

Moreover RAKE could be made a great deal more sensitive as needed by utilizing one of various sandwich or signal amplification techniques e.g. streptavidin HRP biotin antibodies chemiluminescence etc . This is analogous to the discussion regarding the DEP assay above.

The present invention utilizes glass slide substrates for the microarrays e.g. CodeLink glass slides with amine modified DNA oligonucleotide probes spotted robotically and specifically immobilized via attachment at the 5 end described in greater detail in the Example that follows . This technique provided results that on a technical level proved to be consistent with findings in prior microarray experiments. For RNA targets analyzed using DNA oligonucleotide probe based microarrays the probe to target cross hybridization is seen only if the degree of theoretical cross hybridization is 80 for 50 70 mer probes Dai et al. 30 e86 2002 and 90 or more for an 20 mer probe depending upon variables that include hybridization conditions probe G C composition and the location of the mismatched nucleotide s Ramakrishnan et al. 30 e30 2002 El Fantroussi 69 2377 2382 2003 Koizumi et al. 68 3215 3225 2002 Liu et al. 3 619 629 2001 Dorris et al. BMC Biotechnol. 3 6 2003 CodeLink slide microarrays have been shown to demonstrate excellent hybridization characteristics Ramakrishnan et al. 2002 Dorris et al. 2003 .

The RAKE assay was devised to exploit the known ability of the Klenow enzyme fragment to act as a DNA polymerase using an RNA primer on a DNA oligonucleotide template Huang et al. 24 4360 4361 1996 Huang et al. 322 269 274 2003 . Prior studies have demonstrated on slide enzymatic reactions and primer extension see e.g. Nikiforov et al. 22 4167 4175 1994 Head et al. 25 5065 5071 1997 . However direct detection of RNA hybridization using RNA primed DNA polymerase has not been reported on a microarray nor have the special properties of the Klenow enzyme been used on such microarray studies.

It was also necessary to use Exonuclease I a 3 5 single stranded DNA specific exonuclease which is highly processive Brody et al. 261 7136 7143 1986 . It is important to note that the activities of both Klenow enzyme and exonuclease Brody et al. 1986 are independent of the sequence of their substrates. Systematic bias is therefore not introduced and the results produced by the present invention demonstrate sensitivity to the level of 10 picograms pg of target miRNA which is comparable to Northern blots Lim et al. 2003. In contrast however RNA ligases are prone to bias because enzyme kinetics change with substrate sequence see Ohtsuka et al. 1977 supra Romaniuk et al. 1982 supra producing an inaccurate representation of the miRNAs present in a target pool labeled by RNA ligase methods.

In alternative embodiments of the present invention even greater sensitivity may be obtained using sandwich type amplification or a more sensitive labeling technique e.g. gold particles for Resonance Light Scattering . Quantification of miRNA abundance and resolution of expression differences may be improved by incorporating a standard reference that hybridizes to the spacer sequence and is detected with a second scanner channel.

The results provided by the present invention have proven to be broadly compatible with those produced using Northern blots e.g. Sempere et al. 2004 supra although the present methods are far more efficient and effective. In each sampled tissue only a minority of miRNAs are expressed at detectable levels a given time in a given tissue.

Some miRNAs appear to be widely expressed including miR 98 let 7 paralogs miR 16 miR 26a and miR 100. MiR 124a and miR 9 which were found only in samples from anaplastic oligodendrogliomas are reportedly highly restricted being expressed only in the central nervous system Sempere et al. 2004 supra Lim et al. 2003 supra . MiR 92 which is present in cultured cells but not appreciably in the sampled tissues Sempere et al. 2004 is also present in HeLa cells and Jurkat cells but not in the tested primary tumor tissue described in the Example that follows. Finally there is general agreement between the HeLa expression profile set forth herein as a result of the RAKE analysis and the miRNAs evaluated previously in HeLa cells Lagos Quintana et al. 2001 supra Mourelatos et al. 16 720 728 2002 . In the Example that follows there was also the surprising finding that miR 20 showed stronger expression than one may have expected from prior studies. This expression was validated by Northern blot .

Jurkat cells are derived from a T cell lymphoma Gillis et al. 152 1709 1719 1980 . In prior studies of chronic B cell lymphomas miR 15a and miR 16 were deleted or down regulated in more than two thirds of cases Calin et al. 2002 supra whereas miR 155 was highly expressed in Burkitt lymphoma Metzler et al. 39 167 169 2004 . By contrast Jurkat cells show strong expression of both miR 15a and miR 16 and low expression of miR 155.

The sensitivity of the RAKE assay provides for sensitive specific and high throughput miRNA expression profiling consistently produced robust signals at 0.16 fmoles equal to about 10molecules of miRNA. However in contrast to the microarrays developed e.g. by Liu et al. 2004 supra and Miska et al. 2004 supra the RAKE assay does not require or involve the generation of a cDNA library nor is amplification of the RNA sample necessary. In fact the RAKE assay avoids sample RNA manipulation altogether. Moreover the RAKE assay appears to be superior to prior art methods for discriminating paralogous miRNAs that differ at their 3 ends since the prior art techniques rely solely on hybridization to detect and discriminate between miRNA paralogs.

In addition since blocks of formalin fixed and paraffin embedded FFPE tissue can be assessed using the RAKE technique or other miRNA tools as described in greater detail in the Example that follows the present invention permits samples to be analyzed from the voluminous archive of human pathological specimens. This will provide a better understanding of the roles of miRNAs in healthy and disease conditions.

The present invention can employ solid substrates including arrays in some preferred embodiments. Methods and techniques applicable to polymer including protein array synthesis have been described in U.S. Ser. No. 09 536 841 WO 00 58516 U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 143 854 5 242 974 5 252 743 5 324 633 5 384 261 5 405 783 5 424 186 5 451 683 5 482 867 5 491 074 5 527 681 5 550 215 5 571 639 5 578 832 5 593 839 5 599 695 5 624 711 5 631 734 5 795 716 5 831 070 5 837 832 5 856 101 5 858 659 5 936 324 5 968 740 5 974 164 5 981 185 5 981 956 6 025 601 6 033 860 6 040 193 6 090 555 6 136 269 6 269 846 and 6 428 752 in PCT Applications Nos. PCT US99 00730 International Publication No. WO 99 36760 and PCT US01 04285 International Publication No. WO 01 58593 which are all incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention also contemplates many uses for oligomers attached to solid substrates. These uses include gene expression monitoring profiling library screening genotyping and diagnostics. Gene expression monitoring and profiling methods can be shown in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 800 992 6 013 449 6 020 135 6 033 860 6 040 138 6 177 248 and 6 309 822. Genotyping and uses therefore are shown in U.S. Ser. Nos. 10 442 021 10 013 598 U.S. Patent Application Publication 20030036069 and U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 856 092 6 300 063 5 858 659 6 284 460 6 361 947 6 368 799 and 6 333 179. Other uses are embodied in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 871 928 5 902 723 6 045 996 5 541 061 and 6 197 506.

The practice of the present invention may also employ conventional biology methods software and systems. Computer software products of the invention typically include computer readable medium having computer executable instructions for performing the logic steps of the method of the invention. Suitable computer readable medium include floppy disk CD ROM DVD DVD ROM hard disk drive flash memory ROM RAM magnetic tapes and etc. The computer executable instructions may be written in a suitable computer language or combination of several languages. Basic computational biology methods are described in for example Setubal et al. PWS Publishing Company Boston 1997 Salzberg Searles Kasif Ed. Elsevier Amsterdam 1998 Rashidi and Buehler CRC Press London 2000 and Ouelette and Bzevanis Wiley Sons Inc. 2ed. 2001 . See also e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 6 420 108.

The present invention may also make use of various computer program products and software for a variety of purposes such as probe design management of data analysis and instrument operation. See e.g. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 593 839 5 795 716 5 733 729 5 974 164 6 066 454 6 090 555 6 185 561 6 188 783 6 223 127 6 229 911 and 6 308 170.

Additionally the present invention may have preferred embodiments that include methods for providing genetic information over networks such as the Internet as shown in U.S. Ser. Nos. 10 197 621 10 063 559 10 065 856 10 065 868 10 328 818 10 328 872 10 423 403 and 60 482 389.

Additional objects advantages and novel features of the invention will be set forth in part in the detailed protocols used as non limiting examples that follow and in part will become apparent to those skilled in the art on examination of the following or may be learned by practice of the invention. The following examples however are understood to be illustrative only and are not to be construed as limiting the scope of the appended claims.

The practice of the present invention may employ unless otherwise indicated conventional techniques and descriptions of organic chemistry polymer technology molecular biology including recombinant techniques cell biology biochemistry and immunology which are within the skill of the art. Such conventional techniques include polymer array synthesis hybridization ligation and detection of hybridization using a label. Specific illustrations of suitable techniques can be had by reference to the example herein below. However other equivalent conventional procedures can of course also be used. Such conventional techniques and descriptions can be found in standard laboratory manuals such as Vols. I IV and all from Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Stryer 1995 4th Ed. Freeman N.Y. Gait Oligonucleotide Synthesis A Practical Approach 1984 IRL Press London Nelson and Cox 2000 Lehninger 3rd Ed. W.H. Freeman Pub. New York N.Y. and Berg et al. 2002 5th Ed. W.H. Freeman Pub. New York N.Y. all of which are herein incorporated in their entirety by reference for all purposes.

Methods for conducting polynucleotide hybridization assays have been well developed in the art. Hybridization assay procedures and conditions will vary depending on the application and are selected in accordance with the general binding methods known including those referred to in Maniatis et al. 2Ed. Cold Spring Harbor N.Y 1989 Berger and Kimmel Vol. 152 Academic Press Inc. San Diego Calif. 1987 Young and Davis 80 1194 1983 . Methods and apparatus for carrying out repeated and controlled hybridization reactions have also been described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 871 928 5 874 219 6 045 996 and 6 386 749 6 391 623 each of which are incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention also contemplates signal detection of hybridization between ligands in certain preferred embodiments. See e.g. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 143 854 5 578 832 5 631 734 5 834 758 5 936 324 5 981 956 6 025 601 6 141 096 6 185 030 6 201 639 6 218 803 and 6 225 625 in U.S. Ser. No. 10 389 194 and in PCT Application PCT US99 06097 published as WO99 47964 each of which also is hereby incorporated by reference.

Methods and apparatus for signal detection and processing of intensity data are disclosed in for example U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 143 854 5 547 839 5 578 832 5 631 734 5 800 992 5 834 758 5 856 092 5 902 723 5 936 324 5 981 956 6 025 601 6 090 555 6 141 096 6 185 030 6 201 639 6 218 803 and 6 225 625 in U.S. Ser. Nos. 10 389 194 60 493 495 and in PCT Application PCT US99 06097 published as WO99 47964 each of which also is hereby incorporated by reference.

Cell batches from HeLa and Jurkat cells and RNA were processed separately for biological replicates. RNA was purified initially using Trizol LS reagent InVitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . Human tissue was procured in accordance with accepted procedures. From archival FFPE tissue blocks RNA was initially isolated essentially as previously described Korbler et al. 74 336 340 2003 . Briefly Citrisolv Fisher Scientific Pittsburgh Pa. was used as a xylene substitute and Trizol LS was used after deparaffinization. CitriSolv clearing deparaffinizing agent is nontoxic and biodegradable and provided results comparable with xylene.

Fresh tissues from two different brain tumors a malignant meningioma and an anaplastic oligodendroglioma were dissected by a neuropathologist. Fresh tissue was placed in a RNALater solution Ambion Inc Austin Tex. . RNA was subsequently isolated from this fresh tissue using Trizol . For the anaplastic oligodendroglioma the RNA from fresh tissue was compared against adjacent tissue from the same tumor that had been formalin fixed and paraffin embedded FFPE using conventional anatomic pathology methods. For fresh tissue cultured cells and FFPE tissue RNA was further processed using a kit designed to isolate low molecular weight RNA MirVana kit from Ambion . For Northern blots whole RNA was isolated from the cells or tissues using the Trizol LS reagent. RNA was then run on 20 urea PAGE gels blotted and probed using 5 end radiolabeled probes against the indicated miRNAs as previously described by Nelson et al. 10 387 394 2004 . Blots were exposed on phosphorimager screens overnight and signals were scanned and quantified using a Storm 860 Phosphorimager Molecular Dynamics Sunnyvale Calif. .

Probe DNA oligonucleotides were synthesized at 600 pmol on 384 well plates Qiagen each containing a 5 terminal C6 amino modified linker. Each probe had a sequence as depicted in 5 linker m13 like spacer thymidines and sequence antisense to miRNAs except for a control probe which contained the spacer only. Probes were suspended at 40 M in 150 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 8.5 200U ml print buffer with 0.0005 Sarkosyl.

A GeneMachines OmniGrid 100 robot printed probes onto CodeLink slides Amersham Bioscience Piscataway N.J. at 30 35 humidity at 24 27 C. Each spot element measured 120 m in diameter with center to center spacing of 400 m. Each glass slide contained 6 spots three spatially separated pairs corresponding to each probe for a total 1422 spots including controls. Further chemical blocking of the spotted glass slide was found to be unnecessary.

Small RNA hybridizations were found to optimally include more than 2 g total mass per slide. Less can be used but the signal was weaker for less abundant miRNAs. Spotted microarray slides were processed using an automated hybridization apparatus Tecan HS4800 Tecan Trading AG Switzerland which greatly facilitated sample processing and allowed near identical handling of all microarray slides throughout.

The concentrated hybridization buffer is composed of 15 formamide 15 SSC. DNA oligonucleotide spike ins corresponding to plant miRNAs ath miR 157 ath miR 163 and ath miR 169 prepared beforehand in a solution at 10M 10 M and 10M respectively diluted in water. For all hybridization and enzymatic steps RNAsin 0.4U l Promega Biosciences Inc. San Luis Obispo Calif. was included. The protocol involves the following sequence 1 minute wash in 2 SSC at 25 C. 5 minute rinse in 5 SSC with 10 formamide at 25 C. 3 30 second rinses in 2 SSC at 25 C. 18 hour target probe hybridization 35 l concentrated hybridization buffer 65 l small RNA preparation containing 4 g low molecular weight RNA and 10 l plant DNA spike in solution which were together heated to 75 C. and allowed to cool at room temperature prior to hybridization at 25 C. This was followed by 3 1 minute rinses in 2 SSC at 37 C. 3 hour incubation with Exonuclease I New England Biolabs Ipswich Mass. fresh buffer at pH 7.5 4U pi at 27 C. 3 1 min. rinses in 2 SSC at 27 C. 10 minute rinse in 2 SSC with 0.05 SDS at 27 C. 4 1 minute rinse in 2 SSC at 37 C. 60 minute incubation with Exo Klenow Promega 0.15 U l in 1 DNA polymerase buffer Promega with biotin 7 dATP InVitrogen 4 M at 27 C. 2 1 min. rinse in 2 SSC at 25 C. 30 min incubation with streptavidin conjugated Alexa fluor 547 Molecular Probes 15 ng l at 25 C. 3 1 min. rinses in 2 SSC at 25 C.

A concentration curve was generated using a synthetic target RNA oligonucleotide miR 124a in the background of a complex RNA mixture low molecular weight RNA isolated from HeLa cells a cell line that does not contain miR124a . Plant miRNA spike ins were used at concentrations listed above.

Slides were scanned using a Genepix 4000B laser scanner Axon Molecular Devices Sunnyvale Calif. at a constant power level and sensitivity 550 PMT using a single color channel 532 nm wavelength . Non hybridizing and artifact associated spots were eliminated by both visual and software guided flags. Image intensities were measured as a function of the median of foreground minus background. Negative values were normalized to zero but no other normalizations were performed. Images were analyzed using the Genepix Pro5.0 software package. Excel and Genespring 6.2 were used for further data analysis. Testing discrimination of miRNA paralogs.

RNA oligonucleotides corresponding to 3 different miRNA paralogous pairs 6 different miRNAs were synthesized and purified by PAGE. Corresponding antisense DNA oligonucleotides were also made and served as probes in Northern blots. RAKE experiments were performed using 0.1 pmoles 6 10molecules of each synthetic miRNA.

Hybridizations were performed in a complex mixture containing 2 g of small RNA from Jurkat cells which do not normally express any of these 6 synthetic miRNAs see . Microarray experiments contained 6 spots probes for each synthetic miRNA and were performed in duplicate 12 spots total for each synthetic miRNA . 0.1 pmoles of each synthetic miRNA was fractionated on 15 urea PAGE for Northern blots which were performed in duplicate. Detection and signal quantification for RAKE assays and Northern blots were performed as described above.

A method was developed to achieve high throughput gene expression analyses of miRNAs. To eliminate systematic bias associated with RNA ligation steps amplification cDNA intermediaries or separate fluorophore labeling on slide enzymatic reactions methods recognized in the art for other purposes were used.

The assay is shown in schematic form in . DNA oligonucleotide probes having 3 halves complementary to specific miRNAs e.g. let 7a and having shared 5 halves spacer were synthesized and covalently cross linked at their 5 termini onto glass microarray slides. Three thymidines separated the spacer from the remainder of the DNA probe which was antisense to specific miRNAs. The RNA sample containing miRNAs was hybridized and after washes the slide was treated with Exonuclease I which specifically degraded single stranded unhybridized probes. The slide was again washed and the Klenow fragment of the DNA polymerase I was applied along with biotinylated dATP B dATP . While any biotin conjugated dATP may be used and it is available in many places in the present example biotin 7 dATP InVitrogen was used. The hybridized miRNAs act as primers for the Klenow enzyme and the immobilized DNA probe acts as a template leading to incorporation of B dATPs. The slide was then washed and a streptavidin conjugated fluorophore was applied to visualize and analyze the spots containing hybridized and Klenow extended miRNAs.

In principle either the Exonuclease I reaction protection of a tagged immobilized probe from nuclease by hybridization to a miRNA or the Klenow DNA polymerase primer extension from the hybridized miRNA on an immobilized probe template should be effective alone to produce accurate microarray based detection of miRNAs. However microarrays and protocols designed to use either of these enzymes without the other resulted in high background signal levels. It was subsequently determined that the sequential application of these enzymes as described above and below was optimal. A glass slide microarray was developed including probe spots corresponding to 239 miRNAs sequences were obtained from the official microRNA registry Griffiths Jones 32 Database issue D109 111 2004 spotted in three pairs throughout the slide for a total of 1422 spots per microarray including miRNAs from humans mice rats and

Included also were DNA probes complementary to plant miRNAs on the microarray both for negative controls and for future studies involving Three separate miRNA spike ins were used. Synthetic DNA oligonucleotides corresponding to the three plant miRNAs ath miR 157 ath miR 163 and ath miR 169 were introduced in each hybridization step. For each hybridization the final concentration of ath miR 157 ath miR 163 and ath miR 169 were 10M 10M and 10M respectively. These spike in DNA oligonucleotides were used to assist normalization and to provide absolute reference points for each study see below and . AthmiR 157 at 10M 6.02 10probe molecules 100 l hybridization reaction provided an internal control for the highest fluorescent signal level.

The sensitivity of the RAKE assay was investigated by using a synthetic RNA target oligonucleotide corresponding to the sequence of mature miR 124a. The results are shown in with each concentration representing duplicate arrays 12 data points each . Low molecular weight LMW RNA isolated from HeLa cells was included to compose a complex RNA background. MiR 21 a normal component of HeLa cells and the miR 157 DNA spike in did not vary significantly at different concentrations of miR 124a . The dynamic signal of miR 124a spanned at least three orders of magnitude . These results were not normalized and thus demonstrate the robust nature of the raw data.

RNAs derived from human epithelial and hematopoietic cell lines were evaluated as well as RNAs derived from two human brain tumors Table 1 .

In order to minimize the likelihood of cross hybridization only LMW RNA was used in the microarray hybridizations. LMW RNA was isolated using a commercially available kit that successfully separated smaller from larger RNA species. The resulting LMW RNAs from the FFPE tissue appeared relatively less degraded than the larger RNAs from FFPE tissue . It was also considered that miRNAs could be isolated from archival formalin fixed paraffin embedded FFPE pathological material since short segments of RNAs have been shown to be preserved in FFPE tissue Van Deerlin et al. 27 993 1003 2002 and siRNAs are relatively slow to degrade in vivo Chiu et al. 10 549 561 2002 .

To directly compare the performance of RAKE with RNA isolated from fresh or FFPE material tissue was obtained from a surgically removed human brain tumor anaplastic oligodendroglioma . RNA was isolated from half of the specimen and the other half of the specimen was submitted for routine FFPE processing. RNA was then isolated from 50 M thick serial sections from the paraffin block. Consistent with prior studies RNA prepared from fresh tissue appeared to be less degraded than that of FFPE tissue . It was also found that an appreciable amount of total RNA up to 10 grams could be isolated from a single 50 M thick section of FFPE tissue.

Specimens were analyzed using three replicates for all RNA samples biological replicates for HeLa and Jurkat cells and technical replicates for human brain tumor tissue. Technical replicates were performed on the human brain tumors. A statistically definitive miRNA profile for individual tumor types will result from further analyses of more human data. Valid conclusions about the RNA sampled in the replicates is set forth in greater detail elsewhere herein.

Most negatively hybridizing spots exhibited less of a signal as compared with background . Signal was defined as the median of foreground spot fluorescence at 532 nm wavelength minus background defined by surrounding pixel intensity . Negative values were normalized to zero. Otherwise no normalization was used since there was only a single dye the number of samples was only 239 and values were consistent across the microarray slides as described elsewhere herein. A summary of the mean of the three replicates for all five samples RNA from HeLa cells Jurkat cells malignant meningioma and fresh and FFPE derived anaplastic oligodendroglioma tissue is presented in . Results from duplicated miRNAs ath miRNAs and other controls suggest that only ath miR 319 showed nonspecific signal positive in some experiments without RNA targets due to a technical problem with this particular probe.

The DNA spike in oligonucleotides produced high signal as expected. Some miRNAs demonstrated high signal in multiple tissues e.g. miR 15 miR 16 let 7f whereas others were relatively restricted to certain tissue types e.g. miR 27b in HeLa cells SEQID No 4 miR148 in Jurkat cells miR 199b in malignant meningioma and miR 9 in the fresh and FFPE anaplastic oligodendroglioma . Biological and technical replicates were highly correlated with coefficients of correlation R 0.9 . Representative examples are shown in . Note also that the fresh and FFPE anaplastic oligodendroglioma showed results that were highly correlated R2 0.9 with each other showing that formalin fixation and paraffin embedding did not significantly skew the miRNA profile.

Northern blots were used to evaluate selected data obtained by RAKE . These experiments were performed on total RNA. Although the results were for the most part the same between RAKE and the Northern blots there was some discrepancy. The largest discrepancy was for miR 23b which by Northern blots showed robust signal for both HeLa and malignant meningioma derived RNA. RAKE showed no detectable amounts of miR 23b in all samples. These results suggest that miR 23b expression was indeed low or absent in these tissues. However in Northern blots the miR 23b DNA oligonucleotide probe might cross hybridize with the paralogous miRNA miR 23a miR 23a 5 aucacauugccagggauuucc SEQ ID NO 1 mir23b 5 aucacauugccagggauuaccac SEQ ID NO 2 . By contrast the RAKE assay discriminated the difference between miR 23a and miR 23b because like many paralogs miR 23a and miR 23b differ at their 3 end. Consequently they could only prime Klenow extension when they were hybridized to the appropriate specific probe.

To further test the ability of RAKE to discriminate between paralogous miRNAs parallel microarray and Northern blot experiments were performed on three separate paralogous miRNA pairs SEQID Nos 1 2 and 4 7 that differed primarily at their 3 ends most differences between miRNA paralogs are found at the 3 ends . Each paralogous miRNA 0.1 pmoles 6 10molecules was analyzed by RAKE and on Northern blots C . The mean signal intensity expressed in log units for each miRNA was determined in RAKE n 1.2 and in Northern blots n 2 . A ratio between the paralogous miRNAs was calculated for each pair shown in . The results of this analysis showed that RAKE is superior to Northern blots in discriminating miRNA paralogs.

For example the power of RAKE to discriminate between hsa miR 23a 23b paralogs in a sample containing hsa miR 23a SEQID No 1 was 9.6 times 13.9 1.44 that of the Northern blots. Similarly the power of RAKE to discriminate between hsa miR 23a 23b paralogs in a sample containing hsa miR 23b SEQID No 2 was 10.6 times 0.85 0.08 that of the Northern blots. These values are somewhat different for each miRNA paralog tested in . It was likely due to at least two factors. First the number identity and position of the nucleotide differences between the paralogous miRNAs may have influenced their hybridization properties. Second the use of B dATP in the RAKE assay may have reduced its power to discriminate between certain miRNA paralogs. As described above B dATP was used along with Klenow enzyme to extend hybridized miRNAs. When hsa miR 200b present in the sample RNA hybridized to the mmu miR 200b probe which is the antisense DNA sequence of mmu miR 200b SEQID No 7 the Klenow enzyme incorporated a single B dATP molecule on the hsa miR 200b SEQID No 6 . This is because the mmu miR 200b probe contains a thymidine corresponding to the adenine underlined in found in the 3 end of mmu miR 200b but not found in hsa miR 200b.

For the same reason hsa miR 23a SEQID No 1 gave a weak signal on RAKE on the hsa miR 23b SEQID No 2 spot B . In contrast up to three B dATP molecules may be incorporated when hsa miR 200b hybridizes to its own probe because there are three consecutive thymidines corresponding to Spacer sequences SEQID No 3 after the 3 end of the hsa miR 200b DNA probe SEQID No 6 leading to a stronger signal on RAKE. This also applies to hsa miR 23a SEQID No 1 when hybridized to its own probe. Nevertheless RAKE is still superior to Northern blots in discriminating paralogous miRNAs differing at the 3 ends . The discriminating power of RAKE towards paralogous miRNAs that differ by the presence of additional adenine s at their 3 ends such as hsa miR 23b SEQID No 2 versus hsa miR23a SEQID No 2 also may be improved by using B dNTPs other than dATP and modifying the sequences of the spacer accordingly.

Accordingly the invention has established a microarray platform to enable high throughput gene expression analyses of small RNAs. In addition the RAKE assay may have applications besides miRNA gene expression profiling and the ability to apply the Klenow enzyme with high sensitivity and specificity as a RNA or DNA primed polymerase on a microarray slide will open the door to further interesting studies including for example viral gene expression profiling.

Each and every patent patent application and publication that is cited in the foregoing specification is herein incorporated by reference in its entirety.

While the foregoing specification has been described with regard to certain preferred embodiments and many details have been set forth for the purpose of illustration it will be apparent to those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention that the invention may be subject to various modifications and additional embodiments and that certain of the details described herein can be varied considerably without departing from the basic principles of the invention. Such modifications and additional embodiments are also intended to fall within the scope of the appended claims.

