---

title: Handheld instrument for monitoring and/or identification of chemicals
abstract: A Computer Vision Chemical Detector has been developed that uses invertebrate organisms trained to respond to targeted chemical odors.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07607338&OS=07607338&RS=07607338
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of Agriculture
number: 07607338
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050720
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 592 737 filed Jul. 30 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The present invention relates to a chemical detection system which uses computer vision technology for chemical monitoring and or identification using invertebrates especially insects. It also relates to methods for using the system to monitor and or identify chemicals.

Detector systems have played an integral and beneficial role in our culture for many years. Governmental institutions medicine agriculture education industry and households rely on chemical and physical detectors for safety quality control research and communication. Gas chromatography and mass spectrometry have advanced the understanding of chemistry and the ecology and physiology of species Olson et al. Physiol. Entomol. 1999 volume 25 17 26 2000 Pare et al. Plant Physiol. Volume 114 1161 1167 1997 and x rays and laser imaging have provided a means for detecting pathologies Boice et al. JAMA Volume 265 1290 1294 1991 Graham Rowe New Scientist Volume 159 24 1998 including the quality of foods Price et al. Food Technology Volume 44 6 1990 . Radar sensors are used internationally for communication navigation and entertainment Galatie et al. Iee Proceedings RADAR SONAR and Navigation Volume 144 156 162 1997 and Doppler radar systems monitor global weather patterns Condella Earth Volume 7 56 58 1998 . Near infrared detectors monitor general vegetation health in agricultural systems Bosch Precision Farming 20 24 1997 accelerometers are used in cars to detect crash and signal deployment of airbags and detectors are installed in homes to indicate the presence of harmful radiation chemicals and smoke Edgerton et al. Environ. Science Technology Volume 20 803 807 1986 Lamarine et al. J. Community Health Volume 17 291 401 1992 .

Many of our technological developments have already been adapted from nature for example sonar gyroscopes heating and air conditioning aviation polyester etc. Au Bioacoustics Volume 8 137 162 1997 Engels et al. Studies on Neotropical Fauna and Environment Volume 30 193 205 1995 Sherman Agricultural Research Volume 37 18 1989 . However with the exception of capturing the bioluminescence of fireflies beeswax from bees and the use of domestic animals as detectors Cherfas New Scientist Volume 122 45 1989 King et al. Nature Volume 249 778 781 1990 reliance on nature as models for technological development has been generally lacking. Only recently are investigations in the areas of robotics and biomimetics Goldner R D Magazine Volume 35 77 1993 Shimozawa Rob. Autom. Syst. Volume 18 75 82 1996 Srinivasan Materials Science Engineering C biomimetic Materials Sensors and Systems Volume 4 19 26 1996 Weibecker et al. Talanta Volume 44 2217 2224 1997 discovering nature s potential as models for technological development.

Domesticated animals particularly dogs have been relied upon as detectors. Historically humans and domesticated animals have had a close association and many of these species have an incredible ability to detect objects and scents. Humans have been able to harness these abilities largely through training because of their ability to learn. Dogs have been successfully trained to detect narcotics accelerants used in arson and explosives including landmines and to track game and missing persons in search and rescue operations. However the learning process and human relationship with these domesticated animals to create the responses to trained stimuli has never been totally understood. It is known that these animals often traverse and operate as effective detectors in less natural arenas possibly because their historic domesticity has allowed them many years of adaptation to these environments. This ability has provided us with a means to utilize these trained and reliable detectors for our benefit in many different environments.

The U.S. Army Center for Environmental Health and Research USCEHR has devised a method for using bluegill sunfish for monitoring a broad range of toxins in water http usacehr.detrick.army.mil envsen2.html . The aquatic biomonitor uses mounted electrodes to monitor signals generated in the water by the movement of the fish. When six or more of the eight parameters are detected as abnormal the system initiates an alert. The system responds within an hour to most chemicals at toxic levels. This aquatic biomonitor is currently being implemented in a New York City reservoir.

Research by APOPO at the Sokoine University of Agriculture in Tanzania has led to the development of a successful regiment for training African Giant Pouched Rats to non destructively detect landmines and accurately detect tuberculosis http www.apopo.org . The rats are capable of residual explosive scent tracing REST and direct detection of buried mines. The rats can be brought samples for identification or taken out and led through suspected mine fields. For tuberculosis detection the rats have shown success in discriminating between positive and negative sputum samples without the need for expensive test equipment.

Insentinel Ltd. Hertforshire UK has successfully devised a system using honeybees for trace vapor detection http www.inscentinel.com . Using image recognition software Insentinel bees can be monitor for the activity of a response to the target odor. The systems electronic output can notify a user of the presence of a single target odor.

Detecting volatile chemicals is becoming a leading method of non invasive searching. Historically the detection of volatiles has been very important in tracking illegal substances and detecting explosives but it also has been shown to be a viable means of detecting other organic materials Rains et al. unpublished 2003 . With the advancing needs of precision agriculture and homeland security efforts are being made to lower the costs and increase the efficiency of screening through the use of volatile detection. Traditional methods of detecting volatile chemicals include human olfaction canine training and electronic olfaction Gardner and Bartlett Electronic noses Principles and Applications Oxford University Press Inc. New York 1998 . Of these human and dogs are the most sensitive however both can be subjective and costly Garnder and Bartlett 1998 supra . Many electronic devices have been developed in response to the cost and reliability associated with volatile detection and range in design from simple such as a metal oxide doped transistor to complex such as an array of polymer coated sensors analyzed using neural networks. The simple designs are relatively inexpensive but are normally very specific and sensitive to low concentrations or they detect a wider range of volatiles but lack sensitivity Gardner and Bartlett 1998 supra Dicknson TIBTECH Volume 16 250 258 1998 B rgesson et al. Cereal Chemistry Volume 73 4 457 461 1996 . More elaborate electronic nose designs are inexpensive relative to training and maintaining a canine but are about 100 times less sensitive than human olfaction Raman and Gerhardt Transactions of the ASAE Volume 40 6 1699 1707 1997 Sarig J. Aric. Engng Res. Volume 77 3 239 258 2000 and the user is left to interpret the complex output Rains et al. ASAE Meeting Paper No. 01 1069 2001 .

Although existing chemical detectors are specific and reliable and have allowed major advances in our ability to monitor for target chemicals there remains a need in the art for chemical detector systems that have sensitivity programmability portability and a cryptic nature that are needed for many current problems requiring detection and monitoring. The present invention provides a system and method of chemical detection which is different from prior art methods.

It is therefore an object of the present invention to provide a computer vision detection system containing at least one trained invertebrate organism for identification of target chemicals and a camera operatively connected to a computer.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a computer vision detection system that includes at least one detection chamber containing at least one trained invertebrate organism and an air delivery system.

A still further object of the present invention is to provide a method for recording at least one response of at least one trained organism to at least one target chemical using a computer vision detection system.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a method for detecting target chemicals which includes training an invertebrate organism to display a typical behavior in response to the smell of a target chemical placing at least one trained organism in at least one detection chamber compartment containing a camera bringing air from the suspected area through the detection chamber and recording images of the organisms behavior with the camera and transmitting the images to a computer containing software for data analysis.

Invertebrate organisms can be used as highly flexible and sensitive detectors in a system for chemical monitoring and or detection. The three major areas which benefit from a sensitive portable cryptic and reliable detection system include agriculture national defense and medicine.

There is a growing need for more sensitive programmable portable and cryptic detector systems. A contained invertebrate organism such as an insect provides two means for retrieving information. First the organism interprets and expresses behavior s in response to the presence of a chemical. The expressed behavior s is distinct i.e. easily recognized and is a reliable indicator of the presence of a chemical. The organism must remain focused and is not easily distracted. Second the sensory apparatus such as antennae antennae lobe or brain for example of the contained organism can be tapped into to obtain the response. Both avenues require that the organism be delivered to the source or the source be delivered to the organism and monitored by an individual or the processed information analyzed by a programmed computer. The present invention can be used in easily accessible areas such as for example airports agricultural fields hospitals etc.

In agriculture the detectors of the present invention will allow plant and soil health to be monitored as well as interaction of species which leads to early problem detection and intervention. Current technology using remote sensing systems cannot immediately detect specific nutrient levels or early stages of pest infestations and large and expensive gas chromatography and optical and mass spectrometry equipment cannot be taken to the field which limits diagnosis to a few transported samples. In addition small rugged and inexpensive solid state chemosensors like metal doped SnO sensors lack the sensitivity and selectivity that is necessary.

In the area of national defense for chemical and biological weapons detection bio weapons cannot be detected with radiation or x ray making them well concealed and easily transported for release into transit water and food systems. Medical centers are not prepared for the delays inherent in recognizing that a bio weapon has been released. There is a need for new technology for rapid and sensitive weapon detection including the need for more cryptic means of detection in adversarial zones.

In medicine there is a need for less invasive detection of pathogens and monitoring of human and animal health. Recent studies show that dogs can be trained to noninvasively detect screwworm infested animals and breath analysis can detect peptic ulcer disease both procedures eliminating the need for painful endoscopic examinations.

The present invention separates a very specific behavior from its biological context for use as a reporting device called a response behavior. This response behavior is defined for purposes of the present invention as any behavior the organism usually displays when in close proximity to a biological resource such as for example food mate prey or host. This response behavior can be isolated from the organism s natural behavioral context and used with any chemical cue using the training method as set forth in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 826 146 146 herein incorporated by reference in its entirety. The method of the 146 application quickly programs the organisms in at least about 1 minute to about 4 hours and brings the organisms to report trained odors especially odors not related to the biology of the organism with high accuracy under a wide range of environmental conditions. The trained organisms can pick out a single chemical from a chemical blend after being trained to that chemical. Knowledge of the chemical nature of the programmed odors is not necessary.

This invention provides a portable computer vision system to utilize invertebrates especially insects trained to detect volatile chemical odors. Insects have experienced intense selection pressure for sensitive and effective ability to locate mates food and hosts in nature. For example Cresson are endoparasitoids of the larvae of Boddie and are able to detect and respond to volatile chemicals from host plant sources in amounts as low as 4.5 10M. Such low detection thresholds are comparable to those of vertebrates Smith et al. Annu. Rev. Entomol. Volume 39 351 375 1995 Stoddart In The Ecology of Vertebrate Olfaction 58 62 1980 Chapman and Hall New York N.Y. . Insects are able to learn which allows them to be programmable. Only recently the breadth of insects learning abilities has been discovered Papaj et al. In. Insect Learning. Ecological and Evolutionary Perspectives. Chapman and Hall 1993 Vet et al. In Chemical Ecology of Insects 2 65 101 1995 Chapman and Hall New York N.Y. . Invertebrates have a very short generation time and they can be easily reared in large numbers. The great diversity of insects allow different species to be drawn upon for use in specific habitats or environments.

Any organism trained to detect a volatile odor can be used with device of the present invention. Device is a portable computer vision system which has a means for introducing a sample of air from a suspected area into at least one detection chamber containing at least one trained organism . Device is a programmable portable and cryptic detector system for detecting at least one chemical such as for example those contained in explosives those associated with microorganism contamination those associated with parasitic contamination those associated with various contraband etc. Components of detector include a laptop computer web camera and a data analysis system not shown a ventilated area a lighting source and a detection chamber . The analysis of the information received from camera is performed on a laptop computer with one computer serial port input line interfacing with camera . One of ordinary skill in the art could readily determine how to perform the information analysis using any type of hardware that is compatible with a software program capable of analyzing data received from camera from the following detailed description.

Detector has an air system which slowly brings air from outside the system to be tested into the ventilated area through an opening in the base of chamber of device and exhausts it. Air system includes a ventilation fan within body and ventilated area and includes the inside of body and cap . Ventilation fan can be any fan which draws less than 0.43 cubic feet per minute CFM in a range of about 0.1 to about 0.3 cubic feet per minute. Examples of ventilation fan useful in the present invention include for example a flat unidirectional CPU fan DigiKey P11086 ND . One of ordinary skill in the art could readily determine what type of fan to use given the detailed description of the present invention. Fan is attached to top of device using any fastening means such as for example any type of screw. Fan speed is variable between about 12.18 milliliters minute or about 0.43 cubic feet per minute to purge the system and less than 12.18 milliliters minute under testing conditions. Speed is varied through the use of a single pole double throw SPDT switch and about a 56 Ohm current limiting resistor not shown . The resistor is soldered onto one of the leads of switch . One of ordinary skill in art could readily determine where to place the resistor following the circuit diagram . Fan allows the creation of an odor gradient inside cap and body by slowly drawing outside air through port located in cap . A funnel shaped inlet frictionally attaches to port on the outside bottom of cap or in the base of chamber and extends through cap and allows air to be drawn into cap and into detection chamber where at least one trained organism is located. The air exits through the top of chamber and is subsequently drawn through body and out ventilation fan .

A power source not shown is provided to device through a universal serial bus USB connection not shown . A USB cable is hard wired to camera lighting source and fan in parallel and all are powered by the computer through the USB cable. Standard wire of about 31 to about 24 AWG and wire to wire connectors such as Molex connectors for example are used to make all electrical branchings from the USB cable not shown .

As shown in and detection chamber provides a container for the trained invertebrate which is sized to allow sufficient movement of several trained invertebrates but not so large as to diminish their timely responsiveness . Chamber has to be well ventilated and transparent in order to monitor and illuminate the interior. Detection chamber is constructed of light weight transparent material which does not absorb odors. Examples include a plastic glass acrylic etc. which allows viewing of trained organism . In the embodiment used in the example below a Millipore Aerosol Analysis Monitor was used for body . Top was a lid for a Millipore PetriSlide modified to fit the body and thoroughly perforated to allow for ventilation by fan . A wire mesh disc was placed in the bottom of the body to prevent the trained vertebrate from escaping through the inlet and .

For purposes of the present invention invertebrates include for example Arthropods including but not limited to wasps bees moths butterflies beetles true bugs e.g. assassin bugs and arachnids for example including but not limited to spiders mites ticks and scorpions Crustaceans for example including but not limited to crayfish lobster and crabs and mollusks for example including but not limited to snails slugs squids and clams.

Housing of device includes a top a body and a cap which keeps all of the components positioned statically and allows for consistent uniform lighting from lighting source . Any component of housing can be of any material which is compatible with the air being sampled and does not absorb odors. Examples include polyvinylchloride PVC Teflon glass etc. Determination of useful materials for housing is well within the ordinary skill in the art.

Body can be of any size or shape to house sensor means which is camera . Typically body is cylindrical in shape with a top opening and bottom opening to form a ventilated area . Body can be made of any material as discussed above for housing such as for example schedule PVC pipe. The dimensions of body used in the example below were about 15.72 cm length and about 7.62 cm width. Body contains 3 through openings into which are placed a middle alignment screw and two side alignment screws on three of its quadrants for supporting or suspending sensor means inside body . Any means for supporting or suspending sensor means is useful the determination of which is within the ordinary skill in the art given the present detailed description. Examples of other means for supporting or suspending sensor means include for example a non odorous epoxy or glue. Two of through openings on opposing sides holding side support screws are located approximately 7.66 cm from the top of body and the third through opening which holds middle alignment screw is located approximately 8.85 cm from the top of body . A fourth opening cap align screw drilled halfway through the inside or outside of the body wall wall of body is located about 3.81 cm from the top for a bolt to properly align top . Cap frictionally attaches to body to enclose bottom opening . Cap can be of any size or shape that fits body determination of which is well within the ordinary skill in the art. In example 3 below cap is an approximately 7.62 centimeter flat bottomed PVC cap Genova Plumbing Products 70153 notched with notch for consistent placement. The center of the inside of cap was bored out to a depth of about 0.3175 cm and diameter of about 3.97 cm. An approximately 0.4 cm diameter cap through opening not shown was made in the center of the bore to allow air to be drawn into the ventilation area. Two detection chamber brackets are located on each side of the bore and are used to hold test cartridge in the bored out area. Brackets are made of any soft metal and each are held in place by one screw and two washers . Brackets can be made of any material that has elasticity such as for example plastic metal rubber etc. One of ordinary skill in the art could readily determine how to secure chamber in cap . The top of body is capped with top which is a flat and circular in shape. Top is approximately 0.635 cm thick. Top is held in place by two screws . Washers provide a spacing between top and body which controls the flow rate of the intake of inlet . An opening is cut into top to allow for mounting of ventilation fan . The size of the opening is determined by the size of the ventitilation fan which is within the ordinary skill in the art. In example 3 device has a flat CPU fan DigiKey P 11036 N has an opening which is approximately 2.3 cm. A rectangular shaped opening is placed about 2.06 cm from the center of top to allow for mounting of switch . The size and shape of the opening is determined by the type of switch used and is within the ordinary skill in the art. For a SPDT switch and 56 Ohm resistor opening was approximately 0.79 cm 1.59 cm. Inside of body lighting source bracket can be made of any material and can be of any shape which will hold lighting source against the inside of body . Bracket is mounted using bracket screws approximately 0.635 cm from the bottom of body to hold a lighting source in place. Lighting source is mounted to the lower part of body using a bracket and screws . Lighting source must provide consistent uniform lighting. One example of lighting source is a white mcd LED DigiKey CMD333UWC and a current limiting 46 Ohm resistor. One of ordinary skill in the art could readily determine the type of light source given the detailed description of the present invention.

Computer vision system of the present invention includes a camera a laptop and a software package. Computer vision is a vast field integrating the principles of electrical computer and optical engineering. Its application varies but the guiding principle behind computer vision is to allow for automated visual inspection. Much like the human visual system a minimal computer vision system consists of a camera eye for acquiring images and an electronic or computer device brain for processing those images.

Each image acquired must be captured in or converted to a digital format before it can be processed in the computer. An image is digitally represented by small sections called pixels. The amount of pixels used to represent a single image is dependent upon the camera s detector or frame grabber. Each pixel has an intensity value associated with it. For example a pixel within an image of 8 bit resolution can take on a value from about 0 to about 255 2 1 . In a 8 bit grayscale image 0 is black 255 is white and everything in between is a shade of gray. Each picture is digitized by turning it into a two dimensional array x y coordinates of values.

Some images taken do not make use of the full resolution available. For example an 8 bit image with no pixels that takes on the value of 0 and or 255 does not take advantage of the full scale resolution offered by the 8 bits. By normalizing the pixel values the full image resolution can be taken advantage of allowing for greater contrast. Take for example an 8 bit image containing 4 pixels with values of 100 230 75 and 200 . There is a clear edge within this image that separates it into right large values and left small values side. The contrast between the two halves of the image can be increased by normalizing the pixel values using the following equation 2 1 Here P x y is the normalized pixel value calculated for location x y using image resolution N the current pixel value at location x y and the maximum and minimum pixel value within the image. The normalized pixel values are 41 255 0 and 205 with 41 at top left 0 bottom left 255 top right and 205 bottom right . There is now more contrast between the right and left side allowing for easier processing.

A larger image contrast allows for easier edge detection and object identification through segmentation. For example a grayscale image can be converted to a binary image through binary segmentation with a user defined threshold. All pixels of value lower than that of the threshold are forced to zero black all pixels of value higher than the threshold are forced to 1 white . This binary image can be used to quickly classify each pixel as being a member of one or two classes such as background or objects of interest.

Grayscale value frequency data provided by histograms offers valuable information when selecting segmentation thresholds. Thresholds for creating good binary images are often selected within values of the frequency data. Additionally histograms inherently offer total and member class pixel counts .

If any of these processing techniques are to be applied only to a select region of interest ROI a mask must be applied to the image. Like a stencil a mask covers any part of an image to be ignored and exposes the area to be viewed studied modified etc. Mask application allows for focusing the processing time and efforts only of the region of interest.

National Instruments LabVIEW is a development suite based on the G programming language for easily creating software for signal data and image acquisition and processing LabVIEW User Manual 2004 . Through a drag and drop process users are able to quickly create their own graphical user interfaces GUIs and code. Each file created is known as a Virtual Instrument VI and a VI embedded inside another VI is called a subVI. The creation of subVIs is crucial to creating easily scalable and readable code.

Every VI is comprised of two parts the front panel and the Block Diagram. The Front Panel is where the user interface is created. Knobs gauges sliders graphs etc. are created by simply dragging dropping and resizing them on the Front Panel. For each control and indicator created on the Front Panel a node is automatically created for it in the block diagram. The Block Diagram contains the code for the VI. Like the Front Panel each function is placed within the Block Diagram through a drag and drop process. It is possible to create nodes which contain text based code.

A wide variety of extra functionalities can be added to the base LabVIEW installation through add ons. Some add on packages can include analysis connectivity motion control control design personal digital assistant PDA and application building toolkits. Additionally National Instruments offers a Vision Development Module for image processing tasks currently not ported for PDA s . The Visional Development Module allows a user to easily incorporate masking normalizing segmentation and image histograms into a VI.

The software created using LabVIEW 6.1 and Peter Parente s Lab VIEW WebCam Library gives a user the power to perform several tasks related to observing and analyzing insect crowding behavior including taking single snapshots capturing time stamped pictures extracting time variant information from still pictures using image processing and capturing and analyzing insect behavior in real time.

There are several basic image manipulation and analysis techniques forming the core process that allows the software to analyze the crowding behavior of insects. These techniques include masking normalizing creating histograms and binary segmentation as discussed above. The core process is utilized in both time stamped and real time image processing features. The captured image is first masked using a 320 240 pixel mask of the user s choice in order to select the region of interest . The pixel data within the region of interest is normalized and segmented resulting in a binary image. The amount of black pixels within the region of interest are counted and divided by the total number of pixels within the region of interest. The time variant percent black pixel data is integrated using the Trapezoidal Rule Equation 2 to produce time variant integration curves.

For immediate results a user utilizes the real time image analysis sub VI. This sub VI allows a user to capture and process images in real time. The activity is quantified and displayed graphically on screen. At this point the user is left to manually input positive response conditions however incorporation of a calibration routine to automatically determine those conditions can be added. When a positive response is recognized the user is alerted See .

To record the organism behavior and analyze it later there is a sub VI for capturing time stamped still shots of the organisms every about 250 milliseconds some variation is present in the capture interval lengths due to computer latency . The directory of images are recorded and saved in a global.inf file. The last 10 directories are recorded and .

To analyze the captured time stamped still shots a sub VI has been created to process them. This sub VI allows a user to browse a data disk for recorded images and set masking and threshold parameters. Additionally it records the number and percentages of black pixels within the region of interest and the resulting cumulative integration for the time variant stills to a file of the users choice and .

Global parameters are set using a settings sub VI accessible from the main menu of the software. The settings sub VI allows for modification of camera masking and threshold parameters contained in the global.inf file. The global.inf file allows for the easy loading of parameters into all of the other sub VIs.

For users who would like to take a single picture a sub VI has been created to save single snapshots from the camera .

Camera can be any camera which can send digital images to a computer. One example of camera is a webcamera. Camera is connected to computer having a data analysis system with one computer USB input line interfacing with each sensor.

In operation ventilation fan pulls air to be sampled into housing and into detection chamber . Air flow is controlled by fan speed and the spacing between top and body created by washers which should be from about 0.1 to about 0.3 cfm. As the air enters chamber through an opening in the base of chamber it passes at least one trained organism . If the sampled air contains the chemical or chemicals to which organism is trained organism will exhibit area restricted searching behavior within the region of interest surrounding chamber inlet.

Device with at least one trained organism is then placed in an area suspected of containing at least one target chemical. Air is drawn in from the air suspected of having the at least one target chemical into the system using ventilation fan and into detection chamber past the at least one organism. If response behavior is displayed the software will alert the user with sound and visually with a blinking screen within about 25 seconds. The system is then purged with clean air by increasing fan speed. The at least one trained organism will remain trained for about 48 hours before retraining or replacement.

The parasitic wasp is used as a model organism to show trained organisms in a system for chemical detection. Cresson is a solitary larval parasitoid of and species . Adult females forage for food and hosts according to their physiological needs and females may use learned odors to locate both resources. Thus females with experience on a plant host complex or on host frass faeces are attracted to the odor of the plant host complex and to host frass odor. Naive females antennating frass link it with an odor with a nonvolatile recognition kairomone found in frass that reinforces associative learning. In a similar fashion naive females that are feeding on nectar or sugar water link the associated odor to the food resource. In this manner wasps learn odors associated with the presence of hosts or food and subsequently use these odors as cues while foraging for more host or adult food. Wasps are readily conditioned to fly coil head stick or antennate in response to odors associated with a host or food source. In the following examples the number of wasps crowding around the chamber inlet where odor is emitted region of interest is recorded. This response is called the crowding behavioral response.

The examples are intended to further illustrate the invention and are not intended to limit the scope of the invention defined by the claims.

The insects used in the following examples were laboratory reared at about 28 C. and about 50 70 relative humidity with a 16 8 light cycle. Larvae of were reared on pinto bean artificial diet according to the method described by Burton U.S.D.A. Tech. Bull. ARS SER. 33 134 1969 herein incorporated by reference . were reared on as described by Lewis and Burton Ann. Entomol. Soc. Amer. Volume 64 471 473 1970 herein incorporated by reference . Adult wasps were held in Plexiglas cages provided with water and honey. In all experiments females wasps were about 2 6 days old and host larvae were about 2and 3instar. Each experiment was completed over about 2 to 5 days with females from different cohorts each day. Each day the same number of wasps was used for all treatments within an experiment.

Female about 2 4 days old were starved provided water only for about 26 to 30 hours at the time of the bioassays described below. The wasps were trained to detect 3 octanone a ketone used in perfume and flavoring as described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 826 146 which is herein incorporated by reference.

The preparations were blank control and test. The mouth of a mason jar was covered with a 12 12 cm piece of aluminum foil and shaken for about 15 seconds subsequently creating small dimpling in the foil covering. Blank corn samples consisted of a 240 ml Mason jar with about 150 ml 120 grams of whole kernel feed corn. Control samples were created from existing blank samples. The foil covering of the blank sample was removed and a Whatman filter disc was placed on top of the corn using a pair of forceps the filter disc was pushed to the bottom of the corn using a separate pair of forceps before recovering the jar. After shaking the sample was set aside to allow the head space over the corn to build for about 5 minutes. Test samples were created from control samples. A Whatman filter disc was loaded with an aliquot of 3 octane dichloromethane solution on a glass dish and allowed to dry for about 1 minute. The foil covering of the control sample was removed and the glass dish was used to drop the disc onto the top of the corn. A separate pair of forceps was used to push the odorous filter disc to the bottom of the corn before recovering the jar. After shaking the sample was set aside to allow the head space over the corn to build for about 5 minutes.

Detection chamber was observed while empty and while containing five . Chamber containing 5 wasps placed over a control sample of corn was defined as a control treatment. Chamber containing 5 wasps placed over a test corn sample was defined as a test treatment.

Chamber was composed of three parts. Body of chamber was part of a Millipore Aerosol Analysis Monitor . Top was a lid for a Millipore PetriSlide modified to fit the body and thoroughly perforated with small holes to allow for sufficient ventilation . A wire mesh disc was placed in the bottom of the body to prevent the wasp from escaping out through the inlet .

Before using each chamber was thoroughly cleaned with soap and water and dried. After drying cleaning was continued by sweeping a 10L min air stream for approximately 15 seconds over all surfaces of each chamber . Wasps were placed individually into chamber . Chamber was placed upside down in a clean area under a fume hood.

The software described above was used for comparing the behavior of the wasps when presented with the air from the head space of the prepared corn samples. Data was taken for three different concentrations of 3 octanone masked with a background odor of whole kernel corn. The quantities of 3 octanone dichloromethane solutions used to impregnate the filter disc were about 10 L of a 1 16 solution or about 0.5 mg 3 octanone which is about 5.5 ppm about 2 L of a 1 16 solution or about 0.1 mg of 3 octanone which is about 1.1 ppm and about 10 L of 1 842 solution or about 0.01 mg of 3 octanone which is about 111 ppt. For each concentration 5 replications of blank control and test treatments were recorded. A blank was defined as a chamber with no wasp over a blank corn sample. A control was defined as a chamber containing 5 wasps over a control sample of corn and a test was defined as a chamber containing 5 wasps over a test corn sample.

Testing was performed in a fume hood and the laptop camera and samples were all placed under the fume hood. The laptop was placed in the front corner of the fume hood with the camera mount positioned approximately 15 cm to the left of the keyboard. During testing all light sources within the room except the overhead fluorescence room lights were turned off or covered up resulting in an average light intensity of about 295lux at the top of chamber . Logitech QuickCam was placed so that the tip of the camera was approximately 2.54 cm about 1 inch above the top of the chamber 1.4 cm 125 pixels .

All pictures collected were analyzed with the software process stills function and . For each set of pictures a black 320 240 pixel TIF image containing a centered 125 pixel diameter white circle was used as a mask. The image was given an X and a Y offset to center the mask s white circular area over the inlet of chamber using setmask.vi See accessible within process stills.vi. The region of interest set by the mask corresponded to about a 1.4 cm diameter circular region. A lower threshold of 70 was used for binary segmentation pixels value 70 forced to 1 . The software provided data describing the amount of black pixels within the region of interest. The number of pixels the percent total pixels and the integration of the time variant percent of total pixels that were black within the region of interest for each set of pictures.

Initial analysis reveal large variations between the 15 blank treatments suggesting that some response curves may be inherently offset more than others due to significantly larger numbers of black pixels within the region of interest not representing wasp body mass i.e. background noise. To remove the effects of these variances the control and test treatment data was calibrated. From each set of images corresponding to single tests one image was selected in which the wasps contained with chamber were not searching within the region of interest. This image was used to measure the amount of black pixel noise not representing wasp body mass which is present within the region of interest throughout the 60 second test period. The image was masked normalized and segmented like all the other images processed during this study. The percent of the total black pixels within the region of interest was recorded for each image selected and analyzed and then used to create calibration curves for each treatment. Since the lighting within the test area and chamber positioning would not have changed during the 60 second testing period it was assumed that the same amount of black pixels within the region of interest not contributing to the measurement of the crowding behavior response would have remained constant throughout all images for that single treatment. The time values recorded for each test were copied to a spreadsheet and the percent black pixel values extracted from their corresponding calibration images were copied next to them repeating the value for each time. The data was then integrated using the Trapezoidal rule function above with LabVIEW to create 20 new time variant integration value curves to be used for calibration. The newly created calibration curves were then subtracted from their corresponding treatment response curves.

Microsoft s Excel was used to compile average and graph the approximately 256 some variation existed due to computer latency integration values and their corresponding stamps for the five replications per treatment within each concentration. The standard deviation was calculated for the integration values whose corresponding time stamps averaged out to approximately a multiple of five seconds excluding zero . Confidence intervals were calculated using the resultant standard deviation values an 0.05 m and n 5.

An ANOVA statistical analysis of the data was performed using a general linear model SAS . There were three dosage levels 0.5 mg 0.1 mg 0.01 mg 3 treatments blank control test 5 replications of each dosage treatment pair 15 total and 12 observations from each replication time stamps close to multiples of about 5 seconds to create a total of 540 observations analyzed with the general linear model GLM . The 15 blank treatment replications 180 observations were analyzed to determine if each was statistically the same. The remaining 30 calibrated replications 15 controls 15 tests were analyzed by dosage and next by treatment to determine if either had significant effect on the mean response.

Variability may have been caused by several factors including dimpling in the aluminum foil covering and non uniformity of chamber tops mesh bottoms and lighting. Corn samples were shaken for about 15 seconds after being covered and the corn striking the covering caused dimpling in the foil. This dimpling created diffuse reflection that may not have been uniform between corn samples. Chamber tops made from Millipore PetriSlide coverings were modified by drilling holes in them and removing excess material from their edges. This was done by hand and non uniformity in their construction is certain. Many of the edges of the drilled holes blocked the camera s view of chamber bottom therefore variability in their placement would have caused non uniform blocking of camera s view. Additionally the mesh discs placed in the bottom of chamber body were metal and discolored some through repeated washings. Discoloration was caused by small amounts of oxidation. Discoloration may have been substantial enough to cause some of the pixels representing mesh in the images acquired to have a value lower than the segmentation threshold LT 70 in present study . During testing all sources of lighting excluding the overhead room lights were covered. The overhead lights did not change location and it is assumed that their output was consistent over the test period. It is doubtful that the lighting conditions caused the large variability in the blank replications.

In mass production a reproducible manufacturing method of chamber would reduce the physical differences between chambers since the metal mesh would not be needed to prevent the organisms from escaping chamber . A fixed lighting source reduces the possible variability in lighting and shadows.

The control and test treatments 180 observations were calibrated and analyzed to determine the effects of treatment and dosage on the mean response average integration values over 60 second test period and . shows the control and test treatment mean responses grouped by dosage. The error bars were calculated using n 5 and 0.05 for each treatment per dosage. shows a different grouping of the same data in dosage responses are grouped by treatment and error bars were calculated using n 5 and 0.05 for each dosage per treatment. The response of the groups over the about 60 second test period can be seen in . The controls for all dosages were tightly grouped and were similar to the test treatment at the 0.01 mg dosage. The test treatments at the 0.5 mg and 0.1 mg dosages were both significantly different from all other treatment dosage pairs after at most about 20 seconds. Errors were calculated using n 5 and 0.05 for each treatment per dosage.

Five groups of 5 individuals per group received both control and test treatments using 0.5 mg of 3 octanone. The behavioral response of at the 0.5 mg dosage level was significant across treatments d.f. 1 n 120 P

Similar results were obtained with five groups of 5 individuals per group receiving both control and test treatments using 0.1 mg of 3 octanone. The behavioral response of at the 0.1 mg 1.1 ppm dosage level was significant across treatments d.f. 1 n 120 P 0.0002 . The mean response of the test treatment 3.5822 was significantly higher than that of the control treatment 0.6117 . The time d.f 11 n 120 P

The system was able to quantify the behavior of the trained wasps in such a way as to successfully distinguish between the crowding behavior exhibited when presented with the target odor at the about 0.5 mg and about 0.1 mg levels and the individual searching behaviors exhibited when presented with only the odor of corn. When looking at individual dosages a significant difference in the two treatments was detectable in as little as about 10 seconds . When results from the dosages were pooled a significant difference between the tests and controls was detectable in about 20 seconds .

The behavioral response of at the 0.01 mg dosage level was not significantly different across treatments d.f. 1 n 120 P 0.3100 . However the time d.f. 11 n 120 P

Fifteen groups of 5 individuals per group received control treatments before receiving test treatments at one of three dosages 0.5 mg 0.1 mg and 0.01 mg. Dosage had no significant effect on response to the control treatment d.f. 2 n 180 P 0.7159 . Dosage time interaction effects were not significant d.f. 22 n 180 P 1.0 but time effects were d.f. 11 n 180 P

Dosage did have significant effect on response to the test treatment d.f. 2 n 180 P 0.0005 . The 0.1 mg 3.5822 and 0.5 mg 2.7639 response means were not significantly different from each other but they were both significantly different from the 0.01 mg response mean 1.0254 . Both time d.f. 11 n 120 P

The system was not able to distinguish between responses to dosages that were significantly different from the controls.

Female about 2 4 days old were starved provided water only for about 26 to 30 hours at the time of the bioassays described below. The wasps were trained to detect myrcene a plant terpenoid and 3 octanone a ketone used in perfume and flavoring as described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 826 146 which is herein incorporated by reference.

Three corn sample preparations were prepared as described above in Example 2. A total of 10 blanks 15 controls 10 tests containing Myrcene and 10 tests containing 3 octanone. Chamber and insects were prepared for the study as described above in Example 2.

A Fintip plastic pipette tip was inserted into the bottom of chamber so that the large end of the pipette tip fit frictionally into the inlet of chamber . The tip channeled all airflow directly to the inlet of chamber . Data was collected using the software described above with both untrained and trained wasps presented with 3 octanone and myrcene odorants. Empty containers over blank corn samples were also tested to check for the uniformity of chambers and lighting. The crowding behavior of was observed under 3 conditions 

3 Wasps trained to 3 octanone presented with control sample then Myrcene test sample then 3 octanone test sample.

Images of the behavioral responses of untrained wasps when presented with either odorant were collected to determine if has natural attraction to either 3 octanone or myrcene. During this time the 10 blank replications were preformed.

All pictures collected were analyzed with the software s Process Stills function and A C . For each set of pictures a black 320 240 pixel TIF image containing a centered 125 pixel diameter white circle was used as a mask as described above in Example 2.

Initial analysis revealed a large variation between the blank empty chamber over corn containing no additional odorant suggesting that some response curves may be inherently offset more than others due to significantly larger numbers of black pixels within the region of interest not representing wasp body mass background noise . To remove the effects of these variances the control and test treatment data was calibrated. Form each set of images corresponding to single tests one image was selected in which the wasps contained within chamber were not searching within the region of interest. This image was used to measure the amount of black pixel noise not representing wasp body mass present with the region of interest throughout the 60 second test period. The image was masked normalized and segmented like all other images processed during this study. The percent of the total black pixels within the ROI was recorded for each image selected and analyzed and then used to create calibration curves for each treatment. Since the lighting and chamber positioning does not change during the 60 second testing period it was assumed that the same amount of black pixels within the region of interest not contributing to the measurement of the crowding response would have remained constant throughout all images for that single treatment. The time values recorded for each test were copied to a spreadsheet and the percent black pixel values extracted from their corresponding calibration images were copied next to them repeating the value for each time. The data was then integrated using the Trapezoidal Rule function within LabVIEW to create 35 new time variant integration value curves to be used for the calibration. The newly created calibration curves were then subtracted from their corresponding treatment response curves.

Microsoft Excel was used to compile average and graph the approximately 256 some variation existed due to computer latency integration values and their corresponding time stamps for all calibrated replications untrained wasps ten controls five Myrcene tests five 3 octanone tests . The standard deviation was calculated for the integration values whose corresponding time stamps averaged out to approximately a multiple of five seconds excluding zero . Confidence intervals were calculated using the resultant standard deviation values an 0.05 and n 5.

An ANOVA statistical analysis of the data was performed using a general linear model SAS . Observations were taken from the 15 groups 5 individuals per group of divided unevenly into 2 levels of training 10 groups untrained 5 groups trained . The untrained groups were further divided into 2 sets 5 groups per set . One untrained set received control and myrcene treatments. The other untrained set received control and 3 octanone treatments. Prior to each control treatment measurements were taken from an empty chamber over a blank corn sample i.e. blank treatment . The 5 groups of trained received control and myrcene and 3 octanone test treatments. Each treatment was replicated 5 times. The 10 blank treatment replications 120 observations were analyzed to determine if each was statistically the same. The remaining 35 calibrated replications 15 controls 10 myrcene tests 10 3 octanone tests were analyzed by training and by treatment to determine if either factor had significant effect on the mean response. A total of 45 replications containing 540 observations were collected Table 2 . Table 2. Treatment Layout. Blank no odor no wasps and control no odor 5 wasps .

When blank chamber measurements were compared there were significant differences between the 10 individual blank treatment replications d.f. 9 n 120 P

When the effects of treatment and training on response was tested the control and test treatments 420 observations were calibrated as discussed above and then analyzed to determine the effects of treatment and training on the mean response average integration values over 60 second test period . shows the mean responses exhibited by untrained and trained wasps grouped by treatment. The error bars were calculated using n 5 and 0.05 for each state of training per treatment. shows a different grouping of the same data in treatments are grouped by training and error bars were calculated using n 5 and 0.05. The response of the wasp groups over the 60 second test period can be seen in . The response of the wasps trained to detect 3 octanone in the presence of the target odor was significantly different from all other treatment training pairs after 25 seconds.

Fifteen groups of wasps received control treatments and were compared. Five groups received prior training to 3 octanone and ten did not. The behavioral response of wasps receiving the control treatment was not significantly different within or across training d.f. 2 n 180 P

Five groups of wasps trained to detect 3 octanone received control myrcene and 3 octanone treatments in order to test the effects of treatment on response of the wasps. The behavioral response of the wasps trained to detect 3 octanone was significantly different across treatments d.f. 2 n 180 P

Ten groups of untrained wasps received control and test treatments to see the effects of treatment on the untrained wasps. Five groups were presented with 3 octanone during their test treatment and five groups were presented with myrcene. The behavioral response of untrained wasps was significantly different across treatments d.f. 3 n 240 P 0.0033 FIG. . The mean responses of untrained wasps exposed to 3 octanone 1.8190 or myrcene 1.4537 were not significantly different but they were both significantly different from the mean responses of both control treatments 0.8670 and 0.7778 . The control treatment responses were not significantly different. Both time d.f. 11 n 180 P

Ten groups of wasps were exposed to 3 octanone to see the effects of training to 3 octanone. Five groups had received prior training to 3 octanone and 5 groups were untrained. The behavioral response of the wasps exposed to 3 octanone was significantly different across training trained vs. untrained d.f. 1 n 120 P 0.0059 . Wasps trained to detect 3 octanone had a significantly higher mean response 3.0698 when presented with 3 octanone than did untrained wasps 1.8190 receiving similar treatment. Both the time d.f. 11 n 120 P

Ten groups of wasps were exposed to myrcene to see the effects of training to 3 octanone on the response of the wasps. Five groups had received prior training to 3 octanone and five groups were untrained. The behavioral response of wasps exposed to myrcene was not significantly different across training d.f. 1 n 120 P 0.1732 . Wasps trained to detect 3 octanone had a similar mean response 1.1337 when presented to myrcene to untrained wasps 1.4537 receiving similar treatment. Both the time d.f. 11 n 120 P

The above detailed description is for the purposes of illustration. Others skilled in the art can apply the knowledge described to train other invertebrates to detect chemicals for use in a system for chemical detection. Such detail is solely of that purpose and those skilled in the art can make variations therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

