---

title: Cosmetic product and method of applying a mascara composition
abstract: A cosmetic product includes a mascara composition and a treatment device, whereby the mascara composition is applied to the eyelashes by softening the mascara composition via heat. The mascara composition is solid at room temperature, however is softened at elevated temperature, so it may be applied to the eyelashes. The treatment device includes an applicator for receiving, heating to soften, and applying the softened mascara composition to the eyelashes. Once the softened mascara composition is applied to the eyelashes, the mascara composition is quickly cooled and thus solidified by the atmosphere. The mascara composition thus applied to the eyelashes provides a firm film covering the eyelashes, which is not softened at body temperature, and thus provides enhanced wearability. A cap detachable to the applicator is provided with a loading mechanism for delivering pieces of the mascara composition one by one to the applicator.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08142090&OS=08142090&RS=08142090
owner: The Procter & Gamble Company
number: 08142090
owner_city: Cincinnati
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051124
---
The present invention relates to a cosmetic product including a mascara composition and an eyelash treatment device whereby the mascara composition is applied to the eyelashes by fluidizing the mascara composition via heat generated by the eyelash treatment device. The product provides improved performance of a mascara composition while also being safe for the general consumer to use. The present invention further relates to a method of applying a mascara composition to the eyelashes.

Mascara products are used to enhance the beauty of a person s eyes by coating the eyelashes to primarily thicken lengthen color and define the individual eyelashes. For the last 60 years mascara products have been provided in the form of mascara applicators having an applicator brush attached to a handle the applicator brush portion dipped in a package such as a tube containing a liquid to semi solid mascara composition. Mascara compositions typically take the form of emulsions or dispersions of waxes and pigments in water or other volatile carriers. Mascara composition and delivery systems are limited by emulsion or solution chemistry and film forming technologies that are applied wet and then dried to create a film of mascara that sets and holds the eyelashes.

These mascara compositions which are liquid to semi solid have a low viscosity profile and low yield point such that they are inherently prone to smearing and smudging after application to the eyelashes. The solid components dispersed in the composition such as waxes may also be difficult to apply as clumping and globbing may occur due to lack of film smoothness of the solid components.

From another aspect solvents and carriers of the composition that do not evaporate in timely manner may also provide smearing and smudging after application to the eyelashes. The so called waterproof mascaras intend to solve such problem by employing volatile hydrocarbon solvents. While such volatile hydrocarbon solvents provide wear benefits the application and beauty benefits may be compromised. Further the volatile hydrocarbon solvents may cause odor and safety concerns.

One solution for providing a mascara composition having improved application and improved wearability is to provide the composition solid wherein the composition is heated prior to application to the eyelashes for softening and or smoothing the composition upon application. Such heating would also benefit in shortening the evaporation time required after application. The solid film provided on the eyelashes after application would have a much higher yield point than films made by conventional mascara compositions thereby being less prone to smearing and smudging.

Based on the foregoing there is a need for a mascara product which can apply a solid mascara composition to the eyelashes in a safe and effective manner. It would be further beneficial to provide the solid mascara composition in a predetermined dosage form such that the user is easily provided with an adequate amount of composition to apply to the eyelashes.

Meanwhile there have been proposed in the art eyelash curling devices such as WO 99 22782 including a applicator brush and heater combination. However the applicator brush is designed to curl the eyelashes by application of heat while applying the mascara composition of liquid or semi liquid condition fetched from a container. Due to the absence of the idea and structure for heating and fluidizing the solid mascara composition the applicator brush is practically impossible to use in combination with the mascara composition proposed by the present invention. There is a need of providing a dedicated treatment device which takes the full benefit of the mascara composition to apply the fluidized composition successfully and uniformly to the eyelashes. There is a further need of providing such a treatment device which also comprises a loading means for providing a predetermined dosage form of mascara composition upon use.

The present cosmetic product comprises a mascara composition and an eyelash treatment device whereby the mascara composition is applied to the eyelashes by softening the mascara composition via heat the applied mascara composition forms a solid film on the eyelashes which film has improved wearability. The product provides improved performance of a mascara composition while also being safe for the general consumer to use.

The mascara composition is solid at room temperature however is softened at elevated temperature so it may be applied to the eyelashes. The eyelash treatment device comprises a heater for providing enough heat to the mascara composition yet safe for application to the eyelashes even in accidental situations where the user inadvertently touches the device with the eyelids or eyeballs. The eyelash treatment device comprises an applicator for receiving heating softening and applying the mascara composition.

Once the softened mascara composition is applied to the eyelashes the mascara composition is quickly cooled and thus solidified by the atmosphere. The mascara composition thus applied to the eyelashes provides a firm film covering the eyelashes which is not easily softened at body temperature and thus provides enhanced wearability.

In particular the mascara composition of the present invention fulfills the above performances by incorporation of a solid hydrophobic component which gives a unique rhelogical profile to the composition. The rheological profile of the composition is defined in terms of a needle penetration as measured according to ASTM American Society for Testing and Material Test Method D5 a yield stress and a viscosity. The mascara composition of the present invention is prepared to have the needle penetration of from about 1 to about 40 the yield stress of at least about 1500 Pa at 25 C. and the viscosity of between about 1 mPas and about 10 000 000 mPas at 100 C. The mascara composition with the above rheological profile can be therefore applied to the eyelashes by being softened via heat and is then solidified on the eyelashes to provide a firm film on the eyelashes.

The mascara composition may be prepared in the form of an oil mixture in which the solid hydrophobic component forms an oil phase. The composition may be alternatively in the form of a water in oil emulsion additionally including water and an emulsifier.

Further the composition may be added with a pigment and or a film forming polymer for enhanced aesthetic appeal and wearability.

The device of the present invention is specifically designed to give a structure that is configured to soften the mascara composition and to hold the softened mascara composition for applying it to the eyelashes uniformly. The device includes an applicator equipped with a heater for softening the mascara composition and a comb arranged along the length of the applicator. The comb is arranged along the length of the applicator to be coated with the softened mascara composition. Whereby the softened mascara composition can be successfully delivered to the eyelashes from the entire length of the comb leaving the solid mascara film on the eyelashes.

The device of the present invention is further equipped with a loading means for delivering a predetermined dosage form of mascara composition upon use. The loading means may be provided in a cap fitted over the applicator. By providing the device with the loading means of predetermined dosage the user may easily apply an adequate amount of composition to the eyelashes. The loading means is configured to hold a plurality of mascara pieces and to load the mascara piece one by one to the applicator for delivering the adequate dosage of the mascara composition.

The cap includes a sheath fitted over the applicator and formed with an opening communicating with the applicator. The loading means includes a carrier which has a plurality of compartments each storing the mascara piece. The carrier is movable relative to the sheath in order to make one of the compartments selectively in registration with the opening for delivering the mascara piece to the applicator through the opening. Thus the mascara piece can be easily delivered to the applicator simply by manipulating the carrier.

Preferably the carrier is prepared in the form of a sleeve coaxial with the sheath to be rotatable about the axis of the sheath. In this instance the sleeve may be equipped with a plurality of gates which normally close the compartments and are movable to open the associated compartments for delivering the mascara piece.

The opening may be provided with a normally closed valve. In this instance the loading means is provided with a plunger which forces the mascara piece to temporarily open the flap valve for delivering the mascara piece to the applicator.

The carrier may take the form of a disc which is rotatable about an upright axis perpendicular to the axis of the sheath and has a plurality of compartments arranged about the upright axis. Also with this arrangement the mascara piece can be delivered simply by rotating the disc about the upright axis perpendicular to the axis of the sheath or the applicator.

The mascara piece may be retained in each of the compartments by means of a breakable seal. In this connection the loading means is provided with a plunger which forces the mascara piece out of the breakable seal for delivering the same to the applicator. With the use of the breakable seal the mascara composition can be kept in good condition over a long period but is easy to be loaded to the applicator.

The compartments formed in the disc may be spaced circumferentially as well as radially such that a set of radially aligned compartments comes into registration with the opening elongated along the axis of the sheath. With this arrangement more than one mascara piece can be delivered to axially spaced points on the applicator.

Rather than utilizing the movable carrier holding the mascara pieces the loading means may include a feeder in the form of a screw in piston that drives the mascara pieces linearly towards the opening with the normally closed flap valve. The loading means is further provided with a plunger that forces the mascara piece just around the opening against the flap valve to temporarily open the valve. Thus the mascara piece can be delivered by a combination of manipulating the feeder and the plunger.

Instead of the screw in piston the feeder may be in the form of a spring biased piston so that the mascara piece can be delivered simply by pressing the plunger.

Further the loading means may be configured to include a hopper formed at one end of the sheath away from the opening to contain the mascara pieces in the form of pellets and a screw conveyor extending into the compartment for feeding the pellets from the hopper to the opening. Thus the mascara composition can be delivered simply by manipulating the screw conveyor and by an adequate amount or dosage by adjusting the movement of the conveyor.

These and other features aspects and advantages of the present invention will become evident to those skilled in the art from a reading of the present disclosure with the appended claims.

While the description concludes with claims particularly pointing out and distinctly claiming the invention it is believed that the present invention will be better understood from the following description.

A product in accordance with the present invention is a combination of a mascara composition and an eyelash treatment device.

Now referring to there is shown an eyelash treatment device in accordance with a preferred embodiment of the present invention. The device uses a solid mascara composition which is solid at room temperature namely 25 C. and is softened with elevated temperature such that it can be applied to the eyelashes. By solid herein for describing the mascara composition what is meant is that the composition has a certain hardness to retain its structure and also that the composition is stable against stress or shear. The mascara composition goes through a transition change in terms of rheology between 25 C. and 100 C. such that during these temperatures there is a range of temperature and rheology in which the composition is suitably softened for application to the eyelashes. The softened state of the mascara composition is fluid enough to be applied to the eyelashes however is viscous enough to stay on the applicator upon application and on the eyelashes after application.

The device includes an elongated hand grip carrying at its one longitudinal end an applicator for applying the softened mascara composition to user s eyelashes. The applicator is elongated to have a length generally aligned with a length of the grip and includes a heater which is configured to heat the mascara composition for softening the composition after it is loaded to the applicator on one hand and to heat the eyelashes for curling on the other hand. The mascara composition is provided in the form of a solid piece and is held in a cap detachable to the applicator. The cap is configured to include a loading mechanism for loading or delivering the mascara piece one by one onto the applicator details of which will be discussed later.

The applicator is composed of a head extending integrally from the grip and a comb attachment detachably fitted on the head . The head is made of a dielectric plastic material and carries the heater composed of a resistor coil wound around a U shaped core of dielectric material to give two parallel vertical rows running in the length of the applicator . The coil is electrically connected to a voltage source i.e. a battery within the grip and is energized by manipulating a switch handle on the side of the grip . The comb attachment is made of a dielectric plastic material and is fitted on the head in thermal transfer relation with the heater so as to be heated to an elevated temperature for softening the mascara composition. The comb attachment is shaped to have a rounded top face provided with a comb having a plurality of comb teeth which are arranged along the length and width of the applicator for applying the softened mascara composition to the eyelashes while smoothening the eyelashes. A ditch is formed in the width center of the top face to extend the length of the applicator for receiving an upper part of the heater and also for providing a space within which the softened mascara composition can be retained. The softened mascara composition is thereafter allowed to flow over the comb teeth climbing up to the comb teeth by the action of a surface tension to be ready for being delivered to the eyelashes as the comb teeth smoothen the eyelashes.

In operation the applicator is firstly placed in a position with the comb attachment just below the eyelashes as shown in . Then the applicator is raised and twisted to some extent for smoothing the eyelashes with the comb teeth as shown in thereby applying the softened mascara composition to the eyelashes while lifting the same. In this condition the top face of the comb attachment comes into contact with the eyelashes for heating and curling the eyelashes. As soon as the applicator is moved away from the eyelashes as shown in the softened mascara composition is cooled quickly to give a firm film of the solidified mascara composition on the eyelashes. Thus the above single operation can give the effect of forming the mascara film as well as curling the eyelashes.

The heater is controlled to heat the comb attachment to a temperature of about 50 C. to 100 C. for softening the mascara composition. At the elevated temperature the softened mascara composition exhibits a viscosity of 1 mPas to 10 000 000 mPas sufficient for coating the eyelashes but being kept from flowing out of the applicator for assuring a safe application of the mascara composition.

All percentages parts and ratios are based upon the total weight of the compositions of the present invention unless otherwise specified. All such weights as they pertain to listed ingredients are based on the active level and therefore do not include carriers or by products that may be included in commercially available materials.

All ingredients such as actives and other ingredients useful herein may be categorized or described by their cosmetic and or therapeutic benefit or their postulated mode of action. However it is to be understood that the active and other ingredients useful herein can in some instances provide more than one cosmetic and or therapeutic benefit or operate via more than one mode of action. Therefore classifications herein are made for the sake of convenience and are not intended to limit an ingredient to the particularly stated application or applications listed.

The mascara composition of the present invention is solid at room temperature namely 25 C. and is softened with elevated temperature such that it can be applied to the eyelashes. By solid herein for describing the mascara composition what is meant is that the composition has a certain hardness to retain its structure and also that the composition is stable against stress or shear. The present composition has a needle penetration as measured according to the American Standard prescribed by the American Society for Testing and Materials ASTM Test Method D5 of from about 1 to about 40 and a yield stress of no less than about 1500 Pa both measurements at 25 C. preferably at 35 C.

The principle of the measurement of the needle penetration according to the ASTM D5 consists of measuring the depth expressed in tenths of a millimeter to which a standard needle weighing 2.5 g and placed in a needle holder weighing 47.5 g i.e. a total of 50 g penetrates when placed on the composition for 5 seconds. The principle of the measurement of yield stress consists of measuring oscillation stress sweep for understanding flow behavior and viscoelastic character for fluids and semi solids as a function of stress shear rate or temperature. In the present invention the yield stress is measured using a TA Instrument Rheometer AR 500 using a 40 mm Al Parallel Plate Gap 600 mm at 1 Hz. At 25 C. the present composition preferably has no measurable yield point under stress or shear.

The mascara composition changes rheology as it is heated and finally reaches a point where it is liquid by 100 C. preferably by 90 C. By liquid herein for describing the mascara composition what is meant is that the composition has a viscosity of between about 1 mPas and about 10 000 000 mPas. The present mascara composition goes through a transition change in terms of rheology between 25 C. and 100 C. such that during these temperatures there is a range of temperature and rheology in which the composition is suitably softened for application to the eyelashes. The softened state of the mascara composition is fluid enough to be applied to the eyelashes with an average number of strokes of an applicator holding the composition however is viscous enough to stay on the applicator upon application and on the eyelashes after application. When the composition is too thin or watery the composition is difficult to hold on the applicator and amount of composition applied to the eyelashes decreases.

The mascara composition is designed to have a rheology profile which gives suitable rheology during the temperature band to which the eyelash treatment device is heated. The temperature band may be selected to provide suitable balance of applicability of the mascara composition and eyelash curling lifting benefit. Typically the temperature band is between about 50 C. and about 100 C.

The components for the composition are selected in order to provide the desired rheology profile. The composition comprises at least a solid hydrophobic component for providing the essential physical characteristics of the present invention. The composition may be made solely by the solid hydrophobic component.

The composition may take the phase form of an oil mixture the oil being mainly made by the wax or a water in oil emulsion. Water in oil emulsion forms are suitable for encompassing water soluble or water dispersible components.

Alternatively the mascara composition may comprise an outer shell comprising at least a solid hydrophobic component having the unique rheological profiles described above and an inner core which has a certain viscosity. The mascara composition in room temperature is in solid form encasing a fluid inner core. After heating such embodiment composition is believed to provide an adequate crystallization time before solidifying thereby allowing the user to have adequate time to apply and fix the composition on the eyelashes. Such longer play time allows the user to achieve the desired appearance of eyelashes.

The inner core may be an aqueous continuous composition containing 15 to 95 water by weight of the inner core. Such aqueous continuous phase inner core is easy to remove with soap and water. The inner core may also be an oil continuous composition containing 30 to 50 volatile liquid oil by weight of the inner core. Such oil continuous phase inner core provides waterproof benefit.

The present composition comprises a solid hydrophobic component for providing the solid characteristic of the mascara composition. Solid hydrophobic components are typically used at levels from about 25 to about 100 in oil mixture forms and from about 25 to about 95 in water in oil emulsion forms. Suitable solid hydrophobic components include waxes and fats.

Waxes are defined as lower melting organic mixtures or compounds of high molecular weight solid at room temperature and generally similar in composition to fats and oils except that they contain no glycerides. Some are hydrocarbons others are esters of fatty acids and alcohols. Waxes useful in the present invention are selected from the group consisting of animal waxes vegetable waxes mineral waxes synthetic waxes petroleum waxes ethylenic polymers hydrocarbon types such as Fischer Tropsch waxes silicone waxes and mixtures thereof wherein the waxes have a melting point between 25 C. and 100 C.

The specific waxes useful in the present invention are selected from the group consisting of beeswax lanolin wax shellac wax animal waxes carnauba candelilla bayberry vegetable waxes ozokerite ceresin mineral waxes paraffin microcrystalline waxes petroleum waxes polyethylene ethylenic polymers polyethylene homopolymers Fischer Tropsch waxes C24 45 alkyl methicones silicone waxes and mixtures thereof.

Highly preferable commercially available waxes herein include stearyl palmitate by the tradename PURESTER 34 available from Strahl Pitsch ceresin by the tradename CERESIN 252 available from Strahl Pitsch and paraffin wax by the tradenames PARAFFIN SP 673P PARAFFIN 206 and PARAFFIN 192 available from Strahl Pitsch.

Useful herein are fats namely glyceryl esters of higher fatty acids such as stearic and palmitic. Such esters and their mixtures are solid at room temperature and exhibit crystalline structure. The fats employed according to the invention are selected from the group consisting of fats derived from animals vegetables synthetically derived fats and mixtures thereof wherein said fats have a melting point from about 55 to about 100 C. Preferably the fats are selected from the group consisting of glyceryl monostearate glyceryl distearate glyceryl tristearate palmitate esters of glycerol C18 36 triglycerides glyceryl tribehenate C18 36 acid triglycerides and mixtures thereof.

Highly preferable commercially available fats herein include glyceryl monostearate by the tradename CUTINA GMS V available from Cognis Cutina.

The compositions of the present invention may comprise pigments selected from the group consisting of inorganic pigments organic pigments and organic lake pigments pearlescent pigments and mixtures thereof. The present invention comprises mascara compositions devoid of pigments however as such compositions may also provide the benefits of the present invention.

When employed the pigments are present in proportions depending on the color and the intensity of the color that it is intended to produce. When employed the level of pigments in the composition is from about 3 to about 25 preferably from about 5 to about 15 . The pigments may optionally be surface treated with treatments that include but are not limited to silicones perfluorinated compounds lecithin and amino acids.

Inorganic pigments useful in the present invention include those selected from the group consisting of rutile titanium dioxide anatase titanium dioxide both coded in the Color Index under the reference CI 177891 black yellow and red iron oxides CI 177499 77492 and 77491 bismuth oxychloride CI 177163 manganese violet CI 177742 ultramarines CI 177007 chromium oxide CI 77288 chromium hydroxide CI 177289 ferric ferrocyamide CI 177510 zinc oxide CI 177947 and mixtures thereof.

The organic pigments useful in the present invention include carbons black and the dyes and the analogous lakes selected from the group consisting of D C Red 6 CI 115850 D C Red 7 CI 115850 1 D C Red 21 CI 145380 2 D C Red 22 CI 145380 D C Red 27 CI 145410 1 D C Red 28 CI 145410 D C Red 30 CI 173360 D C Red 33 CI 117200 D C Red 34 CI 115880 1 D C Red 36 CI 112085 D C Orange 4 CI 115510 D C Orange 5 CI 45370 1 D C Orange 11 CI 145425 FD C Yellow 5 CI 119140 FD C Yellow 6 CI 115985 D C Yellow 10 CI 147005 FD C Green 3 CI 142053 D C Green 5 CI 161570 FD C Blue 1 CI 142090 Cochineal Carmine CI 175470 Guanine CI 175170 and mixtures thereof.

The pearlescent pigments useful in the present invention include those selected from the group consisting of mica or a similar plate like substrate coated with any of the following materials alone or in combination titanium dioxide bismuth oxychloride iron oxides ferric ferrocyamide chromium oxide chromium hydroxide and any organic pigment of the above mentioned type and mixtures thereof.

The compositions of the present invention may comprise a film forming polymer for imparting wear and or transfer resistant properties. When included such materials are typically used in an amount of from about 0.5 to about 20 preferably from about 0.5 to about 10 by weight of the composition. Preferred polymers form a non tacky film which is removable with water used with cleansers such as soap. The film forming polymers herein can be hydrophobic or hydrophilic and can be provided in a lipophilic or aqueous carrier. When polymers provided in aqueous carriers are employed in the composition a water in oil form is selected. Polymers of hydrophilic nature are also compatible with a water in oil form composition.

Also useful herein are latex polymers including copolymer PVP hexadecane or the copolymer PVP eicosene marketed by ISP under the tradenames Ganex V 216 and Ganex V 220 respectively. Ganex V 216 is a PVP hexadecane copolymer comprising approximately 15 23 of pyrrolidone units with a weight average molecular weight of 7300. Ganex V 220 is a copolymer PVP eicosene which comprises approximately 20 28 of pyrrolidone units and a weight average molecular weight of 8600.

The compositions of the present invention in emulsion form comprises an emulsifier which is typically a lipophilic surfactant preferably by weight of the entire composition at from about 1 to about 15 . The lipophilic surfactant herein has an HLB value of less than about 8.

The HLB value is a theoretical index value which describes the hydrophilicity hydrophobicity balance of a specific compound. Generally it is recognized that the HLB index ranges from 0 very hydrophobic to 40 very hydrophilic . The HLB value of the lipophilic surfactants may be found in tables and charts known in the art or may be calculated with the following general equation HLB 7 hydrophobic group values hydrophilic group values . The HLB and methods for calculating the HLB of a compound are explained in detail in Surfactant Science Series Vol. 1 Nonionic Surfactants pp 606 13 M. J. Schick Marcel Dekker Inc. New York 1966 .

Without being bound by theory the species and levels of the lipophilic surfactant herein are believed to provide a stable water in oil emulsion in view of the other components of the present invention.

The lipophilic surfactant can be an ester type surfactant. Ester type surfactants useful herein include sorbitan monoisostearate sorbitan diisostearate sorbitan sesquiisostearate sorbitan monooleate sorbitan dioleate sorbitan sesquioleate glyceryl monoisostearate glyceryl diiostearate glyceryl sesquiisostearate glyceryl monooleate glyceryl dioleate glyceryl sesquioleate diglyceryl diisostearate diglyceryl dioleate diglycerin monoisostearyl ether diglycerin diisostearyl ether and mixtures thereof.

Commercially available ester type surfactants are for example sorbitan isostearate having a tradename Crill 6 available from Croda and sorbitan sesquioleate with tradename Arlacel 83 available from Kao Atras.

The lipophilic surfactant can be a silicone type surfactant. Silicone type surfactants useful herein are i ii and iii as shown below and mixtures thereof.

Commercially available silicone type surfactants are for example dimethicone copolyols DC5225C BY22 012 BY22 008 SH3746M SH3771M SH3772M SH3773M SH3775M SH3748 SH3749 and DC5200 all available from Dow Corning and branched polyether polydiorganosiloxane emulsifiers such as PEG 9 polydimethylsiloxyethyl Dimethicone having an HLB of about 4 and a molecular weight of about 6 000 having a tradename KF 6028 available from ShinEtsu Chemical.

The composition of the present invention in water in oil form comprises water in an amount sufficient to provide a discontinuous aqueous phase preferably an amount such that water is no more than about 50 more preferably from about 10 to about 40 of the entire composition. Use of water allows the inclusion of useful components such as film forming polymers which are hydrophilic and or aqueous carrier based hydrophilic conditioning agents and other water soluble or water dispersible components described below.

In the present invention deionized water is typically used. Water from natural sources including mineral cations can also be used depending on the desired characteristic of the product.

The compositions of the present invention may further comprise a hydrophobic conditioning agent. Nonlimiting examples of hydrophobic conditioning agents include those selected from the group consisting of mineral oil petrolatum lecithin hydrogenated lecithin lanolin lanolin derivatives C7 C40 branched chain hydrocarbons C1 C30 alcohol esters of C1 C30 carboxylic acids C1 C30 alcohol esters of C2 C30 dicarboxylic acids monoglycerides of C1 C30 carboxylic acids diglycerides of C1 C30 carboxylic acids triglycerides of C1 C30 carboxylic acids ethylene glycol monoesters of C1 C30 carboxylic acids ethylene glycol diesters of C1 C30 carboxylic acids propylene glycol monoesters of C1 C30 carboxylic acids propylene glycol diesters of C1 C30 carboxylic acids C1 C30 carboxylic acid monoesters and polyesters of sugars polydialkylsiloxanes polydiarylsiloxanes polyalkarylsiloxanes cyclomethicones having 3 to 9 silicon atoms polysiloxane crosspolymers such as vinyl dimethicone crosspolymer available as a dimethicone mixture fluid with tradename KSG series available from ShinEtsu vegetable oils hydrogenated vegetable oils polypropylene glycol C4 C20 alkyl ethers di C8 C30 alkyl ethers and combinations thereof.

The compositions of the present invention may further comprise a hydrophilic conditioning agent. Nonlimiting examples of hydrophilic conditioning agents include those selected from the group consisting of polyhydric alcohols polypropylene glycols polyethylene glycols ureas pyrolidone carboxylic acids ethoxylated and or propoxylated C3 C6 diols and triols alpha hydroxy C2 C6 carboxylic acids ethoxylated and or propoxylated sugars polyacrylic acid copolymers sugars having up to about 12 carbons atoms sugar alcohols having up to about 12 carbon atoms and mixtures thereof.

The compositions of the present invention may contain a volatile or non volatile solvent that dissolves or uniformly disperses certain components of the present invention. They include but are not limited to lower alcohols such as ethanol isopropanol dihydric alcohols such as propylene and butylene glycol polyols such as glycerin hydroalcoholic mixtures hydrocarbons such as isobutane hexane decene acetone halogenated hydrocarbons like Freon linalool hydrocarbon esters such as ethyl acetate dibutyl phthalate volatile silicon derivatives especially siloxanes such as phenyl pentamethyl disiloxane phenethyl pentamethyl disiloxane methoxypropyl heptamethyl cyclotetrasiloxane chloropropyl pentamethyl disiloxane hydroxypropyl pentamethyl disiloxane octamethyl cyclotetrasiloxane decamethyl cyclopentasiloxane and mixtures thereof.

The compositions hereof may further contain additional components such as are conventionally used in topical products e.g. for providing aesthetic or functional benefit to the composition or skin such as sensory benefits relating to appearance smell or feel therapeutic benefits or prophylactic benefits it is to be understood that the above described required materials may themselves provide such benefits .

The CTFA Cosmetic Ingredient Handbook Second Edition 1992 describes a wide variety of nonlimiting cosmetic and pharmaceutical ingredients commonly used in the industry which are suitable for use in the topical compositions of the present invention. Such other materials may be dissolved or dispersed in the composition depending on the relative solubilities of the components of the composition.

Examples of suitable topical ingredient classes include sunscreen actives anti cellulite agents antioxidants radical scavengers chelating agents vitamins and derivatives thereof abrasives other oil absorbents astringents dyes essential oils fragrance structuring agents emulsifiers solubilizing agents anti caking agents antifoaming agents binders buffering agents bulking agents denaturants pH adjusters propellants reducing agents sequestrants cosmetic biocides and preservatives such as propylparaben methyl paraben phenoxyethanol benzyl alcohol and EDTA and its salts.

The cosmetic products herein may also be used for other usages in the personal care field with necessary modifications to the composition and or device suitable for the usage. Unlimited examples of such usages include coloring and treatment of eyebrows treatment styling removing and coloring of hair treatment and tattooing of skin and nail coloring.

The following examples further describe and demonstrate the preferred embodiments within the scope of the present invention. The examples are given solely for the purpose of illustration and are not to be construed as limitations of the present invention since many variations thereof are possible without departing from its spirit and scope.

Examples C1 and C2 are mascara compositions in the form of oil mixture and C3 is a mascara composition in the form of a water in oil emulsion. Each composition has a needle penetration of between 1 25 at 35 C. a yield stress of over 1500 Pa at 35 C. and has a viscosity of between 1 mPas and 10 000 000 mPas at 90 C. The mascara compositions can be suitably applied to the eyelashes when heated to between 50 80 C. via use of the device described hereinabove.

Examples C1 C3 may be made in any suitable method known to one skilled in the art. Preferably the examples are made by the following methods.

Examples C4 and C5 are mascara compositions in the form of a hard core shell made by the composition of C1 described above and inner core compositions as shown below. C4 is an aqueous continuous phase composition and C5 is an oil continuous phase composition.

Now the details of the loading mechanism utilized in the present invention will be discussed with reference to several embodiments and their modifications.

Referring to there is shown a first embodiment of the loading mechanism provided on the side of the cap . The cap includes a sheath surrounding the applicator and a carrier . The sheath is formed with an opening which comes into an open communication with the width center of the applicator when the cap is fitted over the applicator . The sheath is shaped to have a non circular bore within which the applicator is slidable but is rotatively fixed so that the applicator has its widthwise center held into constant confrontation with the opening . The carrier is in the form of a sleeve which is coaxial with the sheath and is rotatable relative to the sheath . The carrier is formed with a plurality of circumferentially spaced compartments each storing the mascara piece . The carrier is rotatable relative to the sheath to make one of the compartments selectively in registration with the opening for allowing the mascara piece to drop onto the applicator through the opening thereby loading the mascara piece one by one to the applicator . The carrier is composed of a rotating shell rotatably coupled to the sheath and a jacket forming outer bottoms of the compartments . The compartments are defined between the shell and the jacket . The jacket may be configured to be detachable to the shell enabling to refill the mascara pieces by removal of the jacket .

The jacket is formed on its top with handle for rotating the disc . As shown in a catch spring is provided on the side of the sheath for selective latching engagement with any one of latch projections on the periphery of the disc giving a clicking rotary motion to the disc . The jacket may be detachable to the base for allowing the refilling of the mascara pieces.

Although the illustrated embodiment discloses that the two compartments come simultaneously into registration with the opening at one time it is equally possible to arrange the compartments such that a single compartment or more than two compartments come into registration with the opening.

All documents cited in the Detailed Description of the Invention are in relevant part incorporated herein by reference the citation of any document is not to be construed as an admission that it is prior art with respect to the present invention.

While particular embodiments of the present invention have been illustrated and described it would be obvious to those skilled in the art that various other changes and modifications can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. It is therefore intended to cover in the appended claims all such changes and modifications that are within the scope of this invention.

