---

title: Supplemental restraint for auto-rack railroad car restraint system
abstract: A supplemental restraint for a primary vehicle restraint system for an auto-rack railroad car which reduces or eliminates movement of the vehicle in the auto-rack railroad car. The supplemental restraint is adapted to be positioned on a grating between the tire of the vehicle and the primary restraint. One embodiment of the supplemental restraint includes a body and an expander connected to the body. After the primary restraint is locked in place on the grating, the expander of the supplemental restraint is expanded. The expansion causes a more secure engagement between the tire and the primary restraint. This causes a high level of engagement between the tire and the primary restraint system indirectly through the supplemental restraint. The supplemental restraint also maintains a higher contact area on the tire regardless of the position of the primary restraint.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07128508&OS=07128508&RS=07128508
owner: ZefTek, Inc.
number: 07128508
owner_city: Montgomery
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051121
---
This application is a continuation of claims priority to and the benefit of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 184 113 filed Jul. 18 2005 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 004 696 which is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 644 294 filed Aug. 20 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 926 480 the entire contents of which are incorporated herein.

This application relates to the following co pending commonly owned application IMPROVED SUPPLEMENTAL RESTRAINT FOR AUTO RACK RAILROAD CAR RESTRAINT SYSTEM Ser. No. 11 058 050 filed Feb. 14 2005.

The railroad industry employs a variety of railroad cars for transporting products including vehicles such as automobiles and trucks. Auto rack railroad cars transport newly manufactured vehicles such as automobiles vans and trucks. Auto rack railroad cars known in the railroad industry as auto rack cars often travel thousands of miles through varying terrain. One typical type of auto rack car is compartmented having two or three floors or decks two sidewalls a pair of doors at each end and a roof. Newly manufactured vehicles are loaded into and unloaded from an auto rack car for transport by a person i.e. a loader who drives the vehicles into or out of the auto rack car. The loader also operates the vehicle restraint system that secures the vehicles in the auto rack car.

One problem with auto rack cars is the potential for damage to newly manufactured vehicles which can occur in the auto rack car due to the unwanted movement of one or more of the transported vehicles not adequately secured in the auto rack car. Various restraint or anchoring systems have been developed for securing the vehicles transported in auto rack cars to prevent movement or shifting of those vehicles during transportation. One type of system employs a tie down restraint using chains connected to steel runners in the support surface of the auto rack car. A ratchet tool is usually required to secure these chains taut. Certain types of these systems utilize winch mechanisms and harnesses which must be fitted over the vehicle tires to restrain movement of the vehicle.

To solve these problems and other disadvantages of prior vehicle restraint systems a vehicle restraint or wheel chocking system for restraining vehicles transported on auto rack cars was developed. This system is disclosed in detail in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 239 933 and 5 302 063. This wheel chocking or restraint system includes a plurality of chock members referred to herein as primary restraints detachably secured to gratings provided on a support surface of the auto rack car at defined locations. This wheel chocking system was designed to utilize four primary restraints one associated with each of the four wheels of a vehicle being transported to provide a balanced restraint relative to the center of gravity of the vehicle and eliminate the effects of longitudinal forces caused by impacts and lateral forces induced by rocking of the auto rack railroad car in transit.

As illustrated in the primary restraint of this system includes an angled face plate for alignment with and restraining movement of a tire of an associated wheel of the vehicle positioned on the grating . The angled face plate is vertically adjustable to a lower position shown in an intermediate position and an upper position shown in phantom in to provide chocking for different tire sizes. The angled face plate is attached to a load transmitting member which is adapted to transfer the load applied to the face plate to the grating . The primary restraint also includes a paddle shaped restraining member which contacts the inside surface of the tire to prevent lateral shifting of the vehicle.

While the primary restraint system described above and described in more detail in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 239 933 and 5 302 063 has been widely adapted and generally relatively effective in restraining vehicles such as conventional automobiles vans trucks and certain SUVs a problem has developed in relation to new types of vehicles currently called cross over vehicles. Cross over vehicles generally include a truck or SUV type body mounted on an automobile type frame. Such vehicles currently include the PONTIAC VIBE vehicle the TOYOTA MATRIX vehicle and other similar vehicles. These cross over vehicles have a higher center of gravity and a much lower curb weight than conventional automobiles and SUV s but include relatively low fenders moldings and bumpers compared to certain trucks vans and SUVs . When cross over vehicles are loaded in an auto rack railroad car on the grating of the vehicle restraint system described above it has been found that the restraint system and particularly the primary restraints are not adequately holding these vehicles in place or preventing the movement of the vehicles to a minimum desired level of movement.

This lack of restraint occurs at least in part because the adjustable member or face plate of the restraint cannot be mounted or positioned in the upmost or highest position because the adjustable member will or may interfere with or contact the bumper fender or molding of the cross over vehicle as illustrated in phantom in . It should be appreciated that vehicle manufacturers provide extremely particular instructions which warn against any contact or engagement between anything in the auto rack railroad cars and the new vehicles because the vehicle manufacturers desire to deliver the vehicles to dealers and customers in perfect condition. Any damage such as scratches or dents to the fenders bumpers moldings trim or other parts of the vehicle could prevent or inhibit a customer from purchasing or taking delivery of the vehicle. Accordingly vehicle manufacturers prefer that the adjustable member of the primary restraint of the above system not contact and not come close to the fenders bumpers trim or moldings of the newly manufactured vehicles as illustrated in the lower position in . The adjustable member must accordingly be placed in the lowest or at best the intermediate position when securing certain vehicles such as cross over vehicles in the auto rack cars as illustrated in the lowest position in . This causes the face plate to engage the tire at a lower point on the tire and accordingly the vehicle is more likely to be able to jump over or hop the primary restraint if the vehicle is exposed to sufficient forces as illustrated in .

A related problem which can also cause the vehicle to be more likely to jump over or hop the primary restraint is that the primary restraint is sometimes not placed as close to the tire as potentially possible as also illustrated in . One reason for this is that the loaders are in a hurry when they load the vehicles into the auto rack railroad cars. When the loaders are in a hurry they tend to place the primary restraint in a position close to the tire without substantially maneuvering the primary restraint to the closest possible position to the tire. This positioning can sometimes leave a substantial gap between the primary restraint and the tire. This gap can allow the vehicle to move and in fact build up speed causing the vehicle to hop or jump the primary restraints.

A similar problem arises because the primary restraint may need to be positioned or spaced at a distance from the tire because the tire is at a position on the grating or relative to the grating that does not allow the primary restraint to be placed in engagement with the tire. The primary restraint must be placed a distance of up to three quarters of an inch away from the tire due to the position of the grating members or rungs relative to the tire and the locking members of the primary restraint. Again in such situations a gap is created allowing the vehicle to hop or jump the primary restraints. This is also illustrated in where the size of the gap between the tire and the face plate is approximately half the distance between the rungs of the grating.

This gap problem is compounded because certain vehicle manufacturers require that certain vehicles be transported with the transmission in neutral to prevent damage to the vehicle such as to the transmission of the vehicle. In neutral the transmission does not stop the vehicles from moving.

It should also be appreciated that the vehicles may jump or hop the primary restraints at a variety of different times. During movement of the train including sudden stoppage of the auto rack railroad car or severe deceleration of the auto rack railroad car. Such instances can include sudden stopping for emergencies alone or in combination with slack action. The amount of force on the vehicles being transported relative to the auto rack car can cause the vehicles to hop or jump over the primary restraints especially if the tire is engaged by the face plate at a relatively low point if the primary restraint is spaced from the tire or if the face plate is at a low position and spaced from the tire.

More importantly during loading or unloading in a railroad yard the auto rack railroad cars are coupled and decoupled with other railroad cars on a regular basis. During the coupling action severe jolts of up to 8 to 10 miles per hour can be incurred by the auto rack railroad car even though regulations and signs in the yards and on the railroad cars limit the speed to no more than 4 miles per hour. These jolts can cause extreme force on the vehicles relative to the railroad cars and thus cause the vehicles to jump or hop the primary restraints especially if the tire is engaged by the face plate at a relatively low point or if the primary restraint is spaced from the tire. When a vehicle hops or jumps a restraint the vehicle may engage another vehicle in the railroad car or one or more end doors of the railroad car. There have been significant recorded instances of this type of damage to vehicles and especially cross over vehicles in auto rack railroad cars in railroad yards in recent years. As indicated above such damage to the vehicles necessitates the replacement of the damaged part and potentially other parts of the vehicle. This damage is extremely expensive for vehicle manufacturers which charge the railroads for such damage.

This problem is compounded for vehicle manufacturers when the vehicle damaged is a specially ordered vehicle instead of a stock vehicle for a specific customer. The customer can wait one two three or more months for a specially ordered vehicle. If the specially ordered vehicle is damaged in transit the customer may need to wait for another specially ordered vehicle to be manufactured. This can harm the dealer s and manufacturer s businesses.

Additionally the railroads often incur significant expenses because the end doors of the auto rack railroad cars need to be repaired. During such repairs these cars must be taken out of service.

The primary restraints are also often damaged when the vehicles jump the primary restraints or run into the primary restraints. The railroads have to replace these damaged primary restraints or have these damaged primary restraints repaired. This causes additional expenses which are incurred by the railroads.

It should thus be recognized that while the restraint system described above which has been widely commercially implemented provides certain restraint for vehicles being transported in auto rack cars in certain instances this restraint system does not adequately protect the vehicles or prevent the movement of the vehicles and thus prevent damage to the vehicles the auto rack railroad cars and the primary restraints. The automobile industry and the railroad industry have sought improvements for this restraint system. Accordingly there is a need for an improvement to the restraint system described above which is easy to install and remove and assists the primary restraints which are adapted to be attached to the gratings to hold the vehicles more securely.

The present invention solves the above problems by providing a supplemental or auxiliary restraint for an auto rack railroad car which reduces or eliminates the movement of the vehicles being transported in the auto rack car. The present invention provides a supplemental restraint which is adapted to co act with the restraint system and particularly with each of the primary restraints to more fully secure a vehicle being transported in an auto rack railroad car.

The supplemental restraint of the present invention is adapted to be positioned between the tire of the vehicle and the primary restraint. In one embodiment the supplemental restraint includes a first or tire engaging surface or member a second or primary restraint engaging surface or member and an expander or adjuster which causes the movement of the first or tire engaging surface or member and the second or primary restraint engaging surface or member between a non expanded position and at least one expanded position. In the non expanded position the first or tire engaging surface or member is closer to the second or primary restraint engaging surface or member and in the expanded position the first or tire engaging surface or member is further away from the second or primary restraint engaging surface or member. Moving the supplemental restraint into the expanded position causes the first or tire engaging surface or member to engage the tire and the second or primary restraint engaging surface or member to engage the face plate of the primary restraint. This securely locks the tire in place. It should be appreciated that the present invention may have one or more intermediate expanded positions which compensate for the different size gaps between the tire and the face plate of the primary restraint.

In one embodiment of the present invention the supplemental restraint of the present invention is adapted to be positioned on the grating between the tire of the vehicle and the primary restraint. More specifically after a vehicle is loaded in an auto rack car on the grating the supplemental restraint of the present invention is first positioned directly adjacent to and in engagement with the tire. The primary restraint system is then positioned adjacent to the opposite side of the supplemental restraint. After the primary restraint is locked in place on the grating the supplemental restraint or an expandable portion thereof is expanded. The expansion causes a more secure engagement between the tire and the primary restraint. This causes a high level of engagement between the tire and the restraint system indirectly through the supplemental restraint of the present invention. This prevents movement of the tires of the vehicles and thus facilitates a more effective overall vehicle restraint system.

In one embodiment the supplemental restraint of the present invention includes a body and an expander connected to the body. The body includes a mounting member adapted to be positioned on the grating of the restraint system. The body also includes a tire engaging member or tire engager connected to and extending upwardly from the mounting member. The tire engaging member or tire engager is curved in a suitable manner for engagement with the treaded surface of the tire. The tire engager is formed to engage a significant portion of the tire and specifically to extend between the tire and the adjacent fender molding or trim In one embodiment the expander is connected to the body and in one preferred embodiment connected to the tire engager. The expander is adapted to transversely extend from the tire engager and cause the tire engager to more securely engage the tire. In one embodiment the outer surface or primary restraint engaging surface of the expander is adapted to engage the face plate of the primary restraint when in an expanded position. In an alternative embodiment the body or part of the body is suitably expandable.

In one embodiment the expander includes a moveable adjustment or expanding member adapted to co act with a base connected to the tire engager. The adjusting or expanding member in one embodiment moves such as by rotating from an unexpanded or closed position i.e. closer to the tire engager to a fully expanded or fully open position i.e. further from the tire engager . In one embodiment the expander is adapted to be positioned in one or a plurality of partially expanded positions between the closed or non expanded position and the fully open or fully expanded position and is adapted to be releaseably locked in each such expanded position.

In one embodiment the supplemental restraint includes at least one handle which is connected to the movable adjusting or expanding member of the expander. The handle enables a user to move the movable adjusting or expanding member between the non expanded and fully expanded positions including any partially expanded positions there between . In one embodiment two or more handles are connected to the movable adjusting or expanding member for this purpose. In a further embodiment the handle s are removably attached to the movable member. It should be appreciated that other suitable arrangements are possible for the handle and the movement of the movable adjusting or expanding member between the expanded and non expanded positions in accordance with the present invention.

It should also be appreciated that when the movable adjustment or expanding member is moved from the non expanded position to the fully expanded position or one of the intermediate expanded positions this causes the mounting member and the tire engager of the supplemental restraint to move closer to the tire and therefore eliminate any gap space or slack between the tire and the tire engager.

It should be appreciated that a supplemental restraint of the present invention is preferably used with each primary restraint system which is employed to secure the vehicle in place. For certain vehicles only two primary restraints and two supplemental restraints on opposing tires on opposite sides of the vehicle are employed and for most vehicles four primary restraints and four supplemental restraints are employed i.e. one for each tire .

It is therefore an advantage of the present invention to provide a supplemental restraint for a restraint system for a vehicle transported in an auto rack railroad car.

Other objects features and advantages of the present invention will be apparent from the following detailed disclosure taken in conjunction with the accompanying sheets of drawings wherein like reference numerals refer to like parts.

Referring now to the drawings and particularly to a typical auto rack railroad car includes a frame supported by trucks each of which have several wheels which roll along railroad tracks . The frame supports two sidewalls and a roof . The auto rack car includes a pair of co acting clamshell doors and mounted on each end of the auto rack car . The doors and are opened to facilitate the loading and unloading of vehicles into and out of the auto rack car and are closed during transport or storage of the vehicles.

The sidewalls include a series of steel vertical posts which are mounted on and extend upwardly from the frame . The roof is mounted on and supported by these vertical posts. The vertical posts are evenly spaced along the entire length of both sidewalls of the auto rack car . A plurality of rectangular galvanized steel side wall panels which extend horizontally and are vertically spaced apart are mounted between each pair of vertical posts . These side wall panels are supported at their corners by brackets not shown that are suitably secured to the vertical posts. The average side wall panel has a multiplicity of round sidewall panel holes . These side wall panel holes provide the auto rack car with natural light as well as proper ventilation. Proper ventilation prevents harm from the toxic vehicle fumes to the person or persons loading or unloading the vehicles into or out of the auto rack car.

The auto rack car may be a tri level car having first second and third levels. Normally eighteen passenger vehicles can be transported in a tri level auto rack car six on each level. The auto rack car can also have two levels for vehicles instead of three. The bi level auto rack car has a lower level and an upper level. The bi level auto rack car is generally used to transport larger vehicles such as vans mini vans pickup trucks four by four and cross over vehicles. The bi level auto rack car can usually transport twelve of these vehicles six on each level. The auto rack car may also be a single level car.

Referring now to the supplemental restraint of one embodiment of the present invention generally indicated by numerical is illustrated in the non expanded position in and and in the fully expanded position in and . The supplemental restraint of the illustrated embodiment of the present invention includes a body and an expander or expansion member connected to the body .

In the illustrated embodiment the body includes a mounting member adapted to be positioned on the grating of the restraint system. The mounting member includes a forward section and a rear section The rear section is suitably sized and shaped to extend under the primary restraint when in the mounted position as illustrated in . This provides substantial support for the supplemental restraint and prevents the backward rotation of the supplemental restraint when the supplemental restraint system is engaged by the tire or the tire applies force to the supplemental restraint .

In one embodiment a rubber mounting pad shown in is suitably attached to the bottom of the mounting member to increase the frictional engagement between the bottom of the mounting member and the grating . Since in one embodiment the grating and the mounting member are both metal the rubber pad increases the friction between the bottom of the mounting member and the grating and reduces unwanted sliding of the supplemental restraint relative to the grating . The mounting pad also functions to reduce or eliminate wear between the supplemental restraint and the grating.

In the illustrated embodiment the body includes a tire engaging member or tire engager extending upwardly from the mounting member . The tire engaging member or tire engager is curved in a suitable manner or has a concave shape for engagement with the treaded surface of the vehicle tire which keeps the profile close to the tire and away from the fenders body panels and trim of the vehicle. As best illustrated in in one embodiment of the body the body and or the tire engager includes a plurality of spaced apart braces or supports such as braces or supports and which provide structural rigidity to the tire engager and the entire body of the supplemental restraint. Other suitable configurations are contemplated by the present invention. It should be appreciated that the tire engaging surface or member can extend along a significant portion of the tire between the tire and an adjacent fender molding or trim.

The expander in the illustrated embodiment is connected to the tire engager . The expander is operable to extend substantially transversely from the tire engager as illustrated in to cause the tire engager to more securely engage the tire . The expander is adapted to engage the face plate of the primary restraint when in an expanded position. More specifically the expander in the illustrated embodiment includes a primary restraint engaging or surface member adapted to engage at least a portion of the face plate of the primary restraint.

In the illustrated embodiment the expander includes a moveable adjusting or expanding member adapted to co act with a base connected to the tire engager . The adjusting or expanding member in the illustrated embodiment is adapted to move counter clockwise by rotating from an unexpanded position as illustrated in and to a fully expanded position as illustrated in and and to move clockwise from the fully expanded position to the non expanded position. It should be appreciated that the arrangement of movement could be reversed in an alternative embodiment. In the illustrated embodiment the expander is also adapted to be positioned in each of a plurality of partially expanded positions between the non expanded position and the fully expanded position and is adapted to be releaseably locked in each such position.

In the illustrated embodiment the supplemental restraint includes a removable handle which is connected to the movable adjusting or expanding member of the expander . The handle enables a user to move the movable adjusting or expanding member between the non expanded and fully expanded position including to any of the partially expanded positions therebetween . In one embodiment the handle is removably attached to the expanding member . It should be appreciated that other suitable arrangements are possible for the handle and the movement of the movable adjusting or expanding member between the expanded and non expanded positions in accordance with the present invention.

In the illustrated embodiment the expanding member includes a plurality of steps or mating surfaces and which are formed and sized to co act or mate with steps or mating surfaces and of the base . This arrangement of co acting steps cause the expanding member to transversely extend away from the base when the expanding member is rotated in a counter clockwise manner.

In the illustrated embodiment the expanding member is attached to the base by a biasing assembly including a bolt a first washer a spring a second washer and a nut . The bolt is positioned through an opening defined in the tire engager or the base of the tire engager and through an opening defined in the expanding member . The first washer engages the lip of the expanding member which defines opening the spring is journaled about the bolt and has one end engaging the first washer the second washer engages the other end of the spring and the nut is secured to the bolt . This arrangement causes the expanding member to be biased toward the base to a desired extent. It should be appreciated that other suitable biasing apparatus or arrangements may be implemented in accordance with the present invention.

The expander of the illustrated embodiment also includes a guide mechanism including a guide member or pin and a guide area or slot adapted to receive the guide member or pin . This mechanism or arrangement assists in controlling the movement or rotation of the expanding member relative to the base and prevents the expanding member from rotating too far such as past ninety degrees in the illustrated embodiment. It should be appreciated that other suitable guide mechanisms can be employed in the present invention. For instance a pipe or tube can be positioned adjacent to the spring to prevent the rotation past ninety degrees.

The expander further includes a suitable releasable locking assembly or mechanism adapted to releasably lock the expanding member relative to the base in each of the positions including the non expanded position the fully expanded position and the partially expanded positions. In the illustrated embodiment the releasable locking assembly or mechanism includes a locking member or pin and a plurality of locking receptacles or notches to each adapted to receive the locking pin . In one embodiment the locking pin is a ball nosed spring loaded plunger which is biased toward the expanding member . In the illustrated embodiment a when the pin is in receptacle as in the expanding member is in the fully expanded position b when the pin is in the receptacle as in the expanding member is in the non expanded position and c when the pin is in any of the receptacles to such as the expanding member is in a partially expanded position. illustrates pin extending from the expanding member and the notch in the base . It should be appreciated that other suitable locking or positioning mechanisms can be employed in the present invention. For instance the base and the expanding member can respectively include co acting teeth or ridges peaks and valleys or other locking or stopping structures. These structures can be on one or more corresponding surfaces of the base and expanding member.

To move the expanding member relative to the base an operator uses the handle to disengage the locking pin from the locking notch by applying a transverse force against the spring or biasing member and then moves or rotates the expanding member in the desired direction to the desired position. The operator then releases the handle and the biasing assembly co acts with the spring plunger or locking pin to cause the locking pin to engage the appropriate locking notch to releasably lock the engaging member relative to the base.

In one embodiment the body the expanding member of the expander and the handle are each made from a cast aluminum. The body expanding member and handle can alternatively be made from a nylon Dicyclopentadiene Acrylonitrile butadine styrene or polycarbonate. It should further be appreciated that the entire supplemental restraint including the body expander and handle could be made from any one or more suitable materials including other metals plastics ceramics and composite materials or combinations thereof.

In one embodiment the body including the mounting member tire engager and the base of the expander are integrally formed. It should be appreciated that one or more of these members could be separately formed and suitably connected to the other members.

It should also be appreciated that the supplemental restraint is preferably used with each primary restraint system which is employed to secure the vehicle in place. For certain vehicles only two primary restraints and two supplemental restraints on opposing tires on opposite sides of the vehicle are employed and for most vehicles four primary restraints and four supplemental restraints are employed i.e. one for each tire .

It should also be appreciated that when the movable adjusting or expanding member is moved from the non expanded position to the fully expanded position or one of the intermediate expanded positions the mounting member and the tire engager of the supplemental restraint move closer to the tire thereby eliminating any gap space or slack between the tire and the tire engager as illustrated in .

It should thus be appreciated that in one embodiment the present invention includes the combination of the primary restraint and the supplemental restraint. It should further be appreciated that in one embodiment the present invention includes the combination of the primary restraint the grating and the supplemental restraint.

It should further be appreciated that the present invention includes a method of securing a vehicle in an auto rack railroad car which includes placing a tire engaging member and a primary restraint engaging member between a tire and a primary restraint and expanding or moving at least one of said members away from the other member to engage the tire and the primary restraint.

It should further be appreciated that the supplemental restraint of the present invention may be adapted to be used in conjunction with a primary restraint in other transport mechanism besides auto rack railroad cars.

It should be appreciated that when not in use the supplemental restraints can be stored in a suitable storage box or rack.

It will be understood that modifications and variations may be effected without departing from the scope of the novel concepts of the present invention and it is understood that this application is to be limited only by the scope of the claims.

