---

title: Methods, systems, and computer program products for using a personal conference to privately establish and control media connections with a telephony device
abstract: Methods, systems, and computer program products for using a personal conference to privately establish and control media connections with a telephony device are disclosed. According to one method, a media connection is established between a first user and a personal conference instance. The first user is connected to the personal conference instance via a telephony device, such as a PSTN phone. A plurality of second media connections is established between a plurality of second users and the personal conference instance in a manner that conceals existence of the personal conference instance to at least one of the second users. Media packets from the second users are mixed and sent to the first user. Media packets from the first user are sent to the second users. The first user dynamically controls at least one aspect of the personal conference call instance.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07715541&OS=07715541&RS=07715541
owner: BroadSoft M6, LLC
number: 07715541
owner_city: Gaithersburg
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050901
---
The subject matter described herein relates to methods systems and computer program products for establishing and controlling a plurality of media streams to a telephony device. More particularly the subject matter described herein relates to methods systems and computer program products for privately establishing and controlling media streams to a telephony device using a personal conference call.

In telephony networks it may be desirable to provide a mechanism where more than two media streams can be privately mixed and sent to a general purpose PSTN telephony device. Conventional telephony devices such as PSTN phones are limited in that they can only handle two different incoming media streams. If it is desirable to send more than two media streams from a local PSTN phone to a remote PSTN phone or to receive more than two media streams from the remote PSTN phone it is necessary to use a conference bridge. However using a conference bridge requires that all parties connected to the conference bridge hear each other.

In some instances it may be desirable for the local PSTN phone to receive more than two media streams without requiring that the mixed media streams be delivered to all users or devices connected to the local PSTN phone. For example if a business manager is communicating with multiple employees in the field it may be desirable for the manager to be able to simultaneously hear multiple employees in the field. However it may not be necessary that the employees in the field know that the manager can hear all of them or that they be able to hear each other. In another example one user may desire to listen to music while communicating with other users but may not desire to transmit the music to the other users. In yet another example it may be desirable for an administrator or supervisor at a call center to hear multiple calls with customers to selectively adjust features of the calls and to prevent the customers from hearing each other. Conventional conference bridges lack the flexibility to implement these scenarios.

Accordingly in light of these shortcomings there exists a long felt need for methods systems and computer program products for privately establishing and controlling media connections with a PSTN telephony device.

According to one aspect the subject matter described herein includes a method for privately establishing and controlling media connections with a telephony device using a personal conference. The method includes establishing a media connection between a first user and a personal conference call instance. A plurality of second media connections is established between a plurality of second users and the personal conference instance. The first user is connected to the personal conference instance via a telephony device such as a PSTN phone. The second media connections are established in a manner that conceals existence of the personal conference call instance from at least one of the second users. Media packets from the second users are mixed and delivered to the first user. Media packets from the first user are sent to the second users. The first user can dynamically control at least one feature of the personal conference call.

One advantage of using a personal conference call to privately establish and control media streams to a telephony device over using conventional conference calls is that the users other than the initiator may be unaware of each other. In addition the initiator can selectively control features of the media streams that he or she hears. Exemplary features that can be controlled by the initiator include per line volume muting and directionality. Another advantage of using a personal conference call user to privately establish and control multiple media streams to a telephony device is that the telephony device is not required to have its own multi line conferencing capabilities.

According to one aspect the subject matter described herein includes a method for private establishment and control of multiple media connections to a telephony user using a personal conference call. The establishment and control of the connections is private because the connections are established and controlled in a manner that conceals the existence of the personal conference call from at least one user. is a schematic diagram illustrating the use of a personal conference call to deliver multiple media streams to a telephony user according to an embodiment of the subject matter described herein. Referring to a conference owner or initiator initiates a connection with a personal conference call instance . Personal conference call instance includes hardware and software for establishing media connections with user user audio transmitter and audio recorder . According to an important aspect of the subject matter described herein users and are preferably unaware that they are participating in a conference call. That is media connections and are preferably established and controlled in such a manner to conceal the fact that users and are connected to personal conference call instance . Rather users and may believe that they are connected directly to the phone of conference owner .

According to another aspect of the subject matter described herein conference owner may dynamically control one or more aspects of the personal conference. One aspect controllable by conference owner may include directionality. For example connections and may be send receive so that users and can hear conference owner and so that conference owner can hear users and . Connection from audio transmitter may be receive only. For example audio transmitter may generate music that conference owner wishes to hear but does not wish to broadcast to other users. Connection with audio recorder may be send only so that audio recorder receives media packets from conference owner but not from other sources. Alternatively audio recorder may receive mixed packets from any one or more of the audio sources in the conference call where the packets being mixed are controlled by conference owner .

The directionality volume or other feature of any of the connections connected to personal conference instance may be changed on the fly. Exemplary messages that may be used to dynamically control features of a personal conference call that is used to control multiple media connections with a telephony user will be described in detail below.

Although the diagram in relates primarily to audio streams being delivered to and from the conference owner the subject matter described herein is not limited to delivering only audio content. Any media type that can be packetized and sent over a network may be delivered to and from a conference owner using the methods described herein. For example video streams from each non owner user may be mixed and sent to the conference owner but not to other non owners. Similarly a video stream from the owner may be fanned out and distributed to each non owner.

Table 1 shown below illustrates exemplary comparisons between a personal conference call used to privately deliver multiple media streams to a conference owner as illustrated in and a traditional conference call.

According to the first row of Table 1 one difference between a personal conference call and a traditional conference call is that a personal conference call is attached to a specific user or device whereas a traditional conference call is not attached to a specific user. Instead a traditional conference call is attached to multiple users who are also participants in the call. By attached it is meant that a user receives multiple audio streams. As illustrated in the second row of Table 1 another difference between a personal conference call and a traditional conference call is that in a personal conference call none of the non owner users are aware that they are in a conference call. In contrast in a conventional conference each user is aware of his or her presence and each additional user s presence in the conference call.

Although the second row of Table 1 illustrates that one aspect of a personal conference call may be that no users are aware of other users presence conference call the subject matter described herein is not limited to call in which no users are aware of any other users. In an alternative implementation some users may be aware of other users as controlled by the conference owner.

As indicated in the third row of Table 1 another difference between a personal conference call and a traditional conference call is that in a personal conference call audio streams are added only by action from a specific user. In a traditional conference audio streams can be added by action from any participant who dials the conference number.

According to row four of Table 1 another difference between a personal conference call and a traditional conference call is that in a personal conference call audio streams from other users are presented only to the conference owner and in a traditional conference call audio streams from non owner users are presented to each non owner user. Some traditional conferences allow selective muting of participants. However in general the goal of traditional conference calls is for users other than the initiator to be able to hear each other. In contrast in a personal conference call the goal is for the conference owner to hear non owner users and for the non owner users to hear the conference owner but not each other.

Although row four of Table 1 indicates that in a personal conference call streams from other users are only presented to the conference owner the subject matter described herein is not limited to such an embodiment. For example audio streams from non owner users may be presented to other non owner users in a personal conference call where such presentation is selectively controlled by the conference owner.

As indicated in row five of Table 1 yet another difference between a personal conference call and a traditional conference call is that in a personal conference call non owner users hear audio only from the conference owner whereas in a traditional conference non owner users hear audio from each other.

Although row five in Table 1 indicates that in a personal conference call non owner users only hear audio from the conference owner the subject matter described herein is not limited to such an implementation. For example it an alternate implementation the conference owner may selectively allow certain non owner users to hear other non owner users.

As indicated by row six of Table 1 yet another difference between a personal conference call and a traditional conference call is that in a personal conference call only a conference owner can change the directionality and volume of an audio connection whereas in a traditional conference any participant who has moderator privileges can adjust the properties of a connection through floor control software. However it should be noted that in a personal conference call multiple users can control packets sent to them as owners without departing form the scope of the subject matter described herein.

Still another difference between a personal conference call and a traditional conference call is that in a personal conference call an audio stream connected to the conference call is not a participant whereas an audio stream connected to a traditional conference is a participant. In this context a participant is someone who receives multiple audio streams. is a schematic diagram illustrating the use of the personal conference call instance illustrated in in more detail. In particular shows that audio stream delivered to conference owner is a mixture of packets from audio connections and . However the outbound sides of audio connections and represent only a fanned out version of the outbound side of media stream . An exemplary algorithm for mixing media streams and controlling features of the personal conference call instance will be described in detail below.

As described above one aspect of the subject matter described herein is that the conference owner can selectively control the volume level of other users and the volume level of his or her own outbound media stream. illustrates this concept. In personal conference call instance maintains a volume table including data used by personal conference call instance for adjusting volume levels for media packets received from users and and audio transmitter . Similarly personal conference call instance also maintains separate volume tables and for individually adjusting the volume level of media packets delivered from conference owner to users and and to audio transmitter .

Soft bridge and call agent may be located on the same computing platform or on different computing platforms. In one exemplary implementation soft bridge is implemented on an Intel server platform running a VxWorks operating system and call agent is implemented on a SUN platform executing a Solaris operating system. Soft bridge and call agent may communicate with each other via commands referred to as simple device control protocol SDCP commands.

Exemplary SDCP commands that may be exchanged between soft bridge and call agent to establish and control features of a personal conference call include 

As stated above in delivering multiple media streams to a conference owner it is preferable that only the conference owner be able to adjust volume levels since non owner members may not be aware that other non owner members are present or that a personal conference call is the mechanism used to deliver each media stream to a conference owner. Table 2 shown below illustrates and example of a volume table that may be maintained by each member of a personal conference with one owner and three non owners.

As illustrated in Table 2 each non owner member M M includes a zero dB volume adjustment for other non owner members. In addition the asterisks in Table 2 indicate that the volume adjustments are not modifiable by non owner members. The entries without asterisks may be modifiable. For example owner O can selectively modify the volumes of incoming media streams from members M M and selectively modify O s outgoing volumes of media to M M.

In the illustrated example soft bridge maintains personal conference call instance . Personal conference call instance stores data about media connections and . In the illustrated example personal conference call instance stores a call table which contains call IDs for each of the media connections and corresponding data structures for each call. The data structure for call A which corresponds to the connection with conference owner is shown as an example. In the illustrated example per call data structure includes the IP address and port of conference owner to which media packets should be sent. Volume levels for each call that is mixed and provided to conference owner are also include in data structure . These volume levels are listed in data structure as V V and V. Data structure also includes a direction indicator for the call. The direction indicator indicates whether the call is send only receive only send and receive or not send and not receive. In one implementation the direction indicator may be used to selectively mute non owner members in a personal conference. Table 3 shown below illustrates exemplary values that may be used for the direction indicator 

Call agent includes phone instances that store user contact and protocol information for contacting user terminals corresponding to call terminations and . Call agent also includes protocol agents . Protocol agents implement the protocol specified by phone instances for performing call signaling to establish calls with each user terminal.

Although illustrates soft bridge and call agent as being implemented on separate platforms the subject matter described herein is not limited to such an implementation. In an alternate implementation soft bridge and call agent may be implemented on a single hardware platform without departing from the scope of the subject matter described herein.

In an alternate implementation the personal conference call may be established by having call agent dial the directory number of each user that is to be connected to the personal conference call. In such an implementation protocol agents may perform signaling functions for connecting each user to personal conference call instance . The signaling messages may include a calling party number corresponding to conference owner so that any user with caller ID capabilities will think that the call is from conference owner rather than conference call instance . Call agent may instruct personal conference call instance to add each participant to the conference call using the appropriate SDCP commands.

In step media packets from the second users are mixed and sent to the owner via the first media connection. In step media packets from the owner or first user are sent to the second users via the second media connections. In step the personal conference call instance is controlled dynamically. For example the conference owner may dynamically control volume directionality or muting of any of the media connections. Dynamically controlling an aspect of the personal conference call instance may include having the owner send a command to call agent via any suitable means. For example the owner may send a command via the owner s handset or via a computer terminal separate from the owner s handset to adjust the volume of one of the media connections associated with the personal conference call instance. In an implementation in which the owner uses his or her handset to dynamically control a feature of the conference two methods for controlling the features may be provided one using star codes and the other using other buttons on the owner s handset. Each of these control examples will now be described in detail.

In an implementation in which the owner uses star codes the owner may identify the non owner user whose audio stream is being modified using an identification number corresponding to the non owner user. Each non owner user may be given an identifier in the conference such that the owner can reference the audio stream to or from that user for feature invocation. Once the particular audio stream is selected call agent may be programmed to recognize star codes so that the owner can change the directionality of the media stream modify the volume of the media stream or mute the media stream. Using star codes will allow the conference owner to control features of the personal conference call using any type of phone. However such an implementation requires that the user remember the star codes in order to modify the calls.

In an implementation that uses other phone buttons to dynamically control personal conference call features the phone may include an LCD screen that displays indicators of each of the multiple calls that make up the personal conference call. The LCD screen may also include a menu of buttons for accessing each call. Once a call is selected the owner has the option of using star codes to modify call properties using keys to navigate menus to control each call. For example once a call is selected the LCD screen may allow a user to dynamically adjust the volume level of a call using arrow keys provided on the keypad.

In an implementation in which a computer terminal separate from the conference owner s phone is used to control features of a personal conference call the computer terminal may include a command line interface or a GUI interface that allows the owner to select and control individual conference features. In one example a GUI interface may provide information relating to calls connected to the personal conference call instance. The information may be published to the computer terminal on which the GUI interface is running using application programming interface API commands. The owner can modify call properties by selecting one of the calls and a required action. The selection may be performed using a keyboard mouse or other input device connected to the computer terminal. The request will be translated into an API command and transmitted to the call agent.

In response to receiving a feature control command from conference owner call agent may send the appropriate SDCP command to soft bridge . Soft bridge may adjust the appropriate value in the per conference call data table and adjust the volume level on the corresponding RTP media stream.

In step the adjusted volume is determined for each member. As illustrated in personal conference call instance may maintain separate volume tables containing volume adjustment levels in decibels for each connection. The adjusted volume may be determined by computing the average energy of each received packet and multiplying the average energy times the volume adjustment level.

In step for each time slice and for each conference owner that is flagged for packet reception a list of members to mix is determined based on the adjusted volume. This step may include for each conference member from which the conference is receiving packets 

In step packets are mixed and sent to the conference owner or owners. In order to mix the packets to each owner the following steps may be performed 

In step mixed owner packets are sent to the non owners that are flagged for reception. This step may be accomplished as follows 

In the last If statement in the above referenced algorithm mixed packets are sent to other members who are also owners. This statement allows a personal conference to have multiple owners who receive mixed packets from non owner members.

According to another aspect the subject matter described herein may include pre storing volume adjustment levels for different speech compression algorithms. For example in one implementation soft bridge may not include a digital signal processor DSP for converting volume adjustments between different voice compression algorithms such as G.711 to pulse code modulation PCM . Instead soft bridge may include a general purpose microprocessor that performs volume adjustment as well as other personal conference functions. Since converting volume adjustments between different voice compression standards can involve floating point mathematics it is desirable to reduce the number of these calculations that must be performed by the microprocessor of soft bridge . Accordingly in one implementation of the subject matter described herein volume adjustment tables may be precomputed and stored in memory of soft bridge .

Returning to in step PCM values are computed and stored in array elements corresponding to each G.711 value and volume adjustment level. For example for G.711 value of 4 PCM values may be computed for volume adjustments ranging from 10 dB to 10 dB. The computed PCM values may be stored in the appropriate elements of array . This process is repeated for each G.711 value and volume adjustment level.

In step at run time in order to determine an adjusted PCM volume level the G.711 value and the volume adjustment are used to extract the PCM value from array . For example if the G.711 value is eight and it is desirable to adjust the element by 3 dB then array will be accessed at array element 128 13 to extract the appropriate PCM value. By precomputing and storing volume adjustment levels the subject matter described herein allows dynamic volume adjustment without requiring dedicated DSP resources to perform the volume adjustment.

According to another aspect the subject matter described herein includes mirroring a personal conference call from a master soft bridge to a slave soft bridge so that the personal conference can be switched over without dropping calls and with minimal delay. is a flow chart illustrating an exemplary process for mirroring a personal conference call to n slave soft bridges where n is an integer of at least one and switching to one of the n slaves soft bridge in response to failure of the master soft bridge according to an embodiment of the subject matter described herein. Referring to in step master and slave soft bridges reachable by the same virtual IP address are maintained. In step for each connection added to a personal conference call instance a mirror connection is added to the slave soft bridge. In one exemplary implementation connections may be added using commands transmitted from the call agent to the master and slave soft bridges.

In line of the message flow diagram the call agent sends an add mirror command to the slave soft bridge to instruct the slave soft bridge to add a connection corresponding to the IP address port and call ID specified in the SB add command in line . In response to this request the slave soft bridge preferably reserves resources for processing the call but does not send or receive any media streams relating to the call. In line of the message flow diagram the slave soft bridge acknowledges the soft bridge add mirror acknowledgement command. In lines and of the message flow diagram the call agent sends a modify command to the master and slave soft bridges. The modify command includes the virtual IP address of the master and slave soft bridges the conference ID the call ID of the call being modified the feature being modified and the setting. The modify command is sent to both soft bridges so that the features of the personal conference instance on the slave soft bridge will be synchronized with those of the personal conference instance of the master soft bridge.

Returning to in steps and the master soft bridge is monitored for a failure. Such monitoring may be accomplished in any suitable manner such as periodically requesting operational status from the master soft bridge or having the master soft bridge periodically send heartbeat messages to the slave soft bridge. If no failure is detected the monitoring continues.

However if a failure is detected control proceeds to step where the slave soft bridge broadcasts a gratuitous address resolution protocol ARP message to intermediate switches and routers to direct the media streams to the slave soft bridge. The gratuitous ARP message will update intermediate switches and routers to start sending media packets to the slave soft bridge on the port on which the gratuitous ARP message was received. In step the slave soft bridge begins mixing and sending media packets. Thus by maintaining a mirror soft bridge and switching to the mirror soft bridge in response to failure of the master soft bridge personal conference can be maintained without dropping calls.

The subject matter described herein is not limited to mirroring a personal conference. For example the methods illustrated in may be used to mirror any type of multi party communication including ad hoc conferences where all participants are aware of each other.

It will be understood that various details of the invention may be changed without departing from the scope of the invention. Furthermore the foregoing description is for the purpose of illustration only and not for the purpose of limitation as the invention is defined by the claims as set forth hereinafter.

