---

title: Tester for determining the validity of a feature in a remote device
abstract: One or more test classes implement an object oriented interface that specifies an execution method and a results method called from a user interface running on the mobile terminal or an emulator. The user interface enables a user to select one or more tests to run, view results, and upload results to a server. For each test, the user interface calls the execution method to initiate the test and obtain a success or failure indication. The user interface also calls the results method to obtain data on a capability and/or to obtain validation that the capability is complete and reliable. Tests that require specific hardware are activated or deactivated, depending on whether the mobile terminal includes the required hardware. Test include a memory size test, a memory integrity test, a socket connection test, an HTTP test, a camera test, an image rendering speed test, a message test, and the like.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07630708&OS=07630708&RS=07630708
owner: Yahoo! Inc.
number: 07630708
owner_city: Sunnyvale
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050311
---
The present invention is directed to testing a mobile terminal and more specifically to determining and validating capabilities of the mobile terminal.

Cell phones personal digital assistants PDAs and other mobile terminals often include a hardware and software platform that is based on an industry standard. For example many mobile terminal manufacturers utilize the Java 2 micro edition J2ME specification provided by Sun Microsystems Inc. so that differing cell phones can run the same application program. Details on the J2ME specification can be found from Sun Microsystems Inc. e.g. http jcp.org aboutJava communityprocess final jsr037 index.html .

However the specification may not be perfectly clear and or some mobile terminals may not strictly comply with the specification. Thus some mobile terminals do not run application programs as expected and or perform in unexpected ways. Unexpected characteristics of some mobile terminals are often not provided in documentation and may only be discovered after substantial time and effort has been expended in developing an application program.

The present invention now will be described more fully hereinafter with reference to the accompanying drawings which form a part hereof and which show by way of illustration specific exemplary embodiments by which the invention may be practiced. This invention may however may be embodied in many different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth herein rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the scope of the invention to those skilled in the art. Among other things the present invention may be embodied as methods or devices. Accordingly the present invention may take the form of an entirely hardware embodiment an entirely software embodiment or an embodiment combining software and hardware aspects. The following detailed description is therefore not to be taken in a limiting sense.

An embodiment is described in terms of a mobile terminal that has an ability to interface with one or more networks optionally including multiple types of networks. This exemplary embodiment is designed to enable testing of the mobile terminal to validate its capabilities and or determine the extent of its capabilities. The following embodiment relates to testing mobile terminals that include a J2ME application environment. However the invention can be adapted to other environments.

Mobile terminal may include many more components than those shown in . However the components shown are sufficient to disclose an illustrative embodiment for practicing the present invention. As shown in the figure mobile terminal includes a processing unit in communication with a mass memory via a bus .

Mass memory includes a RAM a ROM and other storage means. Mass memory illustrates a type of computer readable media namely computer storage media. Computer storage media may include volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Other examples of computer storage media include EEPROM flash memory or other semiconductor memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by a computing device.

Mass memory stores a basic input output system BIOS for controlling low level operation of mobile terminal . The mass memory also stores an operating system for controlling the operation of mobile terminal . It will be appreciated that this component may include a general purpose operating system such as a version of UNIX or LINUX or a specialized mobile communication operating system such as the Symbian operating system. The operating system may include or interface with a Java virtual machine module that enables control of hardware components and or operating system operations via Java application programs.

Memory further includes one or more data storage units which can be utilized by mobile terminal to store among other things programs databases and or other data. Programs may include computer executable instructions which when executed by mobile terminal transmit and receive WWW pages e mail audio video and enable telecommunication with another user of another mobile device. In addition mass memory stores testing application which may be stand alone or work in conjunction with an application on a remote device such as a server. Testing application may include computer executable instructions which may be run under control of operating system to test and validate capabilities and features of mobile terminal .

Mobile terminal also includes a power supply one or more wireless interfaces an audio interface a display a keypad an illuminator an input output interface a haptic interface and an optional global positioning systems GPS receiver . Power supply provides power to mobile terminal . A rechargeable or non rechatgeable battery may be used to provide power. The power may also be provided by an external power source such as an AC adapter or a powered docking cradle that supplements and or recharges a battery.

Mobile terminal may optionally communicate with a base station not shown or directly with another mobile device. Wireless interface enables mobile terminal to communicate through a wireless network to a wired telecommunications network to a computer network and or to other networks coupled to remote devices such as a server another mobile terminal a wired telecommunications device and the like. Wireless interface includes circuitry for coupling mobile terminal to one or more wireless networks and is constructed for use with one or more communication protocols and technologies including but not limited to global system for mobile communication GSM code division multiple access CDMA time division multiple access TDMA user datagram protocol UDP transmission control protocol internet protocol TCP IP SMS general packet radio service GPRS Wireless Application Protocol WAP ultra wide band UWB IEEE 802.16 Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access WiMax and the like.

Audio interface is arranged to produce and receive audio signals such as the sound of a human voice. For example audio interface may be coupled to a speaker and microphone not shown to enable telecommunication with others and or generate an audio acknowledgement for some action. Display may be a liquid crystal display LCD gas plasma light emitting diode LED or any other type of display used with a mobile device. Display may also include a touch sensitive screen arranged to receive input from an object such as a stylus or a digit from a human hand.

Keypad may comprise any input device arranged to receive input from a user. For example keypad may include a push button numeric dial or a keyboard. Keypad may also include command buttons that are associated with selecting and sending images. Illuminator may provide a status indication and or provide light. Illuminator may remain active for specific periods of time or in response to events. For example when illuminator is active it may backlight the buttons on keypad and stay on while the mobile device is powered. Also illuminator may backlight these buttons in various patterns when particular actions are performed such as dialing another mobile device. Illuminator may also cause light sources positioned within a transparent or translucent case of the mobile device to illuminate in response to actions.

Mobile terminal also comprises input output interface for communicating with external devices such as a headset or other input or output devices not shown in . Input output interface can utilize one or more communication technologies such as USB infrared Bluetooth and the like. Haptic interface is arranged to provide tactile feedback to a user of the mobile terminal. For example the haptic interface may be employed to vibrate mobile terminal in a particular way when another user of a mobile device is calling.

Optional GPS transceiver can determine the physical coordinates of mobile terminal on the surface of the Earth which typically output a location as latitude and longitude values. GPS transceiver can also employ other geo positioning mechanisms including but not limited to triangulation assisted GPS AGPS E OTD CI SAI ETA BSS and the like to further determine the physical location of mobile terminal on the surface of the Earth. It is understood that under different conditions GPS receiver can determine a physical location within millimeters for mobile terminal and in other cases the determined physical location may be less precise such as within a meter or significantly greater distances.

As illustrated the currently highlighted test is a device information test that accesses stored specifications about the mobile terminal such as a screen width and height a color capability for the screen default location and languages settings the version of a J2ME connected limited device configuration CLDC application programming interface API that is installed in the mobile terminal and or other data. Other tests include but are not limited to 

The developer includes the above methods in any new test class es at an operation . In a Java embodiment each test class implements the predefined interface by declaring all of the above method names and defining corresponding method bodies that are relevant to each particular test class. A method body can define any new operations for testing a mobile device but the method name will be that specified by the Java interface. The same method name will be called by the tester user interface to initiate execution of the corresponding method body in each test class. Consequently the Java interface enables any new test class to be added to the set of tests and accessed easily by the tester user interface. Code for a sample test class that implements the Java interface is provided below. The sample test class simply returns text strings for a successful result.

For the tester user interface to initiate the methods of a test class the test class must be registered with the tester user interface as illustrated by operation . In the Java embodiment the developer adds code to the tester user interface to declare each test class. When executed the tester user interface will loop through each declared test class calling the methods specified by the Java interface.

At an operation the developer compiles all of the desired test classes along with the tester user interface. The developer can then add the compiled files to a Java archive JAR and create a Java application descriptor JAD at an operation . The JAR and JAD files can be stored on a server at an operation for access by mobile terminals.

At an operation the tester user interface detects which displayed tests are selected by a user. The user may mark each selected test and then press an OK button to indicate the user s selections. Alternatively the user can select and execute a single test at a time. The tester user interface starts a thread to run at an operation to execute the selected test s . At an operation the tester user interface loops through execution of each test. In the Java embodiment the tester user interface calls the runTest method for each selected test object. Each test object executes its corresponding test operations associated with the getResults and getDetailedResults methods. Each test object assigns a value to the identifier of each results method and returns the value to the tester user interface at an operation . The tester user interface may append each test result value to a buffer for further processing or for storage before displaying the results at an operation .

At a decision operation the tester user interface may offer the user an option to upload one or more of the test results to a server for further processing aggregation with other results for storage or other purposes. Alternatively the test or tester user interface may be programmed to automatically upload results. If the tester user interface detects an affirmative user instruction or an automatic instruction the tester user interface uploads the test result s to the server at an operation . The result s may be formatted in an extensible markup language XML format or other format for upload to the server. Once the upload is complete the user chooses not to upload the result s or the there is no automatic upload of the result s the tester user interface may determine at an optional decision operation whether any additional instructions have been provided by the server or the user. For example the server may instruct the mobile terminal to execute a sub test based on initial results received from the mobile terminal. If additional instructions are received they are performed at an optional operation . The result s of the optional operation may be displayed to the user and or uploaded to the server. If no more uploads are desired and no more instructions are provided the tester user interface may terminate or await a different user instruction.

However if no error is encountered thus far the camera test class instructs the video control object to take a picture with the camera at an operation . At a decision operation the camera test object determines whether a picture was taken. A picture will be represented by non zero data in a picture buffer. If a picture was not taken the camera test class reports a failure at operation . If a picture was captured the camera test class reports a successful result at an operation . The result is returned to the user interface for display on the mobile terminal display.

However if a successful connection is made the HTTP test class reads data from the accessed resource at an operation . At an operation the HTTP test class records the elapsed time to make the connection and read the data. Control then returns to decision operation . When the predefined number of attempts have been made the HTTP test class returns the results to the user interface for display and or further processing. The HTTP test class may return the number of successful connections the number of failed connections an average round trip time to connect and fetch data and or other information.

At an operation the RMS integrity test class again writes the source data from RAM to the RMS memory. The stored data will again be referred to as RMS data. The RMS integrity test class then reads back the RMS data at an operation and stores the retrieved data to a separate location in RAM. At a decision operation the RMS integrity test class compares the retrieved data with the source data. If the data are not the same the RMS integrity test reports a failure to the user interface at an operation . Conversely if the data are the same the RMS integrity test reports a success to the user interface at an operation .

The above specification examples and data provide a complete description of the manufacture and use of the composition of the invention. Since many embodiments of the invention can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention the invention resides in the claims hereinafter appended.

