---

title: Linking to popular navigation paths in a network
abstract: A method for shortening popular navigation paths in a website comprises determining a popular navigation path through a network, identifying a start page and an end page of the popular navigation path, and updating the start page with a link referring to the end page, wherein the updating is performed by a network resource interfaced with the network.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08230072&OS=08230072&RS=08230072
owner: Oracle America, Inc.
number: 08230072
owner_city: Redwood City
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050318
---
An embodiment of the invention relates to computer network operation in general and more specifically to automatically updating links to popular navigation paths within a network.

In websites larger than a few pages visitors often view more than one page in the site and often follow a navigation path linking from one page to another through various web pages in a site to get to a web page they are interested in. Some pages in a site may require visitors to follow long navigation paths to find them.

Website designers can change the hierarchy of a website to place important pages near the beginning of a navigation path but they cannot always know which pages or sections of the website are most important to visitors. Furthermore website designers do not always know which pages and sections of a website have become more or less important.

Long navigation paths through a website can cause frustration for visitors to the website and website designers many times do not have an easy way to know which navigation paths need to be shortened. Nor do website designers have an easy way to shorten the navigation paths without manually changing the website.

The present invention includes novel methods and apparatus for shortening popular navigation paths in a network.

According to one embodiment of the invention a method is disclosed. A popular navigation path through a network is determined. A start page and an end page of the popular navigation path are identified. A network resource interfaced with the network updates the start page with a link referring to the end page.

According to another embodiment of the invention a system is disclosed. The system comprises a processor a network interface a means for collecting and aggregating data relating to pages a user visits in a network coupled to the network interface a means for processing the data to determine a popular navigation path in the network and a means for updating a start page of the popular navigation path with a link to the end page of the popular navigation path.

A method and apparatus are described for shortening popular navigation paths in a network. According to one embodiment of the invention the method comprises determining a popular navigation path through a network identifying a start page and an end page of the popular navigation path and updating the start page with a link referring to the end page via a network resource interfaced with the network.

In the following description numerous details are set forth. It will be apparent however to one skilled in the art that embodiments of the present invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known structures devices and techniques have not been shown in detail in order to avoid obscuring the understanding of the description. The description is thus to be regarded as illustrative instead of limiting.

Reference in the specification to one embodiment or an embodiment means that a particular feature structure or characteristic described in connection with the embodiment is included in at least an embodiment of the invention. The appearances of the phrase in one embodiment in various places in the specification are not necessarily all referring to the same embodiment.

Also select embodiments of the present invention include various operations which are described herein. The operations of the embodiments of the present invention may be performed by hardware components or may be embodied in machine executable instructions which may be in turn utilized to cause a general purpose or special purpose processor or logic circuits programmed with the instructions to perform the operations. Alternatively the operations may be performed by a combination of hardware and software.

Moreover embodiments of the present invention may be provided as computer program products which may include machine readable medium having stored thereon instructions used to program a computer or other electronic devices to perform a process according to embodiments of the present invention. The machine readable medium may include but is not limited to floppy diskettes hard disk optical disks CD ROMs and magneto optical disks read only memories ROMs random access memories RAMs erasable programmable ROMs EPROMs electrically EPROMs EEPROMs magnetic or optical cards flash memory or other types of media or machine readable medium suitable for storing electronic instructions and or data. Moreover data discussed herein may be stored in a single database multiple databases or otherwise in select forms such as in a table .

Additionally embodiments of the present invention may be downloaded as a computer program product wherein the program may be transferred from a remote computer e.g. a server to a requesting computer e.g. a client by way of data signals embodied in a carrier wave or other propagation medium via a communication link e.g. a modem or network connection . Accordingly herein a carrier wave shall be regarded as comprising a machine readable medium.

In a further embodiment system may be a distributed computing system. In other words one or more of the various components of the system may be located in a physically separate location than the other components of the system . Such components may be accessed and connected via a network to the other components

In accordance with an embodiment of the present invention the computer system includes a Sun Microsystems computer utilizing a SPARC microprocessor available from several vendors including Sun Microsystems Inc. of Santa Clara Calif. . Those with ordinary skill in the art understand however that any type of computer system may be utilized to embody the present invention including those made by Hewlett Packard of Palo Alto Calif. and IBM compatible personal computers utilizing Intel microprocessor which are available from several vendors including IBM of Armonk N.Y. . Also instead of a single processor two or more processors whether on a single chip or on separate chips can be utilized to provide speedup in operations. It is further envisioned that the processor may be a complex instruction set computer CISC microprocessor a reduced instruction set computing RISC microprocessor a very long instruction word VLIW microprocessor a processor implementing a combination of instruction sets and the like.

The network interface provides communication capability with other computer systems on a same local network on a different network connected via modems and the like to the present network or to other computers across the Internet. In various embodiments of the present invention the network interface can be implemented utilizing technologies including but not limited to Ethernet Fast Ethernet Gigabit Ethernet such as that covered by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE 801.1 standard wide area network WAN leased line such as T1 T3 optical carrier 3 OC3 and the like analog modem digital subscriber line DSL and its varieties such as high bit rate DSL HDSL integrated services digital network DSL IDSL and the like cellular wireless networks such as those implemented by utilizing the wireless application protocol WAP time division multiplexing TDM universal serial bus USB and its varieties such as USB II asynchronous transfer mode ATM satellite cable modem and or FireWire.

Moreover the computer system may utilize operating systems such as Solaris Windows and its varieties such as CE NT 2000 XP ME and the like HP UX IBM AIX PALM UNIX Berkeley software distribution BSD UNIX Linux Apple UNIX AUX Macintosh operating system Mac OS including Mac OS X and the like. Also it is envisioned that in certain embodiments of the present invention the computer system is a general purpose computer capable of running any number of applications such as those available from companies including Oracle Siebel Unisys Microsoft and the like.

During the access session the network resource collects traffic data regarding the pages visited by the user and the navigation paths the user took to reach these pages during the access session. In some embodiments the user has an opportunity to provide information about their experiences in the access session. This user survey data is collected by network resource . In one embodiment the network resource is a server but embodiments of the invention are not limited to this implementation.

In one embodiment collection and aggregation module performs the task of collection and aggregation of the user traffic data and user survey data. Such collection and aggregation includes logging the pages a user visited the navigation paths a user took through the network and the user s survey data relating to pages visited in the network. The collection and aggregation module is capable of cataloguing this data for a multitude of users.

Navigation path processing module uses the data collected in the collection and aggregation module to determine popular navigation paths through the network pages. The popular navigation paths determined by navigation path processing module are used by information display module to automatically update a start page of a popular navigation path to include a link to an end page of the popular navigation path. In this manner the network resource automatically and dynamically shortens navigation paths for the user through a network.

Collection and aggregation module processing module and information display module may be implemented in some embodiments in a computer system such as that exemplified in . In some embodiments the modules and may be implemented together in one computer system. In other embodiments the modules and may be implemented each in their own separate computer system. Furthermore some embodiments of the invention may combine the functionalities of modules and into one module or into a multitude of modules. One skilled in the art will appreciate that there are a variety of implementations that may be desired or necessitated by the various embodiments of the invention.

Navigation path begins at navigation path start page A. From navigation path start page A a user continues to navigation path page B. Navigation path pages B through D are pages that a user visits sequentially in route to the user s final destination navigation path end page E. Navigation path is only one example embodiment of a navigation path a user may take through a network. It should be appreciated that the number of pages in a navigation path may vary and is not limited to the five pages presented in .

In some embodiments navigation path end page E is the final page a user visits before leaving a network. In other embodiments navigation path end page E may be a page that a user stays on for a predetermined period of time. In yet other embodiments navigation path end page E may be one that is rated highly by user survey data. One skilled in the art will appreciate that navigation path end page E may be determined by a variety of different criteria.

Embodiments of the present invention automatically track the most popular navigation paths of visitors through a network and create links within the network to shorten these navigation paths. For example one embodiment of the present invention may automatically update navigation path start page A with the Uniform Resource Locator URL of navigation path end page B in a links section of the navigation start page A. This updating in some embodiments of the invention only occurs if the navigation path from navigation start page A to navigation end page B is a popular navigation path through the network.

The automatic updating of the navigation path start page A may in some embodiments be done through collection and aggregation module processing module and information display module of the network resource of .

At processing block the popular navigation paths through a network are determined. Various tools may be employed to determine popular navigation paths. Such tools may include computer applications developed for this purpose. Also examination manual or otherwise of the server logs of the network may accomplish the task.

Various criteria may be used to determine whether a navigation path is popular. For example embodiments of the invention may use criteria such as the number of page visits a page receives the number of users that view a page the length of time a page is viewed or the popularity rank of a page according to user survey results. One skilled in the art will appreciate that embodiments of the invention may be customized to produce different definitions of popular navigation paths.

Once the popular navigation paths have been determined an end page link of a popular navigation path is added to the start page of that popular navigation path . At decision block it is determined whether all new popular navigation paths have been evaluated. If all popular navigation paths have not been evaluated then the process returns to processing block to evaluate another popular navigation path. If all popular navigation paths have been evaluated then the process ends at processing block .

At processing block the popular navigation paths through a network are determined. Once the popular navigation paths have been determined a Start Page and an End Page for a particular navigation path are determined at processing block . The Start Page is the first page of the popular navigation path and the End Page is the final page of the popular navigation path. At processing block old links or URLs that already exist in the code of the Start Page are identified. At decision block it is determined whether an old link is a link to the End Page. If the old link is a link to the End Page of the popular navigation path then the process continues to decision block .

If the old link is not a link to the End Page the process continues to decision block where it is determined whether all of the old links have been evaluated. If all of the old links have not been evaluated then the process returns to decision block to evaluate another old link. If all of the old links have been evaluated then the process continues to processing block where the End Page link is added to the Start Page and the process continues to decision block .

At decision block it is determined whether all popular navigation paths identified in processing block have been evaluated. If not the process returns to processing block and continues the process described above with another popular navigation path. If all popular navigation paths have been evaluated at decision block then the process ends at processing block .

In one embodiment of the present invention old links for navigation paths that are no longer popular and that no longer require shortening may be automatically removed. As a result the network pages will not be cluttered with unnecessary shortcuts. This embodiment may utilize a popular links section of a network page to facilitate automatic updating of popular navigation paths.

At processing block popular navigation paths of a network are determined. At processing block the Start Pages and the End Pages of all of the popular navigation paths are determined. At processing block a popular links section of a Start Page is identified.

The process continues at decision block where an old link in the popular links section of the Start Page is examined to determine whether it is a link or URL for an End Page of any of the popular navigation paths initiating from the Start Page. If the link is not an End Page for a popular navigation path initiating from the Start Page then at processing block the link is removed from the popular links section of the Start Page.

If the link is for an End Page of a popular navigation path initiating from the Start Page then the process continues at decision block where it is determined whether all of the old links in the popular links section of Start Page have been evaluated. If not then the process returns to decision block to evaluate another old link. If all of the old links have been evaluated then the process continues to processing block .

At processing block it is determined whether all new popular navigation paths have been evaluated. If not the process returns to processing block and to evaluate another Start Page of a popular navigation path. If all of the Start Pages of the popular navigation paths have been evaluated then the process ends at processing block .

One embodiment of the present invention may incorporate the processes of into one process that will automatically update a page with links of popular navigation paths and at the same time automatically remove any older links that now lead to a less popular navigation path.

In some embodiments various rules may be established for when an End Page link for a popular navigation path may be added to a Start Page. Such rules may include only creating a limited number of links on the Start Page for the popular navigation paths or only creating links on the Start Page for popular navigation paths that are longer than a certain number of pages. Furthermore in some embodiments the automatic updating process may be customized to only take place periodically such as once a week. One skilled in the art will appreciate the variety of options available to customize and tailor the embodiments of the present invention.

In one embodiment may be implemented with a combination of collection and aggregation module processing module and information display . Although one skilled in that art will appreciate that the methods presented here are not limited to such an implementation.

Similarly it should be appreciated that in the foregoing description of exemplary embodiments of the invention various features of the invention are sometimes grouped together in a single embodiment figure or description thereof for the purpose of streamlining the disclosure aiding in the understanding of one or more of the various inventive aspects. This method of disclosure however is not to be interpreted as reflecting an intention that the claimed invention requires more features than are expressly recited in each claim. Rather as the following claims reflect inventive aspects lie in less than all features of a single foregoing disclosed embodiment. Thus the claims following the detailed description are hereby expressly incorporated into this detailed description with each claim standing on its own as a separate embodiment of this invention.

The foregoing description has been directed to specific embodiments. It will be apparent to those with ordinary skill in the art that modifications may be made to the described embodiments with the attainment of all or some of the advantages. Therefore it is the object of the appended claims to cover all such variations and modifications as come within the spirit and scope of the invention.

