---

title: Individualized digital tracers
abstract: Method and apparatus for inserting digital tracers in data that allow particular copies of the data to be traced to particular entities. Embodiments of a tracer mechanism may programmatically insert individualized tracers into data copies provided to third parties, for example via a Web service interface. A tracer may appear as normal data to the reader, and does not interfere with the typical use of the data copy. Tracers may serve as unique identifiers for particular data copies provided to particular Web service clients, allowing instances of the data copies to be associated with particular Web service clients. Embodiments may, for example, allow an enterprise to programmatically and systematically track copies of data distributed to third parties to help insure that the terms and conditions of licensing agreements are not violated. In one embodiment, the tracer mechanism may be implemented as a Web service.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07917484&OS=07917484&RS=07917484
owner: Amazon Technologies, Inc.
number: 07917484
owner_city: Reno
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050331
---
This invention relates to computer networks and more particularly to inserting individualized digital tracers into copies of data distributed on a network.

Web services may be used to provide Web software developers access to technology platforms and data such as product catalogs hosted on Web servers or Web sites. Through Web services developers may be empowered to innovate and build businesses by creating dynamic interactive Web sites and Web applications that leverage Web services to access services applications and data on other Web servers Web sites.

Generally speaking a Web service interface may be configured to provide a standard cross platform API Application Programming Interface for communication between a client requesting some service to be performed and the service provider. In some embodiments a Web service interface may be configured to support the exchange of documents or messages including information describing the service request and response to that request. Such documents or messages may be exchanged using standardized Web protocols such as the Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP for example and may be formatted in a platform independent data format such as eXtensible Markup Language XML for example.

Servers may be coupled to data storage for storing information in database related to the Web site that may include but is not limited to Web pages data related to the Web site such as product information for an e commerce Web site and customer information. Data storage may be implemented as one or more storage devices configured independently or as a storage system. In general data storage may be implemented as one or more of any type of storage device and or storage system suitable for storing data used by the server systems of the Web site including but not limited to redundant array of inexpensive disks RAID devices disk drives or arrays of disk drives such as Just a Bunch Of Disks JBOD used to refer to disks that are not configured according to RAID optical storage devices tape drives RAM disks Storage Area Network SAN Network Access Storage NAS or combinations thereof.

Database may be implemented as a single monolithic database or as a combination of two or more databases and or data stored in other non database formats such as files stored in any of various file formats including but not limited to Web pages such as product information Web pages providing details on products from a catalog of products offered through an e commerce Web site. Database may be or may include a relational database or may be or may include any other type of database such as an object oriented database depending on implementation or combinations thereof.

One or more client systems may be coupled to Internet . Each client system may be configured to access the Web site using a Web client application such as a Web browser via a Web client interface . One or more other servers may be coupled to Internet such as servers that implement the Web sites of other enterprises institutions individuals etc. or even other Web sites of the enterprise that provides server s . One or more of servers may be configured to access enterprise logic of servers and or database via a Web service interface provided by one or more of servers . Note that Web service interface does not provide a Web browser interface to enterprise logic and database but instead provides a programmatic interface via an API through which at least some functionality of enterprise logic and or at least some data in database may be programmatically accessed by applications hosted on servers . An application that accesses enterprise logic and or database via Web service interface may be referred to as Web service clients. Note that a server including a Web service client may provide Web sites accessible to clients via Web browsers and the Web service client may be configured to access enterprise logic and or database of servers via Web service interface to provide access to at least a portion of logic and or database via the Web site provided by the server .

While illustrates an exemplary system configuration in which a Web site provides both a Web client interface and an Web service interface for accessing enterprise logic and or data of the Web site Web services may be used to provide programmatic access to applications services and or data not associated with a conventional Web site accessible to clients via a Web browser. is a block diagram that illustrates an exemplary system configuration that provides a Web service interface and shows the interaction between a Web service client and a Web service provider in more detail. In this example a Web service interface may be implemented on a server coupled to Internet . This server may be referred to as a Web service provider . Server or alternatively one or more other servers coupled to server may include one or more applications or services . Server may be coupled to data storage for storing information in database . Database may include any type of data.

Server may be coupled to Internet . Server may host a Web service client . Web service client may be configured to programmatically access application or service of server and or database via Web service interface . Note that Web service interface does not provide a Web browser interface but instead provides a programmatic interface via an API through which at least some functionality of application or service and or at least some data in database may be programmatically accessed by Web service client . Also note that server may provide a Web site accessible to client s via Web browsers and Web service client may be configured to access at least some functionality of application or service and or at least some data in database of server via Web service interface to provide access to at least some functionality of application or service and or at least some data in database via the Web site provided by server .

To access an application service or data provided by the Web service provider Web service client may send a request message to Web service interface via Internet . Web service provider may then process the request for example by performing an indicated function s of application or service or accessing indicated data in database . Web service interface may then return results of the processing to the Web service client in a response message via Internet .

Web services may be used in a variety of applications. One example of an area in which Web services may be used is for product merchandising. A first enterprise may provide a Web site or Web application hosted on one or more Web servers that may access information from a second enterprise s Web server or Web servers through Web services provided by the second enterprise s Web server s such as product catalog information to merchandise products from the product catalog through the first enterprise s Web site or Web application. The second enterprise may earn a commission from the first enterprise for each sale.

An enterprise may sublicense at least part of a collection of potentially copyrighted data owned by the enterprise such as product information in a product catalog to third party developers under some sort of licensing agreement. The third party developers may be given access to the data in a systematic fashion through a Web service interface through which the third parties may request and receive copies of particular portions of the data collection. The third party developers may in some cases refurbish data received from the enterprise and sell it or redistribute it to some other party possibly in violation of the licensing agreement.

Various mechanisms for protecting copyrighted works and materials from unauthorized copying and or for detecting illicit copies of copyrighted works have been implemented. Falsified content may be inserted into copyrighted material with the intent of deterring and detecting illicit or unauthorized copying of the material both for works that are in print and electronic digital works. For example mapmakers may insert deliberately inaccurate or fictitious roads or place names in maps. Enterprises that provide phone directories may insert fictitious listings into the directories. The intent of this falsified content is to be perceivable but not easily recognizable as false content to the casual viewer including those who might want to illicitly copy the material. The publisher of a work knows what content of the work is fictitious but the copyright infringer does not. If some entity illicitly uses portions from this material that includes the falsified content the illicit use may be detected by the inclusion of the falsified content. Conventionally the same fictitious information is inserted into each published copy of a work.

 Watermarks may be inserted into various works both works that are in print and electronic digital works. The intent of watermarks is generally to mark a work in such a way as to not interfere with the work itself while providing a mechanism to help protect the work from being illicitly copied or to at least to make it easier to detect illicit or unauthorized copies. Watermarks for printed works are generally invisible under normal conditions and only visible under certain conditions such as when a copy of the work is held up to a bright light. Digital watermarks are generally invisible and cannot be perceived by the casual viewer. As far as the casual viewer is concerned the digital watermark is simply not there. This is in contrast with the inserted falsified content described above which is readily perceivable by a person viewing the material including the falsified content although the typical viewer does not recognize the content as fictitious. Conventionally as is the case for the inserted falsified content described above the same watermark is inserted into each published copy of a work.

Various works both works that are in print and electronic digital works may be individually marked in such a way so that one particular copy of the work may be uniquely distinguished from another copy of the work. An example is the use of serial numbers on works both real and electronic digital works. Some mechanisms may hide this information so that it is not easily perceivable in the work.

Various embodiments of a method and apparatus for programmatically inserting digital tracers in data that allow particular copies of the data to be traced to particular entities are described. Embodiments may provide a tracer mechanism that may programmatically insert individualized human perceivable tracers into excerpted copies of a work or portions of a collection of works e.g. a product catalog or database to be distributed to one or more recipients such as Web service clients typically under an agreement that may stipulate how the data copies may be used and if and how the data copies may be redistributed. A tracer may appear as normal data to the reader and does not interfere with the typical use of the data copy into which it is inserted. The data copies may be distributed to Web service clients via an electronic network and more particularly via a Web Service interface. The tracer may be any type of data including but not limited to textual graphical image audio or video data.

The individualized tracers may serve as unique identifiers for data copies accessed by or provided to particular Web service clients allowing instances of the data copies located anywhere on the Web to be associated with the particular Web service clients to which the data copies were originally provided. Embodiments of the tracer mechanism may for example allow an enterprise to programmatically and systematically track copies of data distributed to third party developers to help insure that the terms and conditions of licensing agreements are not violated.

In one embodiment of the tracer mechanism an individualized tracer may be inserted into each data copy distributed to Web service clients. In other embodiments rather than inserting a tracer into each distributed data copy tracers may be inserted into a subset of systematically or randomly selected data copies provided to Web service clients. One embodiment of the tracer mechanism may provide the ability to customize tracers to particular requests for particular data and or for particular Web service clients.

In one embodiment to generate tracers the tracer mechanism may access a database of generic tracer templates together with a rule set that can fill in the templates to generate the specific individualized tracers. Each tracer may be unique to the particular data copy to which it is attached and which is provided to a particular Web service client thus enabling the tracers to be used to trace or track the distribution of the particular data copy on the Internet and to link instances of the particular data copy to the particular Web service client to which it was originally provided even if an instance of the data copy is found on some other location on the network than Web service client system.

Embodiments of the tracer mechanism may be configured to search the Web for instances of a data copy including an individualized tracer that have been illicitly copied for example to Web sites that are not covered by the terms and conditions for use of the material according to the agreement or contract between the Web service provider and the Web service client. The search may generate a pool of candidate Web pages that may include an instance of the data copy with inserted tracer. These candidate Web pages may then be further examined to determine which of the Web pages actually include an instance of the data copy with inserted tracer. Once this subset of candidate Web pages is determined the subset may be further examined to determine which of the Web pages if any include illicit or unauthorized instances of the data copy. Since the tracer is individualized and thus linkable to the Web service client that originally obtained the data copy the tracer may be used to determine which of the Web sites include legitimate copies and which include illicit or unauthorized copies.

In one embodiment the tracer mechanism may be a Web service with a Web service interface that allows Web service clients to access the tracer mechanism to insert individualized tracers into data copies for example data copies extracted from third party works or collections and to access the detection mechanism of the tracer mechanism to detect illicit or unauthorized instances of the data copies on the Web.

While the invention is described herein by way of example for several embodiments and illustrative drawings those skilled in the art will recognize that the invention is not limited to the embodiments or drawings described. It should be understood that the drawings and detailed description thereto are not intended to limit the invention to the particular form disclosed but on the contrary the intention is to cover all modifications equivalents and alternatives falling within the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims. The headings used herein are for organizational purposes only and are not meant to be used to limit the scope of the description or the claims. As used throughout this application the word may is used in a permissive sense i.e. meaning having the potential to rather than the mandatory sense i.e. meaning must . Similarly the words include including and includes mean including but not limited to.

Various embodiments of a method and apparatus for programmatically inserting digital tracers in data that allow particular copies of the data to be traced to particular entities are described. Embodiments may provide a tracer mechanism that may programmatically insert individualized human perceivable additional or modified data referred to herein as tracers into excerpted copies of a work or portions of a collection of works e.g. a product catalog or database to be distributed to one or more recipients such as Web service clients typically under some sort of contract or agreement that may stipulate how the copies referred to hereinafter as data copies may be used and if and how the copies of the works may be redistributed. The inserted data or tracer appears as normal data to the casual reader and does not interfere with the typical use of the data copy into which it is inserted. The data copies may be distributed to Web service clients via an electronic network and more particularly via a Web Service interface. The inserted individualized tracers may serve as unique identifiers for data copies accessed by or provided to particular Web service clients allowing instances of the data copies located anywhere on the Web to be associated with particular Web service clients to which the data copies were originally provided.

Embodiment of the tracer mechanism may be used to track third party developers for example Web service clients that obtain copies of particular portions of the data from an enterprise s data collection via a Web service interface under the terms of a licensing agreement. Within the particular portions of data perceptible digital information tracers may be inserted that do not pollute or corrupt the data in any significant way. The third party developers may in some cases refurbish data received from the enterprise and sell it or redistribute it to some other party possibly in violation of the terms of the licensing agreement.

An enterprise may potentially have thousands or even tens of thousands of third party developers accessing its data collection through a Web service interface so manually tracking data exposed by a Web service interface may be difficult if not impossible. Embodiments of the tracer mechanism may allow an enterprise to programmatically and systematically track the copies of data distributed to third party developers to help insure that the terms and conditions of the licensing agreements are not violated e.g. by redistributing the data copies in violation of the agreement .

As an example a licensing agreement may allow a third party to ping but not cache portions of data data copies from an enterprise e.g. via a Web service interface the entity may be charged for use of the data for example on a per ping basis. If the third party caches the data copies and possibly redistributes the data copies to other parties the unauthorized instances of the data copies may be detected by the tracer mechanism on the Web by searching for a portion or all of the tracers inserted into the data copies distributed to the third party by the tracer mechanism. The tracers are generated by the tracer mechanism so that each data copy of a particular portion of data distributed to the third party is individualized to that particular data copy so the tracer in a particular instance of a data copy may be used to identify the third party to which the data copy was originally distributed. From an individualized tracer in an instance of a data copy the tracer mechanism may identify where when and to whom the data copy was originally distributed.

In one embodiment of the tracer mechanism a tracer or tracers may be inserted into each data copy distributed to Web service clients. In other embodiments rather than inserting tracer s into each distributed data copy a tracer or tracers may be inserted into a subset of the data copies distributed to Web service clients for example one out of every ten or one out of every one hundred data copies distributed to customers. Some embodiments of the tracer mechanism may systematically as opposed to randomly select which excerpt copies of data provided to various Web service clients receive inserted individualized tracers and which ones do not. For example in one embodiment selection may be made based on risk profiles particular to the recipient on the unique customer identifiers of the Web service clients the quantity and variety of excerpt copies being requested by the Web service client s the time of day geographic origin of the request etc. or by any combination of these or other factors. Other embodiments may use a random mechanism to select which excerpt copies of data provided to various Web service clients receive tracers and which ones do not. Yet other embodiments may use a combination of a systematic and random mechanism to select which excerpt copies of data provided to various Web service clients receive tracers and which ones do not. One embodiment of the tracer mechanism may provide the ability to customize the tracers to particular requests for particular data and or for particular Web service clients. In one embodiment a user interface may be provided whereby an administrator may specify particular data copies in which tracer s are to be inserted and or particular Web service clients that are to receive data copies with tracer s inserted.

Embodiments of the tracer mechanism may generate unique tracers for each excerpt copy of particular data to be provided to various Web service clients. Various embodiments may insert tracers of various lengths from single items of data to entire paragraphs or pages of textual data. For example embodiments may insert an entire fictitious product review e.g. a review for a book a movie a music CD a sporting goods item etc. reviews for any type of goods product or services or a selection from a work such as an individually modified selection from a book as tracers and or may insert a single item of information or line of text such as a fictitious phone number or fake cast member for a movie. In embodiments the fictitious or modified content the tracer may be generated so as to make it difficult for the reader to spot the tracer. Note that longer inserts longer tracers may provides more opportunity for individual tailoring of the tracers that is a longer tracer can carry more bits of information to be used in identifying and tracing the particular excerpt copy of data with which the tracer is associated.

In one embodiment to generate tracers such as fictional reviews of products the tracer mechanism may access a database of generic tracer templates such as a database of generic product review templates together with a rule set that can fill in the templates to generate the specific tracers. For textual tracers such as product reviews the templates may be written in such a way that the text may apply to any product or to any product within a particular product category e.g. any movie any book any music CD any sporting goods item etc. . Using product reviews as an example the templates for the product reviews may be complete reviews or alternatively may be scripts generated from stock phrases sentences and or paragraphs. The rule set may be used to insert the product name or nickname if available in the appropriate places. In addition the rule set may be used for example to select the number of rating stars and suitable modifier words or sentences to match to produce a good or medium or poor review of the particular product. Using this mechanism each inserted tracer review may be unique to the particular data copy to which it is attached and which is provided to a particular Web service client thus making it more difficult for outsiders to spot the tracers and enabling the tracers to be used to trace or track the distribution of the particular data copy on the Internet and to link instances of the particular data copy to the particular Web service client to which it was originally provided even if an instance of the data copy is found on some other location on the network such as a server Web site other than one provided by the Web service client.

In one embodiment the bits of an individual product review or other information inserted as a tracer may be represented by properties including one or more of but not limited to a which template is used to generate the tracer b what customizations e.g. product rating reviewer name stock filler phrases or sentences etc. are used when completing the particular tracer from the template c to which customers Web service clients each template is applied which may be determined by a customer identifier and d where the resulting tracers are placed in the overall sequence of data including other tracers for each customer. One or more of these bits and possibly other information provided by the tracer may provide a signature that may later be decoded to trace an instance of a data copy to a particular customer.

Embodiments of the tracer mechanism may include an automated detection mechanism that searches the Web for instances of data copies including individualized tracers that have been illicitly copied for example to Web sites that are not covered by the terms and conditions for use of the material according to the agreement or contract between the Web service provider and the Web service clients that originally obtained the data copies. In one embodiment the detection mechanism may perform a search of the Web using some third party search engine for a particular phrase or phrases that may appear in one of the individualized tracers to generate a pool of candidate Web pages that may include the data copy with inserted tracer. The detection mechanism may then further examine these candidate Web pages to determine which ones actually include the data copy with inserted tracer. Once this subset of candidate Web pages is determined the subset may be further examined to determine which of the Web pages if any include illicit or unauthorized instances of the data copy. Since the tracer is individualized and thus linkable to the Web service client that originally obtained the copy the tracer may be used to determine which of the Web sites include legitimate copies and which include illicit or unauthorized copies. This information may then for example be presented to the Web service client and or to the entity or enterprise that possesses an illicit or unauthorized copy of the data copy to enforce the terms of the agreement between the Web service provider and or to persuade the entity or enterprise that is in possession of the illicit copy to delete the copy or enter into a usage agreement with the Web service provider. This information could conceivably be used as evidence of copyright infringement in a legal action if necessary.

In one embodiment the tracer mechanism may be a Web service with a Web service interface that allows Web service clients to access the tracer mechanism through the Web service interface to insert individualized tracers into data copies for example data copies extracted from third party works or collections and to access the detection mechanism of the tracer mechanism to detect illicit or unauthorized instances of the data copies on the Web.

While embodiments of the tracer mechanism are generally described herein as being used to insert tracers into data copies distributed via a Web service interface and for tracking instances of those data copies on the Web note that embodiments of the tracer mechanism may be used with other mechanisms for distributing data than Web services. For example embodiments of the tracer mechanism may be used to insert individualized tracers into data accessed on a Web site through a Web client interface by clients using Web browsers. An individualized tracer may be inserted into particular data accessed by a client using a Web browser and illicit copies of the data detected on the Web that include the individualized tracer may be traced back to the client using the tracer for example by associating the tracer with the IP address from which the data was originally accessed or by associating a unique customer identifier provided to the client when the client registered with the Web site with the tracer.

While the tracers generated by the tracer mechanism and inserted into data copies are generally described herein as being visible or perceptible embodiments of the tracer mechanism may be used to insert invisible tracers into data copies as well.

Server may be coupled to Internet . Server may host a Web service client application . Web service client application may be configured to programmatically access database via Web service interface . Note that Web service interface does not provide a Web browser interface but instead provides a programmatic interface via an API through which at least some content of database may be programmatically accessed and copied by Web service client application under a licensing agreement with the enterprise that owns the data in database . Server may for example provide a Web site accessible to client s via Web browsers and Web service client application may be configured to access and copy at least some content of database via Web service interface to provide access to the copied content to the clients under a licensing agreement with the enterprise that owns the data in database .

To access and copy particular data provided by the Web service provider Web service client application may send a request message to Web service interface via Internet . Web service provider may then process the request by accessing the indicated data in database . A copy of the requested data may be generated. Tracer mechanism may then generate an individualized tracer for example from a tracer template for this particular data copy and insert or append the tracer in or to the data copy . Tracer mechanism may store information in tracer data that associates the individualized tracer with the particular Web service request and or with the Web service client application . This information may later be used to identify instances of the particular data copy and to link the instances of data copy to the Web service client application . Web service interface may return the data copy with tracer inserted to the Web service client application in a response message via Internet .

As previously mentioned database may include any type or types of data including but not limited to textual graphical audio and video data or combinations thereof. Data copy may be an excerpted copy of a portion of the data in the database or an excerpted copy of a portion of the data from a subset of the database . Data copy may be textual graphical video or audio data or a combination thereof. Data copy may be for example all or a portion of a Web page for example an item detail page for a product offered for sale by the Web service provider.

Tracer may be textual graphical video or audio data that is unique to the particular data copy into which it is inserted. In one embodiment the tracer may be a permutation generated from a template and thus may be similar but not identical to other individualized tracers inserted into other copies of the extracted data provided to other Web service clients. An example of inserted textual data as a tracer is an individualized product review on an item detail page or other type of Web page. An example of inserted graphical data as a tracer is an individualized image of a product or item inserted into an item detail page or other type of Web page. An example of inserted audio data as a tracer is an individualized audio clip inserted into an item detail page or other type of Web page. An example of inserted video data is inserted individualized fictitious frames or duplicate frames in a video clip to be used as a tracer.

Note that in one embodiment instead of inserting an entire fictitious tracer into the content of a data copy an individualized tracer may be inserted into existing content of the data for example an individualized tracer paragraph or sentence may be inserted into an existing review or alternatively existing content may be individually modified to be used as a tracer for example synonyms may be substituted for particular words in a product review with different combinations of synonyms being used for each data copy containing the product review provided to different Web service clients. Other mechanisms than synonyms may be used for example particular words may be deliberately misspelled or alternative spellings or punctuations may be used. Or combinations may be used for example two or more alternative synonyms may be used at one or more particular word positions and two or more alternative spellings may be used for other words in text to be used as an individualized tracer. As another example a graphical image or an audio clip may be slightly altered to generate an individualized tracer.

For images or audio clips in one embodiment multiple images or audio clips for example images of a product may be maintained. One particular image or audio clip may be included in most copies of particular data for example in an item detail page for a product. For systematically or randomly selected copies of the data an alternate image or audio clip may be inserted by the tracer mechanism as an individualized tracer. Note that for images typically the Web service does not return a copy of the image to the Web service client but instead returns a link to the image. Therefore in one embodiment a link to a customized tracer image may be returned to the Web service client.

A data copy identifier the information that may be used to identify particular excerpts of the content of database e.g. a particular Web page that was provided to a Web service client may be any information that may be used to uniquely identify excerpts of content from database . This information may be a database index a title a descriptive string a Web page identifier or any other data that may be used to identify particular excerpts of the content of database or a combination of two or more such data items. Note that this information identifies the excerpted content but does not distinguish between different copies of the excerpted content provided to different Web service clients.

A tracer identifier may be or may include the information that may be used to identify a particular permutation of a tracer that was inserted into a data copy. In one embodiment the tracer identifier may be the individualized tracer itself. In another embodiment the tracer identifier may be or may include a unique set of data that was used to generate the individualized tracer as a permutation of a tracer template. For example if the tracer is generated by permuting a set of synonyms in textual content such as a fictitious product review the tracer identifier may be the permutation code for this particular permutation. As an example if there are twenty word positions in a fictitious product review template into each of which one of two different synonyms may be inserted by the tracer mechanism to generate an individualized tracer an exemplary permutation code for a particular permutation may be 11011001111010011111 with each digit representing which of the two synonyms for that word position was used in this permutation. Note that in this embodiment the tracer mechanism may access the stored tracer template information and apply the tracer identifier from tracer data to the tracer template information to regenerate the tracer when searching for instances of the data copy including the particular individualized tracer on the Web.

While the above example describes a tracer template that uses word positions and synonyms to generate permutations of the tracer template to be used as individualized textual tracers note that other mechanisms may be used by the tracer mechanism to generate individualized textual tracers such as alternative spellings and alternative punctuations or combinations of mechanisms may be used. Also note that while the above example describes a fictitious product review tracer template the same or a similar mechanism may be applied to other types of textual content such as fictitious paragraphs in book excerpts product descriptions recommendations or even to real content such as an actual paragraph from a book technical manual or other work. Further note that a similar method using permutations of positions in data and synonyms or some other mechanism for the positions may be used to generate individualized tracers from tracer templates for other types of data such as graphical or audio data.

While tracer templates are generally described as being used to generate individualized tracers for particular excerpts of the content of database in one embodiment the same tracer template may be used to generate individualized tracers for different excerpts of the content of database . For example permutations of the same generic fictitious product review may be inserted into data copies containing information on different products excerpted from the database . In one embodiment information that customizes the generic tracer template to the particular excerpted content such as a book or movie title may be inserted into the generic tracer template at a predetermined position see for an example . In one embodiment the same permutation of the tracer template the same tracer may appear in data copy instances of two or more different excerpts of the content of database but not in different data copy instances of the same excerpt. In another embodiment each data copy instance of each different excerpt may receive a unique permutation of the tracer template i.e. a unique tracer .

Data copy along with its inserted individualized tracer may be copied onto another system such as server in this example. This copying may be done with the knowledge and cooperation of the operators of server which may be in violation of the usage agreement with the Web service provider from which data copy was obtained or alternatively may be illicitly copied by an operator of server which potentially violates the copyright for the data copy owned by the Web service provider. Server may be a Web server that itself includes a Web application that may for example provide a Web site through which data copy may be made accessible to client systems but which also makes it accessible from server .

In one embodiment the tracer mechanism may access tracer data and possibly other information such as template information to perform a search of the Web using a search engine for a particular portion of the tracer such as a phrase or phrases from a textual tracer or alternatively for the entire tracer to generate a pool of candidate Web pages Web servers or other Web entities tracer hits that may include an instance of data copy with inserted tracer . The tracer mechanism may then further examine these candidate Web entities to determine which ones actually include the data copy with inserted tracer if necessary. Once this subset of candidate Web entities is determined the subset may be further examined using tracer data to determine which of the Web entities if any actually include illicit or unauthorized instances of the data copy . Since the tracer is individualized and thus linkable to the Web service client application that originally obtained the data copy using tracer data the tracer may be used to determine which of the Web entities include legitimate instances of data copy and which include illicit or unauthorized instances of data copy . Some or all of the information on the hits found by tracer mechanism may be displayed or printed for viewing by an operator and or administrator. This information may then for example be presented to the Web service client and or to the entity or enterprise that possesses an illicit instance of the data copy to enforce the terms of the agreement between the Web service provider and or to persuade the entity or enterprise that is in possession of the illicit instance of copy data to delete the instance or enter into a usage agreement with the Web service provider. This information could conceivably be used as evidence of copyright infringement in a legal action if necessary.

In this example tracer mechanism may get tracer hits on server and server and possibly other servers or systems on the Web. These hits may be analyzed using tracer data and possibly other information such as information describing the terms of the agreement between the Web service provider and the Web service client as to if and to where the data copy may be redistributed to determine if any of the hits are for illegitimate instances of data copy . In this example the hit on server may be flagged as an illegitimate instance of data copy . This information may be provided to an operator and or administrator who may then initiate an appropriate response to the owners of server and or server or whatever other parties may be involved.

In one embodiment rather than maintaining tracer data and using tracer data to associate instances of data copies with particular Web service clients as described above tracers may be synthesized in such a way that the tracer mechanism may reverse engineer a tracer to determine the particular Web service client to which a data copy containing the tracer was originally distributed.

In this example Web service client application may send data copy to Web service interface in one or more messages. Web service client application may also send information identifying a client of the Web service client application that is to receive the particular data copy . Tracer mechanism may then insert an individualized tracer into data copy and store information on the tracer in tracer data including information on the client that is to receive the data copy. The individualized tracer may for example be generated as a permutation of a tracer template as previously described. Web service interface may then return data copy with inserted individualized tracer to Web service client application . Alternatively Web service interface may instead forward data copy with inserted individualized tracer to the client of Server for which the data copy is intended. Tracer mechanism may be programmed to periodically or aperiodically search the Web for legitimate and illegitimate instances of data copy with inserted individualized tracer and to report the results of the search back to Web service client application via Web service interface . Alternatively Web service client application may periodically or aperiodically request that a search for individualized tracer be performed via Web service interface .

Note that while illustrates an exemplary tracer mechanism implemented as a Web service that provides a Web service interface to the functions of the tracer mechanism for clients of the Web service embodiments of the tracer mechanism may be implemented according to other architectures than a Web services architecture for example as a server hosted application accessible by clients according to a client server architecture as a service offered by one or more peer nodes in a peer to peer networking environment or in general as one or more modules services and or applications on a system accessible via an API to other modules services or applications on the same system and or on other systems coupled to the system via a network interface or some other communications interface.

In one embodiment a Web server that implements one or more components of a Web service tracer mechanism as described herein may include a general purpose computer system that includes or is configured to access one or more computer accessible media such as computer system illustrated in . In the illustrated embodiment computer system includes one or more processors coupled to a system memory via an input output I O interface . Computer system further includes a network interface coupled to I O interface .

In various embodiments computer system may be a uniprocessor system including one processor or a multiprocessor system including several processors e.g. two four eight or another suitable number . Processors may be any suitable processors capable of executing instructions. For example in various embodiments processors may be general purpose or embedded processors implementing any of a variety of instruction set architectures ISAs such as the x86 PowerPC SPARC or MIPS ISAs or any other suitable ISA. In multiprocessor systems each of processors may commonly but not necessarily implement the same ISA.

System memory may be configured to store instructions and data accessible by processor s . In various embodiments system memory may be implemented using any suitable memory technology such as static random access memory SRAM synchronous dynamic RAM SDRAM nonvolatile Flash type memory or any other type of memory. In the illustrated embodiment program instructions and data implementing desired functions such as those methods and techniques described above for an e commerce Web site of an electronic commerce enterprise that implements a subscription based shipping program are shown stored within system memory as code .

In one embodiment I O interface may be configured to coordinate I O traffic between processor system memory and any peripheral devices in the device including network interface or other peripheral interfaces. In some embodiments I O interface may perform any necessary protocol timing or other data transformations to convert data signals from one component e.g. system memory into a format suitable for use by another component e.g. processor . In some embodiments I O interface may include support for devices attached through various types of peripheral buses such as a variant of the Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus standard or the Universal Serial Bus USB standard for example. In some embodiments the function of I O interface may be split into two or more separate components such as a north bridge and a south bridge for example. Also in some embodiments some or all of the functionality of I O interface such as an interface to system memory may be incorporated directly into processor .

Network interface may be configured to allow data to be exchanged between computer system and other devices attached to a network such as other computer systems for example. In particular network interface may be configured to allow communication between computer system and other computer systems hosting Web services and Web service clients on the Internet. Network interface may commonly support one or more wireless networking protocols e.g. Wi Fi IEEE 802.11 or another wireless networking standard . However in various embodiments network interface may support communication via any suitable wired or wireless general data networks such as other types of Ethernet network for example. Additionally network interface may support communication via telecommunications telephony networks such as analog voice networks or digital fiber communications networks via storage area networks such as Fibre Channel SANs or via any other suitable type of network and or protocol.

In some embodiments system memory may be one embodiment of a computer accessible medium configured to store program instructions and data as described above for for implementing a Web service implemented a tracer mechanism for inserting individualized tracers into copies of data extracted from a database and provided to Web service clients and for searching for illegitimate data copies including the individualized tracers. However in other embodiments program instructions and or data may be received sent or stored upon different types of computer accessible media. Generally speaking a computer accessible medium may include storage media or memory media such as magnetic or optical media e.g. disk or DVD CD coupled to computer system via I O interface . A computer accessible medium may also include any volatile or non volatile media such as RAM e.g. SDRAM DDR SDRAM RDRAM SRAM etc. ROM etc that may be included in some embodiments of computer system as system memory or another type of memory. Further a computer accessible medium may include transmission media or signals such as electrical electromagnetic or digital signals conveyed via a communication medium such as a network and or a wireless link such as may be implemented via network interface .

Various embodiments may further include receiving sending or storing instructions and or data implemented in accordance with the foregoing description upon a computer accessible medium. Generally speaking a computer accessible medium may include storage media or memory media such as magnetic or optical media e.g. disk or DVD CD ROM volatile or non volatile media such as RAM e.g. SDRAM DDR RDRAM SRAM etc. ROM etc. As well as transmission media or signals such as electrical electromagnetic or digital signals conveyed via a communication medium such as network and or a wireless link.

The various methods as illustrated in the Figures and described herein represent exemplary embodiments of methods. The methods may be implemented in software hardware or a combination thereof. The order of method may be changed and various elements may be added reordered combined omitted modified etc.

Various modifications and changes may be made as would be obvious to a person skilled in the art having the benefit of this disclosure. It is intended that the invention embrace all such modifications and changes and accordingly the above description to be regarded in an illustrative rather than a restrictive sense.

