---

title: High precision voltage source for electrical impedance tomography
abstract: An EIT system includes a plurality of voltage sources for supplying a corresponding plurality of voltages to a corresponding number of other structures, voltage source calibration means for calibrating each voltage source, and switching means for individually connecting the calibration means to each voltage source in succession during a period when each other structure is in an inactive condition. Calibrating respective voltages and currents for each voltage source compensates for shunt impedance of each voltage source. A method for calibrating the system includes individually connecting the calibration means to each voltage source in succession during a period when each other structure is in an inactive condition for calibrating all of said voltage sources in the same way.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07701227&OS=07701227&RS=07701227
owner: Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
number: 07701227
owner_city: Troy
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051230
---
This U.S. patent application claims priority on and all benefits available from U.S. provisional patent application 60 641 508 filed Jan. 5 2005 all of which is incorporated here by reference.

Development of the present invention was supported in part by CenSSIS the Center for Subsurface Sensing and Imaging Systems under the Engineering Research Center Program of the National Science Foundation Award number EEC 9986821 .

The present invention relates generally to the field of EIT and in particular to a new and useful electrical impedance imaging apparatus and a method for calibrating the electrical impedance imaging apparatus.

Electrical impedance tomography is an imaging modality which displays the spatial distribution of the complex conductivity distribution inside a body. An excitation is applied to electrodes on the body surface resulting in an electromagnetic EM field appearing within the volume. If the excitation consists of one or more currents the voltages that appear at some or all of the electrodes are measured. If the excitation consists of voltages then the currents at the electrodes are measured. The inverse problem describing the current to voltage relationship is then solved to determine the complex conductivity distribution that must have been present to produce the measured data set. The ill posedness of this inverse problem manifests itself through the small changes in surface current or voltage that sometimes result from large changes in the interior impedance distribution. High precision electronics are needed to apply the excitations and measure the data that correspond to these changes.

For an electrical impedance tomograph with finite measurement precision distinguishability is defined as the ability to detect an inhomogeneity in a homogeneous background and is maximized for all conductivities and geometries when currents are applied to the surface electrodes and the resulting voltages are measured. Furthermore distinguishability is maximized when multiple independent current sources are used to apply spatial patterns of currents to the electrodes. Applying current patterns whose eigenvalues match the natural response modes of the body being interrogated maximizes the signal to noise ratio SNR of the resulting data set and therefore minimizes the amount of regularization necessary for the subsequent reconstruction.

Taken together these two observations suggest that multiple high precision current sources are required to maximize the distinguishability and SNR of an impedance tomography data set. While such current sources have been developed for this application they tend to have limited bandwidth apply only sinusoidal excitations and require a large number of high precision components. See 1 R. D. Cook G. J. Saulnier D. G. Gisser J. C. Goble J. C. Newell and D. Isaacson. ACT3 A high speed high precision electrical impedance tomograph. vol. 41 8 713 722 August 1994 Also see 2 A. S. Ross G. J. Saulnier J. C. Newell and D. Isaacson. Current source design for electrical impedance tomography. vol. 24 2 509 516 May 2003. The result is an electronics package with a large system footprint and high component power and cooling costs.

In contrast precision voltage sources are generally easier and less costly to implement. However as mentioned above applying voltages and measuring currents produces a less optimal EIT system. In an attempt to gain the hardware simplicity of a voltage source along with the optimality of applied currents algorithms have been developed for utilizing multiple voltage sources to apply a desired current pattern See 3 M. H. Choi D. Isaacson G. J. Saulnier and J. C. Newell. An iterative approach for applying multiple currents to a body using voltage sources in electrical impedance tomography. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society volume 4 pages 3114 3117 September 2003. This algorithm takes into account the interaction between the sources which results in the current at any given electrode being a function of the voltages on all the electrodes.

When using a voltage source in EIT it is necessary to know both the applied voltage and the resulting current with high precision. If it is desired to have the applied voltage remain unchanged for a wide range of load impedances then it is necessary to have a voltage source with low output impedance. In the case where voltages are being applied to produce specific currents the applied voltage will be adjusted generally in an iterative way to compensate for changes in the load impedance. Consequently low output impedance less important than having the ability to precisely measure the actual applied voltage and current.

It is an object of the present invention to provide a system and method for using voltage sources to produce a desired current pattern in an EIT system.

It is a further object of the present invention to directly measure the actual applied voltage and resulting current in an EIT system with high precision.

It is yet another object of the present invention to measure the actual applied voltage and resulting current in an EIT system with high accuracy.

Accordingly a voltage source circuit calibration circuit and calibration procedure are provided for use in EIT. The source incorporates direct measurement of the applied voltage and measurement of the applied current. The calibration procedure results in a set of calibration factors and parameters that allow the suppression of errors due to stray shunt impedance passive element values and non ideal properties of active devices. Since all voltage sources in an EIT system will be calibrated using a single calibration circuit the approach results in nearly identical performance of all voltage sources.

The EIT system of the present invention includes a plurality of voltage sources for supplying a corresponding plurality of voltages to a corresponding number of other structures voltage source calibration means for calibrating each voltage source and switching means for individually connecting the calibration means to each voltage source in succession during a period when each other structure is in an inactive condition. Each voltage source includes an operational amplifier having an output and a sense resistor connected to the output of the operational amplifier. Each voltage source also includes a buffer amplifier having an input connected to the sense resistor for outputting a measured voltage and an instrumentation amplifier having one input connected to the operational amplifier output and another input connected to the sense resistor for outputting a measured current. The calibration circuit includes an operational amplifier a buffer amplifier and switching means for selectively connecting an output of each voltage source to only one of the operational and buffer amplifiers to compensate for shunt impedance of each voltage source.

The method for calibrating the system includes individually connecting the calibration means to each voltage source in succession during a period when each other structure is in an inactive condition for calibrating all of said voltage sources in the same way. The method includes the steps of determining a gain for the buffer amplifier determining a gain for the instrumentation amplifier determining a value for the sense resistor determining an output shunt impedance for each voltage source and determining an actual current delivered to the body by the voltage source.

The various features of novelty which characterize the invention are pointed out with particularity in the claims annexed to and forming a part of this disclosure. For a better understanding of the invention its operating advantages and specific objects attained by its uses reference is made to the accompanying drawings and descriptive matter in which a preferred embodiment of the invention is illustrated.

Referring now to the drawings in which like reference numerals are used to refer to the same or similar elements is a block diagram of an applied voltage EIT system with L number of electrodes . Each electrode is connected to a circuit that includes a voltage source for generating the applied voltage as well as an ammeter to measure the applied current and a voltmeter to directly measure the applied voltage. A switching network enables a single calibration circuit to be connected to any of the voltage source ammeter voltmeter circuits to allow the whole system to be calibrated to a single reference.

Though not shown in the voltage sources with ammeters and voltmeters switches and calibration circuit each interface to a digital controller which sets the system configuration and collects digital measurements of voltage and current. A series of calibration steps to be described below are performed to collect calibration data for each source . Typically the electrodes are not in contact with a body to be imaged during these calibration steps. The digital controller utilizes the calibration data to determine actual applied currents and voltages from measurements that are made when collecting data for an EIT image.

In one exemplary case the shunt impedance Z is infinite and the operational amplifier is ideal having infinite gain infinite input resistance and zero input capacitance. Under these conditions the voltage V that is applied to the load resistance R equals the input voltage V. Also the current delivered to the load I equals the current through R denoted as I. This load current can be determined by measuring Vand evaluating I V R.

If the operational amplifier has finite gain V Vand it is necessary to directly measure Vin a high precision application. The introduction of Zcreates a larger problem because it causes Ito be different from I. Zcan include the capacitance introduced by wiring printed circuit board traces and the input capacitance and resistance at the operational amplifier s non inverting terminal. Also the addition of other circuits such as a voltmeter connected to the output will insert additional capacitance and finite shunt resistance which can be grouped in Z. In all cases the presence of finite impedance to ground will result in some of Iflowing to ground through Zrather than into R. The error current is denoted by

The voltage source and calibration circuit described below in conjunction with will be able to directly measure Zin order to enable Ito be determined with high precision. shows an improvement to the voltage source to enable calibration. In addition to a number of switches a buffer amplifier Buffer has been added to allow measurement of the output voltage and an instrumentation amplifier IA has been added for determining the current flowing in R. A calibration circuit has also been added that can measure either current or voltage. The calibration circuit includes an operational amplifier and a buffer amplifier . The operational amplifier is assumed to have a frequency independent transresistance of Rand the voltage buffer is assumed to have a gain of unity.

In a complete system there is only one calibration circuit and individual voltage sources can be connected to this calibration circuit one at a time. It is assumed that the calibration circuit is itself calibrated to a standard i.e. the current or voltage values that it reports are the true values. However since all voltage sources are calibrated using a single calibration circuit errors in the calibration circuit will only impact the overall accuracy of the system and not its precision.

The shunt impedance Zincludes any stray capacitance along with input capacitance and resistance for the instrumentation amplifier buffer amplifier and the voltage source itself. Also included is the switch capacitance to ground. The capacitance of solid state switches tends to be large and vary significantly with switch position and applied voltage. Since switch positions will change between calibration settings and operation setting low capacitance reed relays are used in place of solid state switches. Reed relays present capacitance that varies little with switch position. Additionally it is assumed that the on resistance of the switches is negligible.

There are several steps for calibrating the voltage source . During the calibration process the gains of the buffer amplifier and the instrumentation amplifier are measured along with the precise values of Rand Z. It is assumed that phase sensitive voltmeters are able to measure the voltages V I Vand I. Consequently all gains voltages currents and impedance values can be complex. The 4 steps in the calibration algorithm are explained below.

An input voltage V is applied and the voltages V V and Iare measured. From these measurements the following gains can be determined 

In the second calibration step the differential gain of the instrumentation amplifier Gis determined. shows the switch arrangement for this step. As can be observed switches S S Sand Sare closed and all other switches are open. Opening Sand closing Sproduces a voltage drop across Rwhen an input voltage V is applied which appears as a differential input voltage to the instrumentation amplifier . The input voltage at the non inverting input is measured by the calibration circuit and equals V V 5 while the voltage at the non inverting input is

In this step the voltages I Vand Iare recorded. For clarity these quantities will be denoted as I Vand I. In addition the differential voltage across Ris computed using

In a high precision application the deviation of the value of Rfrom its nominal value and its variation with aging and temperature will significantly degrade performance. Using the results from steps 3 and 4 along with the calibration constants from steps 1 and 2 the values of both Rand Zcan be estimated.

These values of Rand Zcan be stored and used to determine the current being delivered the load in an actual voltage source application.

In operation the goal is have precise measurements of the voltage applied to a load and the current delivered to this load. shows the configuration with the delivered current denoted as Iand the applied voltage denoted as V. The voltage at the load V is determined by 17 The current being delivered to the load factual is found using equation 2 with V given by equation 17 

The circuit topology shown in was implemented in PSpice to provide data to demonstrate the behavior of the calibration algorithm. A model for an Analog Devices AD8610 operational amplifier was used to implement the voltage source the I V converter and the voltage buffers. The AD8610 was configured as a voltage follower to implement the voltage buffers. A model for a Burr Brown Texas Instruments PGA207 high speed programmable gain instrumentation amplifier was used for the instrumentation amplifier. This instrumentation amplifier was configured for unity differential gain and the model provides a common mode rejection ratio CMRR of approximately 100 dB at DC with a single pole roll off with a pole at approximately 4 kHz. The I V converter used a feedback resistance of 1 k . A 50 pF capacitor was added in parallel with Rto improve stability. The switches assumed to be reed relays were modeled as shown in . The model is based on the specifications for the Coto Technology 9401 surface mount relay. These relays present 1.1 pF of capacitance between each open contact to the coil and 0.2 pF across open contacts. Contact resistance has a maximum value of 0.15 .

The performance of the calibration algorithm was evaluated by collecting values for V I I and Vas needed for each of the 4 calibration steps defined above with R . Additionally values for Vand Iwere collected with Rpresent. From this data an estimate of Rwas produced and compared to the actual R. All measured voltages are complex and the estimate of Ris a complex impedance which can be viewed as the parallel combination of a resistance and capacitance where the capacitance can be positive or negative and ideally equals zero. Separate estimates for Rwere generated for various instances of the voltage source having different values of Zand or R. The calibration circuit was not changed at any time in order to accurately model the case where multiple voltage sources each having somewhat different properties due to component variation and differences in physical layout are calibrated using a single calibration circuit.

The parameters for the 3 test cases are shown in Table 1. The shunt impedance Zis modeled as the parallel combination of Rand C. Case 1 is a reference case having a Rwith the nominal value of 1 k and a significant capacitive component to Z. Case 2 is used to illustrate the ability of the calibration algorithm to compensate for the variation in the true value of Rfrom the nominal value. Case 3 has a substantially different value for Zand is used to illustrate the ability to compensate for differences in shunt impedance.

No Calibration shows the error in the estimated load impedance when the three voltage sources i.e. the three cases in Table 1 are operated without calibration. Ris assumed to be equal to its nominal value of 1 k the instrumentation amplifier is assumed to have unity differential gain and zero common mode gain the voltage buffer is assumed to have unity gain and Zis assumed to be infinite. The load impedance is a pure resistance of value 1 k .

Full Calibration In this simulation performance with full calibration is also considered meaning that the calibration circuit itself has been calibrated. Pspice is used to find the complex transimpedance and complex gain of the I V converter and voltage buffer respectively in the calibration circuit. These values were then used to correct the measured values of Iand Vto give accurate representations of the voltage and current seen by the calibration circuit.

The performance of the algorithm is limited somewhat by the imperfect virtual ground presented by the I V converter. The analysis leading to equation 15 takes into account the current through Zthat results from having a non zero voltage across it it does not account for current that flows through the input and stray capacitance between the input of the I V converter and ground. Consequently the I V converter will provide a low value for the current.

Relative Calibration In practice the calibration circuit may not be perfectly calibrated. A feature of the calibration algorithm is that all voltage sources are calibrated using the same calibration circuit so while errors in calibration circuit calibration will impact the accuracy of the voltage sources it should not impact their precision. To illustrate this point the voltage sources were calibrated using a completely uncalibrated calibration circuit. In the calibration algorithm the I V converter is assumed to have a frequency independent transresistance of Rand the voltage buffer is assumed to have a gain of unity.

Generally the calibration circuit would be calibrated though imperfectly resulting in smaller errors in accuracy than those observed in . However as shows even with large errors in accuracy the relative precision of the voltage sources which are all calibrated using the single calibration circuit remains high.

The results obtained using data from PSpice demonstrate the ability of the calibration system to determine the calibration parameters needed for high precision voltage source performance. If the calibration circuit is properly calculated the calibrated voltage sources will also be highly accurate. If the calibration circuit is imperfectly calibrated the accuracy of the calibrated voltage sources is also imperfect but all sources maintain a high relative precision since all sources are inaccurate in the same way. In an EIT system this relative precision of the sources is much more important than the accuracy of the sources. If for instance the measured currents at each voltage source are scaled by a single common scaling factor i.e. the system has high relative precision but does not have high accuracy the impedance values in the resulting EIT image would also be scaled but the image itself would not be distorted. If on the other hand the measured currents at each voltage source are scaled by different scaling factors representing the case of low accuracy and low relative precision the image itself would be distorted.

While a specific embodiment of the invention has been shown and described in detail to illustrate the application of the principles of the invention it will be understood that the invention may be embodied otherwise without departing from such principles.

