---

title: Smart bollard
abstract: A smart bollard includes a compartment wherein a smart bollard circuit may be located and the smart bollard circuit, in turn, includes at least one processor, a transceiver that may be connected in circuit with the processor and configured to communicate with a central control station in response to commands from the processor, at least one sensor provided for sensing for the presence of one or more airborne agents and at least one disinfection unit that is configured for receiving commands from the processor to effect a selected disinfection of a perimeter area about the bollard sleeve. Also, the processor may be configured to receive input from the at least one sensor concerning the presence of one or more airborne agents, analyze the input and provide commands to the at least one disinfection unit to effect a selected disinfection, and to communicate the presence of one or more airborne agents to the central control station via the transceiver. A method of response to a terrorist attack using the foregoing apparatus is also presented.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07287929&OS=07287929&RS=07287929
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07287929
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051109
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 627 809 entitled Smart Bollard and filed Nov. 10 2004 which is fully incorporated herein by reference herein.

The invention described herein may be manufactured used imported sold and licensed by or for the Government of the United States of America without the payment of any royalty thereon or there for.

The present invention relates generally to devices and methods for protecting people in or adjacent to buildings from a terrorist attack and more particularly to safety posts or bollards which may be located adjacent a building.

Safety posts or bollards are well known for preventing out of control automobiles from entering a pedestrian zone and causing injury and for preventing out of control automobiles from damaging buildings. Typically bollards comprise a metal pipe having cement poured and hardened in the bore of the pipe for strengthening and fixing of the bollard to the earth. Also a cap may be attached to the bollard to house a security sensor. For example U.S. Pat. No. 5 829 913 describes a bollard cap that includes a dome and a sleeve having transparent strips and extending from the dome. Within the volume covered by the dome and the sleeve may be located motion detectors optical detectors or a camera and a sensor control box. This bollard cap provides a minimal security system for buildings parking lots etc.

In accordance with an embodiment of the present invention an apparatus comprises at least one bollard that comprises a compartment wherein smart bollard circuit may be located and the smart bollard circuit comprises at least one processor a transceiver that may be connected in circuit with the processor and configured to communicate with a central control station in response to commands from the processor at least one sensor connected in circuit with the processor and provided for sensing for the presence of one or more airborne agents and at least one disinfection unit connected in circuit with the processor and that is configured for receiving commands from the processor to effect a selected disinfection of a perimeter area about the bollard sleeve. Also the processor may be configured to receive input from the at least one sensor concerning the presence of one or more airborne agents analyze the input and provide commands to the at least one disinfection unit to effect a selected disinfection and to communicate the presence of one or more airborne agents to the central control station via the transceiver.

One embodiment of the present invention concerns a device and a method for ameliorating the effects of a terrorist attack adjacent a location such as a building. In one particular embodiment a bollard comprises a smart bollard circuit which may provide for the sensing of e.g. airborne agents for the disinfection of those agents and for the communication of that information to a central control station. A plurality of bollards may be provided to cover a particular area and each may be in communication with the central control station.

Referring to a smart bollard in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention is illustrated generally at . In this embodiment the smart bollard may comprise a bollard tube such as a pipe and a bollard sleeve . The pipe may be fixed to the earth in a known manner using for example concrete . The bollard sleeve may comprise a generally cylindrical configuration which is dimensioned to fit over the pipe and an outer surface may be decorated with ornaments . In addition the bollard sleeve may include an architectural configuration that along with the ornaments provides a pleasing outer appearance. A curb light may also be provided. Further the bollard sleeve may comprise a housing or a compartment and a removable cap . Although located at one end not numbered of the sleeve it will be understood that the location of the compartment within the sleeve may be varied. As illustrated the removable cap may provide easy access to the compartment .

Referring now also to the bollard sleeve may comprise a channel which may extend to the compartment and along which electrical and or communication wires not shown may extend.

As illustrated in the bollard sleeve may comprise one or more openings that may communicate with the compartment . The opening may comprise a movable door or cover not shown for providing selective access to the compartment the utility of which will be more apparent below. Another opening may be provided in the bollard sleeve for a light to shine on the streetscape or for the spraying of an disinfectant.

Referring now to a smart bollard circuit which may be located within the compartment is shown. The smart bollard circuit may comprise a processor and an associated memory unit a sensor a disinfection unit and a transceiver . The processor in association with the memory unit may be configured to receive input process and provide output to each of the sensor the disinfection unit and the transceiver and comprises appropriate software or firmware to perform each of the functions operations described in more detail hereafter.

The sensor may comprise any suitable device that is currently available or hereafter developed which may function to monitor for and identify airborne agents including any harmful vapors such as nerve blister and blood agents. One example of a suitable device that that is available is that sold under the mark ChemSentry owned by BAE Systems and found on the World Wide Web at http www.baesystems.com. The sensor functions to sense for airborne agents in proximity to the bollard and upon sensing any to provide input such as the particular airborne agent sensed the strength of the agent and opportunistic quantity feasible to disinfect to the processor . To function as described it will be appreciated that the sensor should be located to receive and the compartment and opening configured to communicate and provide through wind or otherwise such as by fan a continuous ingress of air from that surrounding the bollard .

The disinfection unit is configured to receive input which may be in the form of commands from the processor concerning a particular airborne agent sensed by the sensor and to provide a responsive action. In the case of a biological agent such as a pathogenic micro organism the disinfection unit may be configured to provide an antiseptic response such as a bactericide algicide fungicide sporicide and virucide. To achieve this the disinfection unit may comprise a jet sprayer not shown for vaporizing micro droplets on the order of five to fourteen micrometers in diameter of liquid into the air. It will be appreciated that the disinfection unit may be located adjacent the opening or multiple openings about the periphery of the bollard in order to provide an effective antiseptic response in proximity to the bollard . It will be understood that disinfection unit may contain an atomizer that may operate to disperse micro sized particles up to a distance of about twenty meters from the bollard . One example of a disinfection unit that is suitable for use in connection with the present invention is sold under the mark ASEPTOJET along with a disinfectant liquid that is sold under the mark ASEPTOSYL both of which are available from the Aquateigna Corporation and may be found on the World Wide Web at http www.aquateigna.com.

The transceiver may comprise a wired and or wireless system and may be connected to receive commands from the processor for communication between the smart bollard circuit and a central control station and or other bollards as described below. The transceiver may comprise a known secure digital communication system capable of encryption to prevent security breaches in the system.

In operation the processor may be programmed through software or firmware to communicate with the sensor to receive input as to the presence of one or more particular airborne agents. The processor may then associate a particular command with that agent and then may communicate that command to the disinfection unit for providing an appropriate response to the particular agent such as vaporizing a particular antiseptic.

Referring now to and in another aspect of the present invention multiple bollards which may be located approximately four to five feet apart and disposed about the periphery of a building not shown may each communicate with a central control station . The central control station may comprise a local area network router and firewall connected via a wire to the Internet and optionally through wireless communication antenna to the bollards and or one or more computers via antenna . It will be understood that rather than wireless communication fully wired communications may be employed depending upon security requirements. Also it will be understood that computer may be portable and may be in the form of a laptop or palm top computer capable of communicating with the router and firewall via e.g. wireless or the internet. In this aspect of the present invention the central control station may be in constant communication with each processor of each bollard . Upon any sensor of any bollard sensing an airborne agent the central control station may be configured to receive such an indication and identification of which bollard has sensed the agent store the particulars of the airborne agent for future use and may communicate to bollards in close proximity to provide commands to each disinfection unit thereof for also providing an appropriate disinfection action.

The smart bollard circuit may also include one or more video cameras not shown connected in circuit with the processor which may provide a signal to the transceiver for visual assessment by an operator located e.g. at the central control station. The visual assessment affords a central control station operator to take further response actions and direct responders to the scene in a safe manner. Additionally a central control station operator may activate additional adjacent disinfection units if needed to contain the spread of the noxious substance or once depletion of the initially activated disinfection units occurs. A suitable central control station with visual assessment and automatic and manual response capability is available from EPS Security Solutions Inc. on the World Wide Web at http www.epscorp.com.

Optionally the central control station may comprise an emergency mass notification device such as an audible alarm system for notifying local personnel of the detection of an airborne agent. Another suitable central control station with an audible alarm system is available from Wheelock Inc on the World Wide Web at http www.wheelockinc.com. Other emergency mass notification devices suitable for use in accordance with the present invention also may be obtained at the preceding web site.

In accordance with another embodiment of the present invention a method of responding to a terrorist attack in proximity to a building or other inhabited area may comprise modifying a bollard and providing a central control station both of which may be employed to accomplish the following steps. First the bollard must be capable of collecting samples of air for analysis and to detect and broadly characterizing contents of a sample as an airborne agent. Thereafter to provide a presumptive identification of a particular suspected biochemical airborne agent. Further to notify personnel of the potential detection of an airborne agent and to provide a countermeasure such as by spraying chemicals to reduce or eliminate the airborne agents.

While the present invention has been described in connection with what are presently considered to be the most practical and preferred embodiments it is to be understood that the present invention is not limited to these herein disclosed embodiments. Rather the present invention is intended to cover all of the various modifications and equivalent arrangements included within the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

