---

title: Optical fiber with specialized index profile to compensate for bend-induced distortions
abstract: An optical fiber that exhibits reduced mode distortions as the fiber is bent is formed by properly defining its refractive index profile during fabrication. The as-fabricated profile is defined as a “pre-distorted” profile that takes into account the gradient introduced by bending the fiber. A parabolic index profile is one exemplary bend-resistant profile that exhibits a quadratic form. A raised-cone index is another profile that may be used as the “as-fabricated” profile. In any properly configured form, factors such as bend loss and mode distortion are significantly reduced, since the profile undergoes a shift of essentially constant gradient as a bend is introduced. The resultant effective area of the inventive fiber is substantially improved over state-of-the-art fiber that is subjected to bending during installation. The as-fabricated profile may be incorporated into various types of fibers (birefringent, photonic bandgap, etc.), and is particularly well-suited for use in a fiber amplifier arrangement.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07764854&OS=07764854&RS=07764854
owner: OFS Fitel LLC
number: 07764854
owner_city: Norcross
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051227
---
This invention was made with the United States Government support under the NIST ATP program award number 70NANB4H3035 awarded by the National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST . The United States Government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to large mode area optical fibers and more particularly to a large mode area optical fiber exhibiting a refractive index profile particularly designed to minimize the effects of bend induced reductions in the fiber s effective area.

In the field of optical fiber based communication there is an increasing interest in the use of large mode area fibers particularly associated with the fabrication of fiber based optical amplifiers and the like since large mode area fibers are known to overcome various nonlinear impairments such as Raman and Brillouin scattering. The use of large mode area fibers however has been found to increase the presence of other fiber related sensitivities such as macrobend losses inter mode coupling and sensitivities to nonuniformities in the fiber s refractive index profile.

There have been at least two different approaches in the prior art to minimize bend induced losses in optical fiber. In one approach essentially a mechanical approach rod like fibers are utilized that are extremely bend resistant. By forcing the fibers to remain essentially linear the bend induced loss can be significantly reduced. However in most field applications of such fibers there is a need to bend even spool such fibers. Therefore restricting the physical ability of the fiber to bend is considered to be an impractical solution. The other approach is associated with determining a priori a fixed bend loss by defining the specific spooling to be used and then always utilizing the fiber in accordance with the specified spooling radius and number of turns . Again this approach is considered to limit the various applications of large area fibers as well as limit modifications in the field implementations and variations in the use of such fibers.

While these and other designs take into account the bend induced losses of the fiber mode the issue of bend induced distortion remains neglected specifically distortion that includes bend induced reduced effective area. In previous conventional applications using more conventional core dimensions such mode distortions had minimal impact. However in large mode fiber applications the presence of bend induced mode distortions generates a significant reduction in effective area.

Thus a need remains in the art for providing a large mode area fiber whose effective area is not seriously distorted as the fiber is subjected to bending in various applications.

The need remaining in the prior art is addressed by the present invention which relates to large mode area optical fibers and more particularly to a large mode area optical fiber exhibiting a refractive index profile particularly designed to minimize the effects of bend induced reductions in the fiber s effective area.

In accordance with the present invention the refractive index profile characteristics of a large mode area optical fiber are based upon both the conventional bend induced loss parameters as well as bend induced distortions impacting the fiber s effective area. The refractive index profile of a large mode area fiber in accordance with the present invention will essentially compensate for bend induced distortions that will be seen by signals as they propagate along the large mode area fiber.

In a manner similar to signal pre distortion the refractive index profile for a large mode area optical fiber of the present invention is particularly defined in a pre bend fashion such that upon the fiber being bent the equivalent index profile will have the desired flat and broad guiding region. It is an aspect of the present invention that the ability to provide the refractive index profile pre distortion may be used with a variety of different types of fibers including fiber based amplifiers photonic bandgap fibers birefringent fibers and the like.

In one embodiment of the present invention a large mode area optical fiber is formed to exhibit an essentially parabolic refractive index profile where any bending of the fiber functions to merely shift the index profile in a manner such that its parabolic shape is maintained. As a result the characteristics of the fiber become relatively invariant to bending related changes.

In an alternative embodiment a raised cone refractive index profile has been found to yield a relatively large guiding region with a flat index peak even when the fiber is bent.

Other and further aspects and embodiments of the present invention will become apparent during the course of the following discussion and by reference to the accompanying drawings.

The calculated mode fields for exemplary fiber and bend dimensions as shown in illustrate the impact of bending for prior art fibers one with a moderately large core area 30 m in the top two images and one fiber with an extremely large core area 50 m in the bottom two images. In each case the image on the left illustrates the fundamental mode intensity for a straight fiber section and the image on the right illustrates the fundamental mode intensity for a fiber with a 7.5 cm bend radius. For the purpose of illustration a large mode area fiber with a step index core shape was used to create these images. Without the use of the bend compensating refractive index profile of the present invention it is clear that the mode intensity profile of each fiber is perturbed as a result of the bending with the perturbation being greater for the larger core area fiber. This perturbation will thus result in distortion of an optical signal propagating through the bent optical fiber. The present invention by virtue of pre compensating the fiber s index profile will compensate for this distortion and provide a relatively flat equivalent profile for the large mode area fiber.

The mode distortion in a bent fiber can best be understood by reference to the intensity and index plots of where illustrates the intensity and refractive index profile plots for a straight fiber and illustrates the intensity and refractive index profile plots for a bent fiber. In the bent fiber it is clearly shown that the mode intensity plot is distorted having a more asymmetric and sharply peaked index. Referring to the refractive index plot of the straight fiber is shown as able to support a fundamental mode with an effective index as indicated by reference letter A as well as a number of higher order modes HOMs illustrated by reference letters B and C in the refractive index profile. These modes are shown as being well confined over the relatively broad transverse region x. In contrast the refractive index plot of illustrates that for the case of a bent fiber conventional fiber the fiber is able to support a few modes modes A and B in this case and these fewer modes are confined in a narrower guiding region of core X. Confinement is now provided by a fairly narrow low index trench X. Beyond the trench on the right hand side will be a relatively high index outer cladding region so that the modes are able to evanescently tunnel out into the cladding as shown by the arrow in the graph of .

A key parameter affected by bending a large mode area optical fiber is its effective area . illustrates the effective area Aas a function of bend radius Rfor the same two fibers as analyzed above. In particular the dashed lines represent the effective areas of the straight fibers and the associated curves illustrate the change in effective area resulting from introducing a bend into the fiber. The curves clearly show that the modes of the larger core area 50 m fiber have greatly reduced the effective area for any reasonable bend radius as indicated by the double ended arrows between the curve and the dashed line.

The equivalent index model defined above leads to the conclusion that the effect of a bend in a fiber particularly a large area fiber can be likened to adding a constant index gradient to the profile of the fiber material itself assuming low contrast . The tighter the bend the larger the gradient and the resulting bend induced distortion will be. As mentioned above however conventional optical systems and fiber designs do not take this effect into account. Rather the prior art has concentrated on various methods to limit control the amount of bend induced losses. In accordance with the present invention however it is proposed to configure a large core area fiber s refractive index profile to account for both bend induced losses and bend induced distortion. Indeed it has been found that the refractive index profile may be configured referred to hereinafter as the as fabricated profile so as to increase the effective area seen by an optical signal when the fiber is bent.

Accordingly a variety of optical fiber as fabricated profiles are proposed that are manufacturable while also providing the pre compensated aspects that result in flattening the profile once the fiber is bent. As mentioned above an advantage of the refractive index treatment of the present invention is that it is applicable to virtually any type of optical fiber large area fiber . Fiber amplifiers in particular and as will be addressed in further detail below are considered as one class of fiber types that are particularly well suited for the use of such pre compensation. The inventive technique is equally applicable however to various other types of fibers including but not limited to birefringent fiber photonic bandgap fibers including air holes or solid filled holes extending along the longitudinal axis and fibers including features such as UV sensitized areas or grating features. One particular embodiment of the present invention utilizes a parabolic refractive index profile as the as fabricated profile where the parabolic profile will be essentially invariant under the addition of a constant gradient i.e. as the fiber is bent . A parabolic refractive index profile can be defined as . which thus defines the profile as being invariant under the addition of a constant gradient. It is then automatically pre compensated for virtually any bend radius as long as the associated boundary effects remain relatively small. This property is illustrated in which illustrates in a parabolic shaped refractive index profile. A truncated version of the profile is illustrated by the darker line in where for the truncated profile n x y nfor r R. By mathematically completing the square 

Such a transformation yields almost no change in mode size or shape as the fiber is bent as seen by comparing the profile illustrated in to the profile in . Moreover a truncated parabolic profile fiber will exhibit some additional immunity to bend induced reduction of effective area and will then have better resistance to nonlinear impairments. Bend induced distortion and displacement of the guided light may also have an important change in the overlap between the light and the gain medium. Pre compensation of the bend induced distortion can then have the added benefit of improving the gain overlap seen by the amplified signal. As shown the parabolic index function is naturally invariant but translated under the influence of bending so that mode fields are largely free of bend induced distortion asymmetry and contraction. As a result of this understanding it has been found in accordance with this embodiment of the present invention that the effective area can be significantly reduced in a bent fiber as compared to modes of the same fiber without a bend. This result is extremely important in the context of a fiber amplifier since most of the fiber is bent spooled when deployed in the field. By pre compensating the refractive index profile in accordance with the present invention the overlap between the desired signal modes of a propagating signal and the gain medium can be improved while also reducing the overlap between the undesirable noise modes and the gain medium. Indeed a fiber amplifier of the present invention may be formed in a manner similar to conventional fiber amplifiers using a rare earth doped core region a rare earth element such as for example erbium ytterbium and the like . Indeed the core dopant may be confined to a portion of the core so as to further improve the overlap between the desired signal mode and the gain region further improving the amplifier s efficiency. Mode mixing features may also be provided within the fiber amplifier to provide efficient absorption of the pump light within the gain medium. In some cases a low index outer cladding layer may be formed around the defined cladding region so as to allow for the pump signal to be guided along the cladding region.

In a particular configuration of this embodiment of the present invention the parabolic shape of the refractive index profile may be achieved through piece wise linear approximation of a number of separate steps each with a slightly different index. contains a refractive index profile of such a piecewise constant index embodiment. The simulated effective area A of this fiber is illustrated as the darker curve in plotted as a function of bend radius. It is clearly shown that the use of a parabolic index profile results in holding the effective area essentially constant over a bend radius ranging from less than 8 cm to at least 20 cm. For the sake of comparison the changes in effective area for the 30 m core prior art fiber curve II and 50 m core prior art fiber curve III are also shown in . It is obvious that the prior art fibers are much more affected by bending of the fiber.

In this case if the gradient of the cone matches the bend induced gradient the resulting equivalent index profile will have a broad and flat guiding region. illustrates the contour plots of the index profiles for this fiber with illustrating the contour plot for a straight fiber section and illustrating the contour plot for a bent fiber section. Referring to it is clear that this particular raised cone profile results in providing a large area guiding region with a flat index peak when the fiber is bent.

In summary the inventive concept is directed defining an as fabricated refractive index profile that essentially compensates for the bend induced gradient that will be seen by guided light within a bent optical fiber. The as fabricated refractive index profile can in general terms be defined as a conventional profile with the bend induced gradient subtracted from the conventional profile.

It will be apparent to those skilled in the art that various modifications and variations can be made to the present invention without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. In particular various other refractive index profile arrangements can be used to pre distort the index profile to take the gradient associated with fiber bending into account. Thus it is intended that the present invention cover the modifications and variations of this invention provided they come within the scope of claims appended hereto and their equivalents.

