---

title: Pelletized nitrocellulose (PNC) manufacture and long term storage
abstract: A method of making pelletized nitrocellulose (PNC) includes preparing a lacquer, the lacquer comprising nitrocellulose (NC), ethyl acetate and ethyl centralite, the NC having a nitrogen content of at least about 12.2%; mixing the lacquer with an antisolvent to thereby emulsify the lacquer and form PNC; drowning the PNC with the antisolvent; and separating the antisolvent and ethyl acetate from the PNC.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07150855&OS=07150855&RS=07150855
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07150855
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050831
---
The present Application is a Divisional Application of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 263 289 filed on Oct. 2 2002.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for government purposes without the payment of any royalties therefor.

The invention relates in general to a method for preparing pelletized nitrocellulose PNC and more particularly to an environmentally friendly method of preparing PNC.

The nitrocellulose NC most commonly used by the inventors to prepare PNC Plastisolor Pelletized Nitrocellulose is Grade A Type 1 and has 12.6 0.1 nitrogen content. The NC is prepared from cotton linters and is fibrous in shape. Dry military grade nitrocellulose is hydroscopic and will absorb between 1 to 3 water when exposed to atmospheres high in relative high humidity. Dry NC is sensitive to impact friction spark and heat. It is much less sensitive when wet with liquids such as alcohol heptane petroleum ether or water.

Water wet NC is classified as a flammable solid by DOT. The transportation of dry NC is not permitted. The preparation of PNC involves changing the fibrous NC into tiny balls 10 to 20 m or spheres. Safety is a major concern in the manufacture of PNC. PNC is a mass detonating explosive when it is dry. This means it can explode instantly when even a small portion is exposed to fire impact or electrical spark. Technically it is classed as a Group 1 Explosive Class 1 Division 1 DOT Class A . When PNC is wet with 20 or more water it is officially classed as a flammable solid but is very difficult to burn. When PNC is wet with a solvent for example alcohol water or heptane it is officially classed as a flammable liquid. Solvent wet PNC will burn like the solvent alone.

PNC has been manufactured since the 1950 s. Over time a continuous pelletized nitrocellulose PNC process was developed and patented. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 144 020 and 4 590 019 deal with the use of commercial nitrocellulose NC and use alcohol water organic solvents to produce lacquers. There are three types of commercial NC RS 11.8 to 12.2 N SS spirit soluble 10.9 to 11.2 N and AS 11.3 to 11.7 N . RS is soluble in ether alcohol SS and AS are alcohol soluble. The type of NC used in the present invention is military grade 12.2 to 13.8 N . Military grade NC is not soluble in alcohol.

U.S. Pat. Nos. 3 671 515 3 702 353 and 3 873 517 deal with the preparation of PNC. These patents disclose a process for preparation of a nitromethane PNC water emulsion. is a diagram of a prior art PNC manufacturing process. The prior process includes 1. Lacquer Preparation 2. Emulsification 3. Drowning 4. Solvent Removal 5. Product Removal and 6. Solvent Purification

The lacquer is heated to 140 F. 60 C. . Before opening the lacquer makeup tank the lacquer tank vent is turned on to draw off the nitromethane fumes. The lacquer is agitated until all the lumps of NC are dissolved and then diluted to its final concentration. The lacquer is transferred to the lacquer feed tank via the lacquer transfer pump. The lacquer transfer pump should have its discharge valve open at all times to prevent any pressure buildup. Past experience has shown that high nitromethane water content will cause cure viscosity and particle size problems. This has only been noted when the lacquer has a milky appearance all water is not dissolved . The nitrocellulose content of the lacquer has been varied in the past and shown to have no impact on cure quality.

PNC is formed when the NC nitromethane lacquer stream is mixed with a water stream and violent agitation in a colloid mill. This forms an emulsion which is small droplets of the lacquer surrounded by water. This emulsion is next mixed with a large amount of water. This is called drowning . The water extracts all the nitromethane solvent from the lacquer droplets leaving the small spherical PNC particles. The lacquer feed rate has been shown to have some effect on the PNC cure quality if it is above a production rate of 40 lbs hr per emulsification system. The lacquer feed temperature varies between 130 F. and 155 F. 54 C. and 68 C. due to equipment and control system limitations. The lacquer rate has tended to vary with temperature fluctuations of the lacquer. There is no correlation between lacquer temperature and cure quality. Drown water and emulsification water temperature have been well controlled along with the emulsification water and drown water rates. There is no indication of any correlation between these rates and temperature and cure quality. These rates have been varied extensively without affecting the cure quality.

The next step is to remove the nitromethane in the drowned emulsion. The drowned emulsion is pumped to the drown column where it is heated from about 120 F. to 150 F. 49 to 66 C. by the drown column preheater. The drown column must always operate at less than 300 mm Hg pressure. This is to keep the PNC at less than 175 F. 79 C. . If PNC is kept at temperatures above 175 F. 79 C. it will start to degrade. It will not degrade at rapid rates until it is heated above 205 F. 96 C. . For safety a limit of 175 F. 79 C. has been set for normal operations.

Upon entering the drown column the nitromethane is boiled away. This is called stripping the feed to the column of nitromethane The PNC water flows to the bottom of the column where it is circulated through the drown column reboiler. The reboiler provides the heat for stripping off the remainder of the nitromethane. The nitromethane and water vapor coming off the top of the column are condensed and pumped to a decanter where the water is allowed to separate. The nitromethane is then pumped from the decanter to the nitromethane column. In the nitromethane column the last of the water is stripped from the nitromethane and pumped back to the decanter while the purified nitromethane is pumped from the bottom of the column to the nitromethane storage tank.

The PNC water slurry is pumped from the bottom of the drown column to the clarifier to concentrate the slurry. The concentrated slurry is then fed to a centrifuge to separate the water from the PNC. The PNC is discharged from one end and is collected in a conductive plastic bag. The bag is usually changed every half hour and should never be allowed to collect more than 50 pounds. When starting the clairifier or centrifuge always wet down first to desensitize any dry PNC that may have accumulated. The PNC water slurry is fed directly from the clairifier to the vapor body though a spray nozzle. A hot stream of PNC heptane is recirculated through the vapor body surge tank to boil off the water. A large amount of heptane is also vaporized along with the water. The liquid heptane PNC overflows from the vapor body to the surge tank where the vapor goes out the top to the heptane recovery system.

The nitromethane purification process is used to remove water from the wet nitromethane layer. The wet nitromethane normally contains between 2 and 4 water by weight. The dry nitromethane normally contains less than 0.05 water by weight. Since water wet nitrocellulose added in the lacquer preparation area raises the water content of the lacquer to 2.2 small variations in the nitromethane water content do not have a significant effect on the overall water content of the lacquer. The water content of the nitromethane is not regularly analyzed however by monitoring the temperature difference between the upper middle of the column and the column bottom temperature an indication of the moisture content of the nitromethane can be determined. As long as the bottom temperature is above 145 F. and the temperature difference is less than 25 30 F. the moisture content is too low to have any impact on the lacquer moisture content. There also may be other impurities in the nitromethane which may have an impact on the cure. This impurity could be removed by increased boil up in the column. However a review of the data does not indicate any correlation between the nitromethane purification operation and the cure of PNC.

PNC is dried by granulating it if necessary and spreading it on trays. Generally all water wet PNC must be granulated prior to spreading. After the PNC is spread the trays are put into carts and the carts are placed in an oven at 130 F. 54 C. for up to 9 days. In general water wet PNC is dried for 7 days until the moisture is less than 0.5 by weight. Heptane wet PNC is dried for 4 days.

Two major disadvantages of the above described prior process are the use of nitromethane which is toxic and the high temperatures used in the drying process. The present invention eliminates the use of nitromethane and the high temperatures used for drying thereby resulting in a safer more environmentally friendly process. Further objects features and advantages of the invention will become apparent from the following description of the preferred embodiments taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

The present invention is a safe environmentally friendly process for the preparation of pelletized nitrocellulose PNC . The invention eliminates the use of toxic nitromethane by substituting ethyl acetate. The preparation of PNC in the present invention can be performed at low temperatures. Organic solvents for example heptane alcohols as well as water can be used to prepare the PNC emulsion. Water wet or solvent wet PNC is processed at lower temperatures. The new process eliminates the labor intensive and unsafe tray drying of PNC.

Referring to in step S the lacquer is prepared by mixing together nitrocellulose NC ethyl acetate and ethyl centralite. The NC has a nitrogen content of at least about 12.2 .

Preferably the lacquer comprises about 95.2 ethyl acetate 4.31 NC 0.48 water and 0.01 ethyl centralite.

In step S the lacquer is combined with an antisolvent to thereby emulsify the lacquer and form PNC. While shows water as the antisolvent heptane may also be used. In step S the PNC is drowned with the antisolvent. Again while shows water as the drowning fluid heptane may also be used. In step S the antisolvent and ethyl acetate are separated from the PNC by centrifuging and or filtering. In step S the PNC is water washed to further remove the ethyl acetate. In step S the PNC is alcohol washed to remove the water. In step S the PNC is heptane washed to remove the alcohol. In step S the PNC is slurried in heptane.

If heptane is used as the antisolvent in steps S and S then steps S and S may be eliminated. Similarly if water is used as the antisolvent in steps S and S and the end product desired is water wet PNC then steps S and S may be eliminated. also shows a step S which is a recycle loop to recover heptane and alcohol.

The NC lacquer and anti solvent were prepared in temperature controlled baths . Temperature controllers and steam solenoid valves control the temperature of the baths. Temperature controllers receive bath temperature information via thermocouples . Three neck two liter flasks are immersed in the baths. One neck of the flasks receive thermocouples . Air motors with agitators and bearings provide mixing action.

The lacquer was prepared by mixing 54.6 grams of NC 12.6 N lot ARV01F601 100 containing 10 water 49 NC with 1 gram of ethyl centralite EC and 1080 grams of ethyl acetate. The resulting mixture was 95.2 ethyl acetate EA 4.31 nitrocellulose NC 0.48 water and 0.01 ethyl centralite EC . The lacquer was mixed for an hour let stand overnight and mixed for another hour.

Anitsolvent heptane and the lacquer were heated to 55 C. and pumped by pumps at 50 mL minute into an inline laboratory homogenizer . The emulsion exiting the homogenizer was drowned with a flow of 350 mL min of heptane using pump . The mixture was then filtered by filter and pumped by pump into filtrate receiver . The resulting PNC had a particle size of 1 to 20 m and contained 2 ethyl centralite EC . The heptane PNC mixture filtered fast. The PNC prepared contained small particles short fibers and fines 0.5 m .

The procedure is the same as Example 1 except water was used as the antisolvent. The resulting PNC had a particle size of 1 to 20 m and contained 2 ethyl centralite EC . The PNC water mixture filtered very slow. The PNC prepared contained small particles short fibers and fines 0.5 m .

Shown in is an apparatus for long term storage of PNC in heptane. The apparatus includes a drum having a top cover a tube with cap a floor mat and filter cloth placed over the floor mat . Tube extends from the floor mat through the cover of the drum . The floor mat may be made of PVC high density polyethylene or conductive materials compatible with NC and heptane.

The densities of heptane water and PNC are 0.7 1.0 and 1.6 g mL respectively. The water and PNC slowly settle to the bottom of the storage drum as shown in . Heptane vapor collects at the top of the drum. The mesh of the filter cloth is chosen so that water will flow through but not PNC. As trace amounts of water collect at the bottom of the drum the water can be removed at any time using the tube . Stabilizer may also be added to the drum.

While the invention has been described with reference to certain preferred embodiments numerous changes alterations and modifications to the described embodiments are possible without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined in the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

