---

title: Audio privacy method and system
abstract: Provided is a method and system for audio privacy that includes receiving a first sound signal at a microphone proximal to a user's ear, generating a second sound signal based on the first sound signal and a stored filter, the second sound signal interfering with the first sound signal, and emitting the second sound signal from a speaker proximal to the user's ear.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08059828&OS=08059828&RS=08059828
owner: TP Lab Inc.
number: 08059828
owner_city: Palo Alto
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051214
---
During a telephone call a telephone user uses a telephone to communicate with other users oftentimes in an open or noisy environment such as inside a cubicle a kitchen a coffee house a conference room a shopping mall an airport a library or a lobby. A telephone call may be a two party or a multiple party call.

A telephone call may be used for personal communication such as two friends engaging in a conversation a daughter talking to her grandpa a nephew asking his aunt for a secret recipe a newly wedded couple inviting their parents for a Thanksgiving gathering a customer enquiring a business for business hours and direction a guest making a dinner reservation with a restaurant or a subscriber making an request with a cable company for the repair of her cable connection.

For personal communication depending on the information being exchanged during the call it may be desirable to protect the privacy of the telephone users so that the information exchanged is not intelligible to unintended audience.

A telephone call may also be used for business or in business to business communication such as a contractor talking to a city manager about a bid for a project a client ordering goods from a supplier an insurance adjustor taking damage assessment from a hurricane stricken home owner a nurse discussing a medical condition with a patient a stock broker giving financial advice to a client a lawyer speaking to a client on sensitive legal strategy a product distributor asking an equipment vendor for technical information a health clinic nurse delivering a appointment confirmation to a patient or a credit card company representative alerting a customer of unusual activity on a credit card account.

A telephone call may also be used for collaboration within a business such as a traveling salesman asking for updated pricing information from her peer a customer service manager requesting product integration information from a project manager two engineers discussing an application programming interface a emergency room nurse seeking critical advice from a doctor or several executives engaging in a conference call on company financial matters.

For business communication the information being exchanged may be critical to the operation of the business or businesses involved. It therefore may be essential to protect the privacy of the telephone users so that the information exchanged is not intelligible to unintended audience.

The importance of protecting the privacy for business communication becomes increasingly important with the escalating cost of travel the proliferation of service outsourcing and international business partnership as a result of globalization.

An aspect of the present invention provides an audio privacy method. The method includes receiving a first sound signal at a microphone proximal to a user s ear generating a second sound signal to substantially destructively interfere with the first sound signal and emitting the second sound signal from a speaker proximal to the user s ear.

In another aspect of the invention the method further includes a third sound signal emitting proximal to the user s ear the interfering of the first and second sound signals improving the intelligibility of the third sound signal. In an embodiment the third sound signal comprises a human voice.

Another aspect of the present invention provides a personal conversation device. The personal conversation device includes a signal sampling module for receiving a first audio signal a signal interfering module for emitting a second sound signal and a signal processing module operatively connected to receive the first audio signal from the signal sampling module and to generate a second sound signal to the signal interfering module. The second sound signal is generated to substantially destructively interfere with the first sound signal.

In another aspect of the invention the signal processing module of the personal conversation device includes an application specific integrated circuit ASIC .

An aspect of the present invention provides a virtual sound wall device. The virtual sound wall device includes a signal sampling module a signal interfering module and a signal processing module. The signal processing module is operatively connected to the signal sampling module and signal interfering module. The signal processing module is configured to generate a signal for the signal interfering module that interferes with a signal received from the signal sampling module. In an embodiment the signal sampling and signal interfering modules are located along a boundary separating a noisy area from a quiet space.

In an aspect of the invention the signal processing module includes a microprocessor and associated memory and the microprocessor is configured to perform the signal generating function of the signal processing module.

In an aspect of the invention the signal sampling module is configured to filter out sounds over a predetermined decibel level. In an embodiment the predetermined decibel level is 100 decibels.

In the following description for purposes of explanation specific numbers materials and configurations are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the invention. It will be apparent however to one having ordinary skill in the art that the invention may be practiced without these specific details. In some instances well known features may be omitted or simplified so as not to obscure the present invention. Furthermore reference in the specification to one embodiment or an embodiment means that a particular feature structure or characteristic described in connection with the embodiment is included in at least one embodiment of the invention. The appearances of the phrase in an embodiment in various places in the specification are not necessarily all referring to the same embodiment.

Sounds are generally longitudinal pressure waves hereinafter sound waves emitted by a sound source which travel in a suitable conducting medium such as air. Multiple sounds waves interfere with one another to form a combined sound. Where a high pressure peak in one sound wave interferes with a high pressure peak in another sound wave the two sound waves combine to produce a sound wave having a high pressure peak that is higher than the high pressure peaks of either sound wave before their combination. This is also known as constructive interference and the two original sound waves are said to have constructively interfered with each other.

Alternatively where a high pressure peak in one sound wave interferes with a low pressure trough in another sound wave the two sound waves combine to produce a sound wave having a high pressure peak that lower than the original high pressure peak of the first sound wave before their combination. This is also known as destructive interference and the two original sound waves are said to have destructively interfered with each other. When the high pressure peaks of one sound wave perfectly aligns with the low pressure trough in another sound wave having an identical amplitude and frequency the two sound waves destructively interfere to cancel each other out resulting in a lack of sound. Inverting a sound wave and then having the inverted sound wave interfere with the original sound wave will also cause such destructive interference. In the application it is understood that destructive interference may be referred to as interference of a wave with an inverted copy of the wave and that a sound wave may be substantially eliminated by interference with an inverted copy of the sound wave and such destructive interference may be desirable even if it does not result in absolutely complete elimination.

An audio object as herein used is a representation or an approximation of a sound. In an embodiment an audio object is a sample of sound. In another embodiment an audio object is used to generate a sound. In an embodiment an audio object uses a digital format to represent a sound. In another embodiment an audio object uses an analog format to represent a sound. In some embodiments of the invention an audio object may be transformed between digital and analog formats.

In an embodiment of the invention a sound sampling device generates an audio object by sampling a sound for a sampling time interval. For example in an embodiment the sampling time interval is 1 8 000 of a second based on an 8 000 per second or 8 kHz sampling rate the audio object represents or approximates the sound for 1 8 000 of a second. In another embodiment the sampling time interval is 1 44 100 of a second based on a 44 100 per second or 44.1 kHz sampling rate. In another embodiment the sampling time interval is 1 96 000 of a second based on a 96 000 per second or 96 kHz sampling rate.

In an embodiment a signal processing device generates an audio object. For example the signal processing device generates an audio object by synthesizing the audio object. In another embodiment the signal processing device generates the audio object based on a sampled audio object. In another embodiment the signal processing device generates the audio object based on a synthesized audio object. In another embodiment the signal processing device generates the audio object based on an audio factor such as an amplitude normalization factor.

In an embodiment an audio object is converted to an electrical signal. For example a speaker uses an electrical signal to generate a sound. In another embodiment an audio object uses a law Pulse Code Modulation PCM format to encode a sound. In another embodiment an audio object uses law Pulse Code Modulation PCM format to encode a sound. In another embodiment an audio object uses an MP3 MPEG1 Audio Layer 3 format to encode a sound. In another embodiment an audio object uses a Linear Pulse Code Modulation LPCM format to encode a sound. Other formats may also be used to encode a sound.

In an embodiment a signal sampling module is inside a sound zone and includes the functionality of sampling the combined sound to generate a sampled audio object . Sampled audio object is an audio object. In an embodiment signal sampling module sends the sampled audio object to a signal processing module which includes the functionality of generating a processed audio object . In such an embodiment signal processing module receives sampled audio object and generates a processed audio object which is also an audio object. In one embodiment signal processing module generates a processed audio object based on the sampled audio object .

In an embodiment signal sampling module may generate a plurality of sampled audio objects by sampling the combined sound over a plurality of sampling time intervals. Likewise in an embodiment signal processing module may receive a plurality of sampled audio objects from the signal sampling module and generate a plurality of process audio objects .

An exemplary process for the signal processing module to generate a processed audio object is schematically illustrated in . In an embodiment signal processing module receives a sampled audio object and generates a processed audio object based on the sample audio object . In one embodiment signal processing module includes one or more audio filters . Signal processing module generates a processed audio object using the sampled audio object and one or more of audio filters in an embodiment.

In an exemplary embodiment signal processing module computes a first audio object as the result of subtracting the sound represented by audio filter from the sound represented by sampled audio object . Signal processing module computes a second audio object as the result of inverting the first audio object. In one embodiment the first audio object uses an analog format and the signal processing module performs an analog signal inversion of the first audio object. In another embodiment the first audio object uses a law PCM format and the signal processing module changes the sign bit of the first audio object to form a second audio object not depicted . In such an embodiment the signal process module generates a processed audio object using the second audio object.

In an embodiment an audio filter includes an audio normalization factor and signal processing module generates a processed audio object that represents a sound as the result of adjusting based on audio filter the amplitude of the sound represented by an audio object such as sampled audio object .

Also in an embodiment an audio filter includes a frequency range. In one embodiment signal processing module generates a processed audio object that represents the sound resulting form removing based on audio filter the sound inside the frequency range from an audio object such as sampled audio object . For example in an embodiment audio filter may remove from an audio object any sound within the frequency range of a human voice.

In another embodiment signal processing module generates a processed audio object that represents a sound as the result of removing based on audio filter the sound outside the frequency range from an audio object such as the sampled audio object .

In an embodiment a sound source emits a sound signal . For example sound source may be a speaking person a playing audio recorder a playing musical instrument an operating vacuum a dish washer a cloth washer a cloth dryer or a television. It may also be a passing vehicle a roaring train or a soaring airplane. In an embodiment sound source may be a choir a band or an orchestra or a busy freeway a buzzing shopping mall or a noisy restaurant.

In an embodiment signal interfering module emits an interfering sound signal . The interfering sound signal and the sound signals emitted by the multiple sound sources combine to form a combined sound signal inside a sound zone . In an embodiment this combined sound signal may be heard by a person inside sound zone or recorded by a voice recorder inside sound zone . In another embodiment a microphone inside the sound zone captures the combined sound signal .

In a further embodiment signal sampling module may be inside sound zone . Signal sampling module samples the combined sound signal over a series of sampling time intervals to generate a sequence of sampled audio objects . Each sampled audio object represents the combined sound signal for a sampling time interval for the sampled audio object . Preferably the signal sampling module sends the sequence of sampled audio objects to the signal processing module .

In an embodiment the signal processing module generates a sequence of interfering audio objects based on the sequence of sampled audio objects it receives. An embodiment of the signal processing module includes an audio filter which is an audio object approximating the interfering sound signal emitted by the interfering sound module .

Also in an embodiment for each sampled audio object the signal processing module computes a recovered audio object by subtracting the sound represented by the audio filter from the sound represented by the sampled audio object . In one embodiment audio filter and sampled audio object use an analog format and the signal processing module performs an analog signal subtraction of audio filter from sampled audio object . In such an embodiment the audio filter and the sampled audio object use a logarithmic PCM format such as a law PCM format or law PCM format. Signal processing module converts the audio filter to a first numeric amplitude level and the sampled audio object to a second numeric amplitude level performs a numeric subtraction of the first numeric amplitude level from the second numeric amplitude level and converts the result of the subtraction to the logarithmic PCM format.

In an embodiment the recovered audio object represents an approximation of the combined sound signal of the multiple sound signals . For example the signal processing module generates an interfering audio object that represents a sound as the inverted version of the sound represented by the recovered audio object . In one embodiment the recovered audio object uses an analog format and the signal processing module performs an analog signal inversion of the recovered audio object to generate an interfering audio object . In another embodiment the recovered audio object uses a law PCM format and the signal processing module changes the sign bit of the recovered audio object to generate an interfering audio object .

In an embodiment the signal processing module replaces the audio filter with the interfering audio object . In such an embodiment the new audio filter is used in the processing of the next sampled audio object .

Equation 1 2 and 3 illustrate the above process of generating interfering audio object in an exemplary embodiment. RAO Subtract SAO AF Equation 1 IAO Invert RAO Equation 2 AF IAO Equation 3

In these equations RAO denotes recovered audio object IAO denotes interfering audio object SAO denotes sampled audio object and AF denotes audio filter and Subtract is the subtracting function and Invert is the inversion function. Also the signal processing module repeats the process for each of the sequence of sampled audio objects to generate a sequence of interfering audio objects .

In one embodiment for the processing of the first sampled audio object the audio filter has a value of zero. In another embodiment the audio filter has a random value.

In an embodiment the generation of an exemplary sequence of interfering audio objects is illustrated as follows. The sequence of sampled audio objects generated by the signal sampling module is denoted as SAO SAO SAO . . . SAO n 1 SAO n SAO n 1 SAO n 2 . . . where n denotes the order in which signal sampling module generates the sequence of sampled audio objects . The signal processing module receives the sequence of the sampled audio objects in the same order. Equations 4 5 and 6 illustrate this as follows RAO Subtract SAO AF 1 Equation 4 IAO Invert RAO Equation 5 AF IAO Equation 6

In these equations RAO n is the recovered audio object generated by the signal processing module based on SAO n AF n 1 is the audio filter at the time when the signal processing module processes SAO n IAO n is the interfering audio object generated by the signal processing module based on RAO n and AF n is the audio filter after the signal processing module replaces the audio filter with IAO n . The initial value of the audio filter is denoted by AF . In one embodiment AF has a value of 0. In another embodiment the initial AF has a random value.

In an embodiment the signal processing module sends the sequence of interfering audio objects denoted as IAO IAO IAO . . . IAO n 1 IAO n IAO n 1 to the signal interfering module which then converts IAO IAO IAO . . . IAO n 1 IAO n IAO n 1 into the interfering sound signal which in turn is then emitted by the signal interfering module .

In one embodiment the interfering sound signal equals or approximates the plurality of sound signals and the combined sound signal does not allow the plurality of sound signals to be heard intelligibly due to the cancellation or weakening effect of the interfering sound signal . For example at a first sampling time interval the generated SAO n represents the combined sound of a first sample of the plurality of sound signals and a first sample of the interfering sound signal emitted based on the preceding IAO n 1 . According to Equation 6 the Audio Filter AF n 1 is IAO n 1 . Subtract SAO n AF n 1 as in Equation 4 is the same as Subtract SAO n IAO n 1 . The resulting ROA n is an approximation of the first sample of the multiple sound signals . IAO n being Invert RAO n according to Equation 5 is the inverted version of the approximation of the first sample of the plurality of sound signals .

Continuing with the example at a second sampling time interval the emitted interfering sound signal based on IAO n interferes with a second sample of the sound signals . In one embodiment the second sample of the sound signals is similar to the first sample of the sound signals and the interfering sound signal based on IAO n cancels or weakens the second sample of the sound signals .

In an embodiment the audio filter includes an audio normalization factor and the subtract function includes adjusting the amplitude of the recovered audio object to an amplitude level indicated by the audio normalization factor. In one embodiment the subtract function includes adjusting the amplitude of the recovered audio object to the amplitude level when the amplitude of the sound represented by recovered audio object exceeds a threshold.

In one embodiment the audio filter includes a frequency range of human voice. In an embodiment the frequency range is 200 Hz to 3500 Hz. In another embodiment the frequency range is 120 Hz to 3800 Hz. In one embodiment the subtract function removes from sampled audio object the sound inside the frequency range of human voice as indicated by audio filter . In another embodiment the subtract function removes from the sampled audio object the sound outside the frequency range of a human voice as indicated by the audio filter

An illustration using an item of jewelry to provide an audio privacy system as described herein is provided in . In an embodiment a necklace having one or more pendants is envisioned. In such an embodiment each pendant may comprise one or more the overall audio privacy system. For example pendant may also function as a signal sampling module such as a microphone pendant may function as the signal processing module and pendant may function as the signal interfering module such as a speaker. In a preferred embodiment the pendants are designed to be visually appealing such as by having a real or artificial gemstone fa ade. In an embodiment any form of jewelry may be used with the various system components incorporated in one or more of the jewelry item s elements. For example a single larger pendant may be used instead of the three depicted here with all the system components residing therein. Similarly other embodiments are envisioned having any number of elements and any distribution of system components.

An illustration using a headset to provide a privacy system is provided in . In an embodiment the headset comprises an arm for placement on the user s head the arm having a gripping node on one side and the audio privacy system on the other side for advantageous placement near a user s ear. In such an embodiment the audio privacy system comprises a signal sampling module such as a microphone a signal processing module and a signal interfering module such as a speaker. In alternative embodiments not depicted on or more of the modules may be located at a location other than on the headset or may be located on another part of the headset .

An illustration using a telephone receiver with additional internal components to provide an audio privacy system in accordance with an embodiment of the invention is presented in . In an embodiment a telephone receiver such as one having a handheld portion includes internally an audio privacy system having a signal sampling module such as a microphone a signal processing module and a signal interfering module such as a speaker. In alternative embodiments the modules may be located internally in any portion of the telephone receiver .

An illustration using a telephone receiver with additional external components to provide a system in accordance with an embodiment of the invention is presented in . In an embodiment a telephone receiver such as one having a handheld portion includes internally an audio privacy system having a signal sampling module such as a microphone a signal processing module and a signal interfering module such as a speaker. In alternative embodiments the modules may be located externally in any portion of the telephone receiver . In a further embodiment some modules may be located internally while others are located externally.

In an embodiment of the invention a user uses a telephone for a phone call with another user or users the system thereby providing a quiet space for a telephone user. The telephone uses the system for providing a quiet space. The telephone includes a microphone and a speaker. The user speaks into the microphone. The microphone includes a signal sampling Module. The speaker includes a signal interfering module. The microphone samples the sound signal from the user and the interfering sound signal from the speaker. In one embodiment the telephone includes a signal processing module. In another embodiment the telephone connects to a signal processing module. The signal processing module preferably generates an interfering audio object based on the sampled audio object. The user then emits a sound signal and the speaker emits an interfering sound signal. The interfering sound signal is the inverted version of a sound that equals or approximates the sound signal. The combined sound signal of the interfering sound signal and the sound signal do not allow the sound signal to be heard intelligibly creating a quite space for the user.

In another embodiment of the invention a personal conversational device includes the system for providing a quiet space. A person wears a personal conversation device close to his ears. In one embodiment the person wears the device around his neck like a necklace. In another embodiment the person wears the device as a brooch or another item of jewelry. In one embodiment the person wears the device as an attachment to his eye glasses. In another embodiment the person wears the device as a hairpin. In one embodiment the person wears the device as part of his hat.

In such an embodiment the device samples the sound signals from the surroundings emits an interfering sound signal that is the inverted version of a sound that equals or approximates the surrounding sound signals. The interfering sound signal cancels or weakens the surrounding sound signals to create a quite space around the person s ears. In one embodiment the device emits an interfering sound signal that is an inverted version of a sound that equals or approximates the non human voice portion of the surrounding sound signals. The interfering sound signal cancels or weakens the non human voice portion of the surrounding of sound signals. Two people each wearing a personal conversational device can converse comfortably in a noisy environment such as inside a shopping mall along a busy street on board of a commuter train inside a night club or in a rock concert.

In another embodiment of the invention a virtual sound wall device includes the system for providing a quiet space. A virtual sound wall device is preferably installed along a boundary separating a protected area from a noisy environment. In one embodiment the noisy environment is a highway a street an exhibition floor a stadium or an area where an event takes place. In another embodiment the protected area is a house an exhibition booth a food stand a ticket box office or an outdoor restaurant.

In an embodiment a boundary may have no physical delimiter to indicate where the boundary is located. For example a boundary may exist essentially in the open between an area a user wants to protect from noise and an area that is noisy such as an airport without any physical manifestation or wall indicating where the boundary is located. In such an embodiment the boundary is located at the loci where the protected space meets the noisy area. Of course a physical boundary may be present as well. For example a boundary may comprise an actual physical boundary such as fixed or movable objects to which a suitable device may be attached. Examples of physical boundaries include but are not limited to walls half walls knee walls and the like separating cubicles in an office pylons bollards and the like.

In operation an exemplary sound wall device includes a signal sampling module positioned to face the noisy environment and the signal interfering module is positioned to face the protected area. The signal sampling module samples sound signals from the noisy environment and the sound signal emitted by the people inside the protected area. In one embodiment the sound signal emitted by the people diminishes upon reaching the signal sampling module due to the direction of the signal sampling module. In an embodiment the combined sound signal approximates the sound signals from the noisy environment due to the diminished strength of the sound signal emitted by the people. The interfering sound signal emitted by signal interfering module is then the inverted version of a sound that equals or approximates sound signals from the noisy environment. The interfering sound signal thereby cancels or weakens the sound signal from the noisy environment.

In one embodiment multiple virtual sound wall devices installed along the boundary create a plurality of quite spaces in the protected area. In an embodiment the quite spaces are contiguous the distance between adjacent virtual sound wall devices depending on the strength of the sound signals from the noisy environment and the topology of the boundary. In various embodiments the distance may be 3 feet 10 feet 25 feet 12.5 feet or any other suitable distance.

In an embodiment the signal sampling module and signal interfering module are separated by a distance. For example the signal sampling device may be attached to a tree along a busy street and the signal interfering device may be attached to a window of a house. In another embodiment the signal sampling module may be located at a highway wall with the signal interfering module located at the backyard fence of a house. In another embodiment the signal interfering module attenuates the strength of the interfering sound signal to match that of the sound signals from the noisy environment. In another embodiment the level of attenuation is configured in the virtual sound wall device based on the estimated diminishment of the sound signals from the noisy environment upon reaching the signal interfering module.

In an embodiment the signal processing module creates a processed audio object based on a plurality of audio filters. In one embodiment the plurality of audio filters has an order. In another embodiment each of the audio filters includes a sequence number and the order of the plurality of audio filters is based on the sequence number. In another embodiment each of the audio filters includes a time marker. In one such embodiment the time marker includes the time of day when the signal processing module stores the audio filter. In another embodiment the time marker includes a relative time and the order of the plurality of audio filters is based on the time marker.

In an embodiment the signal processing module selects an audio filter based on the order for the generation of a processed audio object. In one embodiment the signal processing module selects multiple audio filters based on the order for the generation of a processed audio object.

In one embodiment the signal processing module computes an average value of the selected multiple audio filters and generates a processed audio object based on the average value. In another embodiment the signal processing module computes a weighed average value of the selected multiple audio filters and generates a processed audio object based on the weighted average value.

In an embodiment the signal processing module adjusts a processed audio object such that the amplitude of the sound represented by the processed audio object matches the amplitude of the sound represented by the sampled audio object.

Although the invention herein has been described with reference to particular embodiments it is to be understood that these embodiments are merely illustrative of the principles and applications of the present invention. It is therefore to be understood that numerous modifications may be made to the illustrative embodiments and that other arrangements may be devised without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims.

