---

title: Electronic visual jockey file
abstract: A digital camera has output ports that are connectable by cables to an HDTV television. The camera generates a slide show viewable on the television screen. The slide show involves a sequence of images stored on the camera and audio stored on the camera. The slide show is supplied to the television in the form of an HDTV resolution video stream and an accompanying audio stream. A user selects one of a plurality of scenarios for the slide show. The particular scenario determines how identified images will be presented. Using camera buttons, the user can stop and start the slide show and can move a pointer on the television screen. A standard EVJ file that defines the slide show in accordance with a scenario is generated by the camera. The file can be played on any rendering device that supports the EVJ functionality so as to recreate the slide show.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07952535&OS=07952535&RS=07952535
owner: Mediatek Singapore Pte Ltd
number: 07952535
owner_city: Singapore
owner_country: SG
publication_date: 20050630
---
This application claims the benefit under 35 U.S.C. 119 of Provisional Application No. 60 654 709 entitled Digital Camera Having Electronic Video Jockey Capability filed Feb. 20 2005 the subject matter of which is incorporated herein by reference . This application is related to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 172 750 entitled Digital Camera Having Electronic Visual Jockey Capability filed Jun. 30 2005 by Watanabe et al. the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference.

Users of digital cameras often collect a large number of digital images. This gives rise to a desire to be able to show these digital images to others in the form of a slide show. Many viewer programs usable to view digital images provide a slide show feature. The digital images are typically displayed one at a time at a constant rate in the order in which the digital images are stored in a folder. There is no audio accompanying the slide show. Consequently the slide show is fairly boring to many viewers.

A product called PhotoCinema marketed by a Japanese company called Digital Stage allows for a fairly sophisticated slide show to be created and viewed on a computer screen of a personal computer. Digital images stored on a personal computer can be presented in a variety of sequences and individual images in a sequence can be zoomed. A chain of multiple images can be made to move from left to right across the computer screen. A chain of multiple images can be mode to move from top to bottom across the computer screen. Music can be selected to accompany the slide show. The slide show is however on a computer screen. There is often significant boot time to start a personal computer and the computer often does not have the large screen that would make viewing a slide show an enjoyable activity. The personal computer may be located in an office or other out of the way place in the home that does not have the comfortable seating and lighting of the family room or media room. Presenting a slide show on the small screen of a personal computer in the out of the way room is therefore not as pleasing as it could be.

Apple Computer has introduced an MP3 music player called the IPOD PHOTO a portable digital media player made by Apple Computer Inc. . Some versions of the IPOD PHOTO a portable digital media player made by Apple Computer Inc. have an ability to store a large number of digital images on a built in micro hard disc drive. Digital images stored on the IPOD PHOTO can be viewed in a slide show by coupling the IPOD PHOTO directly to a television. A special AV audio video cable is provided for this purpose and the IPOD PHOTO has the ability to drive a video signal and an audio signal directly to the television. Touch sensitive buttons on the IPOD PHOTO are usable to select images to be displayed on the television. This aspect of the IPOD PHOTO is very popular and the digital images stored on the IPOD PHOTO can be displayed on a television in the home where comfortable seating is generally available. It is however cumbersome to use the IPOD PHOTO because the digital images generally need to be loaded onto the IPOD PHOTO before the IPOD PHOTO can be used to view those images. This inconvenience and the time required to do the downloading of images into the IPOD PHOTO is undesirable. Moreover the slide show generated by the IPOD PHOTO is fairly simple and constant. There is a constant time per slide value. Watching such a slide show for more than a short period of time is generally a boring experience.

Discotheques in the past had disc jockeys DJs that played interesting mixes of music for patrons. There typically was no imagery or video accompanying the music. The disc jockeys of the past have been replaced with what are called video or visual jockeys VJs . In the dance clubs of today music is often accompanied by a rich variety of still images and video clips and light shows and other imagery and audio and video effects. The VJ may for example have a large expensive stack of many compact disc CD digital video disc DVD players and mixer equipment. The VJ uses this expensive equipment to combine the output of the various CD players and DVD players in an interesting fashion to suit the mood of the patrons of the club. Still images can be seen to sweep across screens in the club from one side of the screen to another or from top to bottom or from bottom to top as the music is playing. The scene of view can zoom into a part of an image. The scene of view can zoom back out from a part of an image. Images can be zoomed up in size and can be zoomed down in size. Significant artistry is often involved in making the collage and flow of pictures and video match the music so that the overall experience pleasing and has the desired impact on the audience. Providing this club experience is therefore generally expensive and requires a significant degree of sophistication.

It is desired to provide an inexpensive VJ like experience for unsophisticated consumers who want to view snapshots in the home without having to spend a lot of time learning how to program and use specialized and expensive equipment. It is desired to provide the VJ like experience at as low of cost a possible without having to use a general purpose computer that is slow to boot and that may not contain the pictures that are to be viewed. It is desired to provide the VJ like experience to users who might not possess the artistic audio visual ability of a VJ.

A digital camera has a video and audio output ports that are connectable by cables to an HDTV television. The video cable may be a YCrCb component video cable. The audio cable may be an AV cable the audio portion of which is used to communicate audio to the television. The digital camera generates a slide show that is viewable on the television screen. The slide show involves a sequence of digital still images stored on the camera and audio stored on the camera. The slide show is supplied to the television in the form of a video stream and an accompanying audio stream.

A user uses the digital camera to select the digital images that will be part of the slide show a playlist . The user may for example select particular image files for example JPEG BMP TIFF GIF format files from a list of all the image files stored on the camera. This list may be displayed on a display of the digital camera. The user may select files from this list using buttons on the camera.

The user also selects one or more audio selections for example MP3 MP4 WAV AAC Apple Lossless files audio snippets that are captured by the digital camera that will be part of the slide show a playlist . The user may for example select a particular audio selection from a list of audio selections that are stored on the digital camera. This list is displayed on the display of the digital camera. The user identifies an audio selection from the list using buttons on the camera.

The digital camera has both a wireless transceiver port for example FIR IRDA or BlueTooth or UWB as well as a port for accommodating a cable or docking station for example USB 2.0 . These ports are usable to download images and or audio for including into the slide show. The images and or audio can be downloaded from any suitable repository of image and audio information for example a personal computer an MP3 player another digital camera a cell phone or a personal digital assistant . The information can also be ported to the digital camera using a removable storage media for example a removable flash card a memory stick a removable hard disc drive or an optical disc .

Using the display and push buttons on the camera the user selects one of a plurality of scenarios for the slide show. The particular scenario selected determines how the selected digital images and the selected audio will be presented in the slide show. A scenario may involve multiple sequence sets where a sequence set is a predefined specification of how images will be manipulated in an artistic VJ like fashion manipulations include blending panning tilting zooming rotating . A sequence set can also control aspects of the audio such as fade in fade out volume and changing the audio file being decoded and output. In one novel business method aspect an experienced visual jockey is consulted to develop elements sequence sets and scenarios that have high artistic quality. These elements sequence sets and scenarios are then provided in a production version of the digital camera for use by ordinary consumers.

A powerful hardware zoom engine that performs sub pixel zooming and that is in used in the digital camera to capture digital images is also used during the generation of the slide show to perform operations such as zooming panning and tilting operations. The digital camera electronics including the powerful hardware zoom engine performs these operations in real time as the slide show progresses. Unlike a situation where an IPOD PHOTO is used to generate a slide show the powerful hardware is provided in the camera for image capturing purposes and providing a sophisticate zoom engine does not entail added cost for the consumer.

In one embodiment the user can stop and start the slide show using a button on the digital camera. The user can also use buttons on the digital camera to cause a pointer to appear on the television screen and to move the pointer around the television screen.

In some embodiments the user can customize a scenario in certain ways. Once customized the customized scenario is used in a subsequent slide show. Automatic face detection within the camera is employed to make the slide show more interesting and VJ like. The location of a face can for example be used to control which parts of an image are emphasized. Face detection can also be used to determine which one of a plurality of images will be emphasized over the others. The detection of a face is provided as an input to the slide show generating software.

In some embodiments the beat of the audio that accompanies the sequence of images in the slide show is detected. The beat is provided as an input to the slide show generating software. The beat is used to synchronize and time the sequencing of digital images to the accompanying audio to make the slide show more interesting and VJ like.

In another novel aspect a single container file contains content files as well as textual information on how to render content in the content files so as to render a slide show in accordance with a scenario. The textual information may for example be present in the form of a text file that is contained in the container file. The content files may for example include JPEG image files and MP3 audio files. In addition the single container file may include a textual playlist file that identifies file names of content files that are to be rendered during the slide show. The container file adheres to format requirements for a new standard type of file. This type of file may be called an EVJ file. EVJ stands for electronic visual jockey. EVJ files names may end with .EVJ to denote that they are EVJ files.

A rendering device that includes an EVJ rendering authoring functionality and that comports with the EVJ standard can be used to read the EVJ file to parse the text information and to render content in the content files so as to regenerate the slide show in accordance with the originally specified scenario. The regenerated slide show appears substantially the same as the slide show was originally authored by the slide show creator using another rendering device. A rendering device may for example be a digital camera a desktop personal computer a laptop personal computer a television a combination of a cable set top box and a display device a combination of satellite set top box and a display device a combination of a digital video disc DVD player and a display device a hand held slide show viewing device a combination of a hand held slide show viewing device and a display device a cellular telephone an MP3 player a personal digital assistant PDA a combination of a home entertainment center control unit and a television.

A user can use a digital camera having an EVJ rendering authoring functionality to select a plurality of content files and a scenario for a slide show. The rendering device then generates an EVJ file in the proper EVJ format. To view the slide show on a rendering device the EVJ rendering authoring functionality accesses the EVJ file and parses the text in the EVJ file and from the text generates a sequence of content manipulation instructions. The content manipulation instructions are carried out by the rendering device such that the content is rendered so as to play the slide show again. Such an EVJ file can be communicated or transferred for example emailed or transferred by flash memory card from the creator of the EVJ file to a second person. The second person can then use a second rendering device that has an EVJ rendering authoring functionality to render the slide show on the second rendering device in the same way that the EVJ file was rendered by the creator on the first rendering device. Functionality in the rendering device allows an EVJ file to be edited so that when the modified EVJ file is rendered the slide show is seen in its altered form. Examples of editing that can be performed include adding images deleting images changing the order that images are rendered adding text that will be displayed during the slide show adding audio snippets deleting audio snippets changing the music that accompanies the imagery of the slide show and editing the definition of the scenario in the EVJ file.

Other embodiments and advantages are described in the detailed description below. This summary does not purport to define the invention. The invention is defined by the claims.

A container file stored on a computer readable medium the container file being readable by a rendering device the rendering device having an ability to translate a code into a corresponding sequence of image manipulation instructions wherein an image manipulation instruction is an instruction understood by the rendering device on how the rendering device shall render image information the file comprising a first image file that contains the image information and a text file containing the code wherein the text file does not contain any image manipulation instruction of the sequence of image manipulation instructions. A file stored on a computer readable medium of a rendering device the file being readable by the rendering device the file comprising a plurality of image files each image file containing image information an audio file and text instructions understandable by the rendering device the text instructions indicating how the image information in the image files is to be rendered.

Reference will now be made in detail to some embodiments of the invention examples of which are illustrated in the accompanying drawings.

Once the digital still images and the audio information is present on digital camera user uses digital camera to display the digital still images and audio information to another individual in an interesting VJ like slide show. The showing of the VJ like slide show is illustrated in . To present the slide show digital camera is coupled by cables and directly to an HDTV high definition television 1280 720 television . Cable is a YCRCB component video cable used to communicate video to television . Cable is an AV composite cable the audio part of which is used to communicate audio to television . Digital camera outputs the digital still images in a sequence in the form of a stream of video information across cable to HDTV television such that the slide show is seen on the television screen. Digital camera outputs the accompanying audio for example music and or audio snippets across cable to television and the audio is heard on the speakers of the television or other sound system used with the television. User controls the slide show using a display of the digital camera and using buttons on the digital camera.

Most if not all of the hardware necessary to provide digital camera the ability to output the video stream and audio stream is already present in conventional digital cameras for example digital still cameras employing image processing integrated circuits manufactured by NuCORE Technology Inc. of Sunnyvale CA . In the near future many consumers will have in their homes both digital cameras of this type as well as HDTV televisions. Consequently the principal added hardware cost associated with providing user the added capability of being able to show individual the VJ like slide show is cables and . Where digital camera is of a type that includes a large amount of storage space for example due to the camera including a micro hard disc drive a tremendous number of high resolution digital still images can be stored on the digital camera thereby obviating a need on the part of a consumer to purchase an additional expensive device such as an IPOD PHOTO just to store and to display digital still photographs. There is no need to capture digital still images with a first device a camera and then load the captured digital still images onto a second device an IPOD PHOTO that has adequate storage to store all the consumer s digital pictures. Digital camera performs both the image capturing function of a camera as well as the digital image storing and displaying functions of an IPOD PHOTO.

User uses the four directional buttons to identify one of the indicators. A currently identified indicator appears highlighted. The four directional buttons are usable to move the highlighting from one indicator to the next up and down a list of indicators and left and right across the columns of indicators. When user has highlighted a desired indicator user presses ENTER button to select the indicator. Once selected the indicator remains highlighted even if the directional buttons are used to move the identified indicator away to another indicator. In this way user selects a plurality of indicators for digital still images stored on digital camera . In the illustration three digital still image indicators are selected PHOTO 2.JPG PHOTO 4.JPG and PHOTO 5.JPG. The list of digital still image indicators can scroll so that a larger number of indicators than seven is available for selection even though only seven can be displayed at a time.

In the same way that user selects a plurality of digital still image indicators the user uses directional buttons and ENTER button to select one of more digital audio indicators in the present case the audio information selected is a song SONG 3 stored in MP3 format on the digital camera .

User also selects one of the listed slide show scenario indicators. One scenario may be suited for use with easy listening contemporary music such as smooth jazz. Another scenario may be more suited for use with classic symphonic music. Another scenario may be more suited for use with dance and club music with a rapid beat. Another scenario may be more suited for use with high energy rock music.

In the present example SCENARIO is selected. During this selection process the information displayed on display may also be displayed on the screen of HDTV television . Digital camera includes on screen display circuitry and an image blending capability usable for the purpose of displaying whatever is shown on display on the screen of HDTV television .

Another example of a motion primitive API is an API call to zoom up the size increase the size as displayed of a digital image. Another example of a motion primitive API is an API call to zoom down the size decrease the size as displayed of a digital image.

Another example of a motion primitive API is an API call to move a particular image to the left with respect to a background image. This operation is called panning. The panning API may be called multiple times in succession to move a particular image to the left across a background image. There is another similar API for panning to the right with respect to a background image. The background image can be another captured image or alternatively can be a solid white frame or a solid black frame.

Another example of a motion primitive API is an API call to move a particular image upward with respect to a background image. This operation is called tilting. Such a tilting motion primitive API may be used multiple times to successively move a particular image upward across a background image. There is another similar API for tilting downward with respect to a background image. The background image can be another captured image or alternatively can be a solid white frame or a solid black frame.

Another example of a motion primitive API is an API call to perform what is called filtering on a particular image. In this sense filtering involves blending with a blurring effect.

Although the layer of software is called the motion primitive API layer there are APIs presented by this layer that are not for motion primitives. There are for example APIs for controlling the audio DAC ADC and the HDTV video codec. For example one API can be called to start the decoding of audio information of a particular file. Codec software executing on processor performs the decoding function and outputs the result to the audio DAC which in turn outputs analog audio onto audio out port . Another API can be called to cause digital still image information from a particular file to be supplied to the HDTV video codec such that the codec outputs that information in the form of a video stream onto video out port .

There is an API for blending a first image with a second image. A variable field in the API call indicates the proportion in a percentage number of the resulting image that is to be of the first image. If for example the proportion is set at thirty percent then each pixel value of the first image will be multiplied by thirty percent and each corresponding pixel value of the second image will be multiplied by seventy percent and the two products will be summed to arrive at the pixel value for the resulting image. In the present embodiment this blending function is performed by processor .

The next layer of software above the motion primitive engine layer is the sequence set API layer . is a simplified diagram that illustrates seven sequence sets. Each sequence set is a sequence of elements Sequence set SET  for example defines the sequence of elements FR  an element frames in duration  FR  an element frames in duration FR  an element frames in duration and FBFR  an element frames in duration . Sequence set SET  therefore defines a total sequence of 195 frames. Each element defines how an associated set of digital images will be zoomed panned tilted rotated and blended. A sequence set and what it entails in one embodiment is described in further detail below.

The next layer see of software above the sequence set layer is the scenario layer . In the illustrated example there are N possible slide show scenarios from which a user can choose one. Each of these scenarios identifies a sequence of particular sequence sets. When one sequence set associated with a scenario is completed then the next sequence set associated with the scenario is started and so on. A scenario and what it entails is described in further detail below.

The next layer of software above the scenario layer is the scenario controller layer . This layer defines the particular digital images that are to be associated with the selected scenario. The layer also defines the particular audio information that is to be associated with the selected scenario.

The top layer of software above the scenario controller layer is the user interface UI software layer . UI layer software controls what is displayed on display during the set up of the slide show. UI layer software detects which buttons are pressed and takes appropriate action to change what is displayed on display and to set up the slide show.

Continuing on with the example of user selecting SCENARIO in the digital camera determines due to SCENARIO being selected that sequence sets SET  SET  and SET  are to be rendered and in that order. From the first sequence set SET  see the first element is element FR .

At time F the zoom ratio and rotation values remain the same so PHOTOA is not zoomed up or down in size and is not rotated. The blending ratio has however gone from a value of zero percent at the time of frame zero to a value of one hundred percent at the time of frame ten. This indicates that at the time of frame ten PHOTOA is blended with a factor of one hundred percent and the black image is blended with a factor of zero percent. Accordingly the black image at time zero is gradually blended away with PHOTOA until PHOTOA appears at time F unaffected by the black image.

At time F the zoom ratio is 115 20FR . It is therefore seen that PHOTOA is zoomed up in size so that PHOTOA appears 115 percent of its starting size at time F. Note that the same high performance zoom engine is used both to capture images as well as to perform zooming functions during a slide show.

Nothing changes from the time of frame F until time of frame F. At time F the zoom ratio is 40 35FR . PHOTOA is therefore zoomed down starting at time F and ending at time F to be forty percent of its starting size.

At time F the tilting of PHOTOA upward is begun as indicated by the left block labeled FR that appears underneath the time line. Note the starting position of the forty percent size version of PHOTOA is centered in the screen. The upward pointing arrow indicates the upward tilting of PHOTOA.

At time F the upward tilting of the forty percent size version of PHOTOA has reached the location indicated by the block below the time line labeled FR. Note that PHOTOA remains at forty percent of its ordinary size. Element FR  ends at the time of frame .

The zooming rotation blending and tilting indicated by the sequence set of are motion primitives each of which is performed by calling a corresponding motion primitive API. Although not shown here an element can also include API calls to control how the audio is output. An element can cause a certain audio file to start to be decoded and output to the television. An element can cause a volume level to be changed. An element can cause fade in and fade out audio. An element can stop the decoding of a particular audio file.

At the time of frame F the second digital image in the digital still images selected by user in this example the digital still image represented by PHOTO 4.JPG is PHOTOA. As indicated by the 40 0FR appearing in the line labeled ZOOM RATIO PHOTOA is zoomed to be forty percent of its original size. The starting position of PHOTOA is illustrated in the leftmost block labeled FR appearing below the timeline. PHOTOA starts out of the field of view and tilting starts upward with respect to the background frame.

At the time of frame F the forty percent size version of PHOTOA has reached the center of the field of view as indicated by the rightmost block labeled FR appearing below the timeline.

From the time of frame F to the time of frame F there is no change. At the time of frame F the zoom ratio is one hundred percent. Accordingly starting at time F PHOTOA is zoomed up in size so that it is one hundred percent of its original size by time F.

From the time of frame F to the time of frame F there is no change. Between the times of frames F and F the blending percentage changed from one hundred percent at time F to zero percent at time F. The one hundred percent sized version of PHOTOA is therefore seen to be blended away into a solid white background by time F. The element stops at time F.

Initially at the time of frame F the solid white frame is rendered at one hundred percent size but it is blended with a percentage of zero percent. PHOTOA on the other hand is blended with the solid black frame with a percentage of zero percent. The overall result is the solid black frame output at the time of frame F.

The blending percentage of PHOTOA versus the solid black frame however changes from zero percent at time F to one hundred percent at time F. PHOTOA is therefore seen to emerge from a black screen and appears in undarkened form by time F.

The blending percentage for the solid white frame remains at zero percent from the time of frame F to the time of frame F. From time F to time F the blending of the solid white frame changes from zero percent to one hundred percent. PHOTOA at time F is at a zoom ratio of zero as indicated by 100 0FR and at time F is at a zoom ratio of 107 as indicated by 107 11FR . PHOTOA therefore is at size at the time of frame F but it is blended with a solid white frame at time F so the result is a solid white frame.

From time F to time F the blending ratio of the solid white frame goes from one hundred percent to zero percent and the blending of PHOTOA goes from one hundred percent blending with the black frame at time F to zero percent at time F. The result is a gradual shift from an all white frame at time F to an all black frame at time F.

At the time of frame F the digital still images appear in the positions indicated in the left diagram in the leftmost block below the time line of . The arrow illustrates the direction of panning.

At the time of frame F the digital still images appear in the positions indicated in the right diagram image in the rightmost block below the time line of . The digital still image PHOTOF has moved out of the field of view and PHOTOD has moved into the field of view. Each of the digital still images PHOTOA PHOTOF are of at thirty percent size as indicated by the time line. The panning stops at the time of frame F. This can be indicated by a stop panning indicator not shown in the position rows of the time lines of PHOTOA PHOTOF.

Starting at the time of frame F only one of the digital still images PHOTOB that is in the middle of the field of view is increased from the thirty percent size to seventy percent size at the time of frame F remains at seventy percent size until the time of frame F and then is decreased in size to thirty percent size at the time of frame F. This emphasizes PHOTOB.

This condition remains until the time of frame F when the panning resumes. The resumption of panning can be indicated by a start panning indicator not shown in the position rows of the time lines of PHOTOA PHOTOF. The row of digital still images PHOTOA PHOTOF is seen to start to pan to the right across the field of view at time F. The digital still images PHOTOA PHOTOF appear in the positions indicated in the left diagram in the rightmost block below the time line of . The arrow illustrates the direction of panning. The panning stops at the time of frame FR. At the time of frame FR the digital still images PHOTOA PHOTOF appear in the positions indicated in the right diagram in the rightmost block below the time line of . From the time of frame F to the time of frame F the positions of the images remains fixed.

After sequence set SET  has been rendered the next sequence set of SCENARIO sequence set SET  is rendered. Then the last sequence set of the scenario sequence set SET  is rendered. This completes the slide show.

At any time in the slide show the user can halt the slide show by pressing the ENTER button . Pressing the ENTER button again restarts the slide show from the point in the scenario where the slide show was halted. The ENTER button acts as a toggle button for this stop restart feature.

Digital camera has a pointer overlay that can be superimposed over whatever images are being displayed on television screen during the slide show. The pointer overlay can be made to appear when the slide show is in progress and can also be made to appear when the slide show is stopped due to use of the ENTER button as set forth above. To cause the pointer overlay to appear the user manipulates one of the directional buttons or manipulates the pointer navigating nipple . Microcontroller detects movement of one of these buttons and informs the image processing integrated circuit via the serial bus and serial interface circuitry . The processor within the image processing integrated circuit in conjunction with codec superimposes the pointer on the digital image being displayed on television screen so that the pointer appears as an overlay. Accordingly pointer information is embedded in the video stream sent to television so that the pointer will appear on the screen of television . The user can move the pointer around the television screen of television by manipulating the directional buttons and or the pointer navigating nipple. The pointer can be made to disappear by having the user take an appropriate action for example by pressing the ENTER button when the pointer is being displayed. In this case pressing the ENTER button does not stop or start the slide show but rather causes the pointer to disappear from the screen of the television.

The slide show as orchestrated by the selected scenario can in some embodiments be customized. In one embodiment user can stop the slide show at a point where customization is to occur by pressing the ENTER button . Once the slide show is stopped user presses the MENU button thereby causing a menu of customization options to appear.

Another option on the menu of is to move the current digital image one image later in the sequence of images. To do this the directional buttons are pressed to move the highlighted menu option onto the MOVE PICTURE LATER option. Pressing the ENTER button performs the operation.

Another option is to move the current digital image one image earlier in the sequence of images. To do this the directional buttons are pressed to move the highlighted menu option onto the MOVE PICTURE EARLIER option. Pressing the ENTER button performs the operation.

Another option is to capture an audio clip. To do this the directional buttons are pressed to move the highlighted menu option onto the CAPTURE AUDIO CLIP option. Pressing the ENTER button causes the digital camera to start capturing audio from microphone . The capturing may for example stop after a certain amount of time or when the sound being recorded drops below a certain loudness threshold for a predetermined amount of time. The last captured audio clip can be added into the slide show starting at the time when the slide show was halted by selecting the ADD AUDIO CLIP option and pressing the ENTER button. The added audio clip is output to the television rather than the selected SONG 3.MP3 until the audio clip reaches its end in which case the playing of the SONG 3.MP3 resumes. If an audio clip is being played at the time when the slide show was halted the audio clip can be deleted from the slide show by selecting the DELETE AUDIO CLIP and pressing the ENTER button.

The volume of the accompanying audio can be changed by stopping the slide show selecting VOLUME UP or VOLUME DOWN on the menu of and then pressing the ENTER button.

The customization of the scenario is stored in the digital camera. To replay the slide show with the scenario as modified the user presses the MENU button which toggles the menu displayed to the menu of . The user then presses the ENTER button without making any PICTURE MUSIC or SCENARIO changes. This causes the last selected scenario SCENARIO to be replayed. When the scenario is replayed it is replayed as customized by the user. The menu options of are merely some of the possible ways that a slide show scenario can be changed by a user or customized. The options of are presented as examples. Other ways of customizing a slide show can be listed on the menu of .

In one embodiment the digital camera has the ability to detect a human face in a digital still image and to use the location of the detected face to control how the digital image is zoomed panned tilted or otherwise manipulated in the slide show. The existence of a face in an image can for example be detected by processing the image to identify areas of image pixels that are in a skin tone color range. The bottom edges of these areas are then determined. The bottom edges are then compared with an arcuate U shaped template of a human chin to see if one of the bottom edges matches the template. A correlation value between the bottom edge and the template is determined. If the correlation value is over a threshold then the skin tone region is judged to be a face. For additional details on how face detection can be performed see 1 U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 970 804 entitled Template Matching Method And Target Image Area Extraction Apparatus filed Oct. 21 2004 the content of which is incorporated herein by reference 2 the article entitled A Real Time Multi Face Detection Technique Using Positive Negative Lines of Face Template by Yuichi Hori et al. Proceedings of the International Conference of Pattern Recognition ICPR 04 vol. 1 no. 1 pages 765 768 2004 the content of which is found in provisional patent application 60 654 709 that is incorporated herein by reference and 3 the slides entitled Using Genetic Algorithm As An Application of Wireless Interconnect Technologies for LSI Chip by Yuichi Hori the content of which is found in provisional patent application 60 654 709 that is incorporated herein by reference .

If for example the scenario of the slide show defines a zooming into a particular location of an image and if the image is determined to include a human face as described above then the location being zoomed into is automatically set to be the location of the detected face. Similarly if the scenario of the slide show defines a zooming out from a particular location of an image and if the image is determined to include a human face as described above then the location from which the zooming out occurs is automatically set to be the location of the detected face. If another motion primitive is to be performed and that motion primitive can be adjusted to emphasize one part of an image over another then the location where the face was detected can be used to emphasize the part of the image containing the human face.

In one embodiment the audio information selected in for accompanying of the slide show is preprocessed to detect a tempo of the audio information. The envelope of the audio loudness can for example be analyzed in the frequency domain so that a dominant frequency such as for example a drum beat is detected. The timing of this beat of the audio is stored with the audio information. When the scenario is selected and the slide show is started the result of the previous audio analysis is used to control the rate of change of the images in the slide show. In one example the appearance and changing of digital images is timed to coincide with the detected audio beat.

The features described above combine to make the slide show generated by digital camera of more VJ like less repetitive and less boring than a conventional slide show as generated by an IPOD PHOTO. By providing the slide show generating capability in the digital camera used to capture the images a consumer need not purchase an additional costly device such as an IPOD PHOTO just to be able to generate a slide show that is viewable on the television. Where digital camera has a large storage capacity the often onerous task of having to transfer captured digital images from a camera or personal computer to another device such as an IPOD PHOTO that has more storage capacity is reduced or eliminated. Digital camera can both store a large collection of digital images as well as generate interesting VJ like slide shows that can be viewed on a television without involving additional electronic devices.

In one alternative embodiment the structure of is modified to include a motion primitive script layer. The motion primitive script layer appears above the dark solid horizontal line in and below the sequence set layer . Motion primitive engine is not provided but rather box is a motion primitive interpreter. The motion primitive interpreter interprets a motion primitive script and as a result instructs the lower level hardware layer how to carry out appropriate motion primitives specified in the script.

Container file contains a plurality of content files and an amount of text that defines a slide show scenario. In the illustrated example there are six content files . Content files are JPEG files of still image information. Content files and are .MP3 files containing digital music information. The text that defines the slide show is present in the form of a text file . Text file is referred to here as a scenario file. In addition to text file and the content files container file may also include another text file called a playlist file. The playlist file contains a list of file names of content files where the content in the content files will be rendered during the slide show.

In the present example after the user plugs memory card into slot in HDTV the user uses remote control device to initiate the EVJ rendering authoring functionality in accessing and reading the EVJ file .

EVJ rendering authoring functionality in HDTV begins parsing the text in the scenario file . In the illustrated example scenario file defines the scenario that was previously selected by the user of the digital camera where the scenario is a sequence of sequence sets and where each sequence set is defined as a sequence of elements. EVJ rendering authoring functionality reads the text of the textual scenario file in order top down order in . This parsing of a first bit of the text in the textual scenario file is step in .

A code for an element is found in the text scenario file between a tag and a tag. This code is FR  . EVJ rendering authoring functionality parses through the text and identifies this code step in . Code is a code for the first element element FR  in the first sequence set sequence set SET  illustrated in .

EVJ rendering authoring functionality contains information on how to translate each element code that might appear in a scenario file into a corresponding sequence of content manipulation instructions. Content manipulation instructions may include instructions to blend images from image files zoom an image from an image file pan an image from an image file tilt an image from an image file flip an image from an image file rotate an image from an image file start playing audio from an audio file stop playing audio from an audio file change the volume of audio being rendered display text on the screen blend an audio snippet from an audio file with music from another audio files and so forth. Content may be still image information video information audio snippet information music and textual information.

In the illustrated example EVJ file does not contain a list of content manipulation instructions for rendering the 15FR03 element. This information is however known to the EVJ rendering authoring functionality . EVJ rendering authoring functionality translates the code into an appropriate sequence of content manipulation instructions step of . The content manipulation instructions are then carried out by the EVJ rendering authoring functionality in order and at the appropriate times so as to render the content identified by the playlist file in accordance with the element step in . The EVJ rendering authoring functionality repeats this process parsing through the text of scenario file in order. Where rendering of an element calls for an additional image the additional image is the image contained in the next image file listed in playlist file . The images that appear in the slide show are therefore rendered in the order indicated in playlist file . Similarly when rendering of an element calls for an additional amount of audio to be played the additional audio is the audio contained in the next audio file listed in playlist file .

In one embodiment scenario file includes a hierarchical definition of a scenario where one portion of the scenario file points to another portion of the scenario file. A sequence set is defined to be a sequence of elements where the elements are taken from a group of predetermined elements known to the EVJ rendering authoring functionalities of rendering devices. Multiple such sequence sets are defined in the scenario file. A scenario is defined to be a sequence of selected ones of the defined sequence sets. Once a sequence set is defined that definition can be referenced multiple times in the definition of the scenario.

When an EVJ file is read by an EVJ rendering device and is found not to include a scenario file or where the EVJ rendering device is unable to decipher the scenario file then the EVJ rendering device uses a default scenario to render the content found in the EVJ file. The EVJ rendering device stores information on the default scenario so that the default scenario need not be included in the EVJ file.

In addition to the tags illustrated in EVJ container file includes tags that identify a creator name field a created date field a modified date field and a size field. EVJ container file also contains a field that contains a code where the code indicates baseline hardware capabilities necessary to properly render the file. The code may for example indicate that any images contained in the file are of no more than a certain resolution or that the images are in a certain format for example 4 2 2 .

In one embodiment EVJ rendering authoring functionality of a rending device is usable to view a slide show stop the slide show at a desired point for example using remote control device identify a content being rendered at the time in the slide show when the slide show was stopped select the file name that contains the identified content and extract the content file. A copy of the content file may for example then be stored on the rendering device as a separate file from the EVJ file. Using this mechanism a person viewing a slide show can extract a file containing a desired still image seen in the slide show. The file once extracted and copied can be transferred from device to device as any other file.

In one embodiment a user can use the rendering device to view the text in the EVJ file to edit the text and to store the modified EVJ file. The order of images appearing when the EVJ file is rendered can be changed by viewing the playlist and changing the order of the content file names appearing in the playlist and then saving the modified version of the EVJ file. Content file names can be removed from a playlist in this fashion and content file names can be added in this fashion. Where the file name of a content file is added to a playlist the identified content file can also be added to the EVJ file using the rendering device. All of these editing functions can be controlled using the remote control device . Using remote control device an EVJ file can be rendered altered rendered again altered again and so forth such that the ultimate EVJ file is customized in a manner desired by the user. An ordinary text editor program can be used to edit a text file within an EVJ file. An EVJ file can be copied stored and transferred from computer to computer as other types of files are commonly copied stored and transferred. An EVJ file for a slide show can for example be generated by a first person using a first rendering device the resulting EVJ file can then be emailed from the first person to a second person and then the second person can use a second rendering device to read the EVJ file and render content contained in the EVJ file so as to replay the slide show.

A personal desktop computer is shown in to illustrate the point that an ordinary personal computer can be a rendering device. The EVJ rendering authoring functionality can be a software implementation such that no special hardware other than standard personal computer hardware is required to implement the rendering device. Although the mode of transferring the EVJ file from one rendering device to another rendering device in the example of is a flash memory card this mode is presented only as an example. Any mechanism for communicating files from one electronic device to another can be employed.

A rendering device may have a capability of storing the slide show video stream on an optical disc such as a standard DVD optical disc. The slide show can then be viewed by simply playing the DVD for example using a DVD player and a television .

The EVJ rendering authoring functionality in television may be implemented using the very same image processing integrated circuit employed in digital camera . By using the same integrated circuit in a television rendering device that is already in use in digital cameras non recurring engineering costs associated with building the EVJ functionality into the television are reduced. Where increased volumes of integrated circuit are manufactured due to the use of the same integrated circuit in televisions and cameras the unit cost of producing integrated circuit can be reduced when compared to the cost of producing integrated circuit just for use in digital cameras.

Although the present invention has been described in connection with certain specific embodiments for instructional purposes the present invention is not limited thereto. Accordingly various modifications adaptations and combinations of various features of the described embodiments can be practiced without departing from the scope of the invention as set forth in the claims.

