---

title: Apparatus and method for generating electric energy in a fluid environment
abstract: Apparatus for generating electrical energy in a fluid environment, the apparatus including a wing member for disposition in the fluid and pivotally movable about an axis in response to flow of the fluid thereabout, connector rods each pivotally mounted at a first end thereof on the wing on opposite sides of the axis, a crank member attached to a second end of each of the connector rods and rotatable about a pivot axis by movement of the attached connector rod, a housing supporting the wing member, a gear system disposed in the housing, an axle interconnecting each of the crank members and the gear system, and an electrical generator disposed in the housing and driven by the gear system.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07311496&OS=07311496&RS=07311496
owner: The United States of America represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07311496
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050314
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The invention relates to the generation of electrical energy and is directed more particularly to an apparatus and method for generating electric energy in a fluid environment such as in shore and harbor areas rivers ocean bays and inlets and ocean off shore.

Undersea communications networks and sensors deployed by the United States Navy require a source of electrical power. Typically such power is provided by shore or ship based generators and or batteries housed in network nodes and in sensors.

There is a need for the generation of the electrical power needs of underwater sensors instruments and communications nodes locally. Local electrical power is needed to support sensor functions recharge power supplies of garaged unmanned underwater vehicles acoustic communication links and for deploying and retrieving sea surface buoys which in turn establish satellite communication links and to provide local computer power for data fusion and other system functions.

An object of the invention is therefore to provide an apparatus for generating electric energy in an under sea environment the apparatus requiring no outside source of fuel or power.

A further object of the invention is to provide a method for generating electric energy in an under water environment by means of a self powered apparatus.

With the above and other objects in view as will hereinafter appear a feature of the invention is the provision of an apparatus for generating electrical energy in a fluid environment. The apparatus includes a wing member for disposition in the fluid and pivotally movable about an axis in response to flow of the fluid thereabout. Connecting rods are each pivotally mounted at a first end thereof on the wing on opposite sides of the axis a crank member is attached to a second end of each of the connector rods and is rotatable about a crank member pivot axis by movement of the attached connector rod. A housing supports the wing member a gear system disposed in the housing and an axle interconnects each of the crank members and the gear system. An electrical generator is disposed in the housing and driven by the gear system.

In accordance with a further feature of the invention there is provided an apparatus for generating electrical energy in a fluid environment. The apparatus includes a wing member for disposition in the fluid and having a hydrodynamic axis about which the wing member is movable in pivotal fashion in response to flow of the fluid thereabout two connector rods each pivotally mounted at a first end thereof on the wing at respective points removed in opposite directions from the hydrodynamic axis a first crank member to which a second end of a first of the connector rods is pivotally fixed at a selected distance from a pivot axis of the first crank member a second crank member to which a second end of a second of the connector rods is pivotally fixed at the selected distance from a pivot axis of the second crank member a housing for supporting the wing member and a gear system disposed in the housing. Each of the crank members is fixed to an axle extending into the housing and connected to the gear system and an electrical generator is disposed in the housing and driven by the gear system to produce electrical energy. Movement of the wing about the hydrodynamic axis thereof causes movement of the connector rods which causes movement of the crank members fixed upon the axles the gear system being actuated by the rotation of the axles to drive the electrical generator.

In accordance with a still further feature of the invention there is provided a method for generating electrical energy in a fluid environment. The method includes the steps of providing an assembly comprising an apparatus for generating electrical energy in a fluid environment. The apparatus includes a wing member for disposition in the fluid and pivotally movable about a hydrodynamic center axis in response to flow of the fluid thereabout connector rods each pivotally mounted at a first end thereof on the wing on opposite sides of the hydrodynamic center axis a crank member attached to a second end of each of the connector rods and rotatable about a crank member pivot axis by movement of the attached connecting rod a housing supporting the wing member a gear system disposed in the housing an axle interconnecting each of the crank members and the gear system an electrical generator disposed in the housing and driven by the gear system and a shell disposed around the crank member the housing and portions of the connector rods and axles. The method includes the further steps of placing the shell in the fluid with the wing held by the first ends of the connecting rods at a disposition in the fluid spaced from the shell the wing being free to move pivotally about the wing hydrodynamic center axis in response to flow of the fluid and providing an output line from the generator to a selected electricity consumer.

The above and other features of the invention including various novel details of construction and combinations of parts and method steps will now be more particularly described with reference to the accompanying drawings and pointed out in the claims. It will be understood that the particular device and method embodying the invention are shown by way of illustration only and not as limitations of the invention. The principles and features of this invention may be employed in various and numerous embodiments without departing from the scope of the invention.

Referring to it will be seen that an illustrative apparatus includes a shell having a generally domed carapace portion shaped similarly to the carapace of a sea turtle. The shell further includes a plastron or bottom portion not shown shaped similarly to the plastron of a sea turtle.

A wing is mounted at a location spaced from the carapace portion of the shell . The wing is supported by a forwardly disposed pair of connector rods each rod of the pair being designated herein as . This compound designation is sometimes employed herein to enable making collective reference to structural elements as well as more specific reference positional species of the structure elements. Wing is further supported by a rearwardly disposed pair of connector rods each rod of the pair being designated . Note that only one rod of the pair of rearwardly disposed pair of rods is exposed in . These rods are pivotally affixed to the wing and extending from the surface of the wing which faces the shell . The wing is further supported by a trailing arm pivotally fixed to the wing and at an end remote from the wing pivotally fixed at a pivot point to a post or fin upstanding from the shell and pivotal about point .

As shown in the shell is adapted to rest on a sea bed or the like. In placement of the apparatus the apparatus may be released at the water surface and utilizing the wing glide through the water until coming to rest on the bed of the body of water.

As shown in the wing is provided with a forward pivot axis extending wing tip to wing tip proximate the forward edge of the wing. Disposed aft of the forward pivot axis by about one fourth of the fore and aft dimension of the wing is a hydrodynamic center axis of the wing extending parallel to the forward pivot axis . A forward end of the trailing arm is pivotally connected to the wing at the center of the hydrodynamic axis i.e. the center of the tip to tip wing length. Disposed aft of the hydrodynamic axis by about one fourth of the fore and aft dimension of the wing is an after pivot axis extending parallel to the forward pivot axis and hydrodynamic axis . The pivot axis is therefore at about the fore and aft mid point of the wing.

Referring to it will be seen that the connector rods are pivotally connected to crank members illustrated in as crank wheels. The crank wheels are of equal diameter and the connector rods are attached to the crank wheels at respective points on the wheels disposed equal distance from the centers of the wheels.

Alternatively the crank members may be crank rods shown in phantom in . The crank rods are of equal length. The connector rods are attached to the crank rods at respective points of the crank rods disposed at equal distances from the pivot axes of the crank rods . Note that in A and axle element pivot axis and sealed bearing may be represented by a single large dot. 

Referring now to FIGS. and A a water tight housing is mounted within the shell . The crank members are each mounted on an end of an axle . The axles are mounted in water tight bearings and extend into the interior of the housing . The axles are each connected to a reduction gear . Note that in axel pivot axis and sealed bearings are represented by a single large dot. 

In the embodiment shown in the drawings four of the connector rods are connected to the wing two at the forward pivot axis and two at the after pivot axis . The connector rods are each connected to a crank member which in turn is mounted on an axle extending through a sealed bearing and into the housing .

The two starboard connector rods are each connected to a starboard crank member the two starboard crank members being mounted on the starboard side of the housing . Similarly the two port connector rods are each connected to a port crank member the two port crank members being mounted on the port side of the housing .

The forwardmost pair of crank members are each mounted on a forwardmost axle and the after pair of crank members are each mounted on an after axle . The forwardmost axle is further affixed to a forwardmost reduction gear while the after axle is affixed to an after reduction gear . The reduction gears are each engaged with an idler gear . Fixed in the hub of the idler gear is an axle having a flywheel fixed thereon and extending into an electrical generator .

The apparatus is intended to supply power to a consumer outside of the apparatus. Output line is provided for connection to such consumer which as noted hereinabove can be a sensor a communication device an underwater vehicle and the like.

While it is expected that the apparatus will in most instances be deployed to rest on a seabed or the like it is contemplated that the apparatus will be used on the hulls of water borne vessels such as barges and the like. In such instances the apparatus will be fixed to the hull of the vessel with the wing extending downwardly or outwardly from the hull of the vessel as depicted in .

In use the apparatus is typically placed upon a seabed or released at or near the water surface and allowed to glide to the seabed. The apparatus will typically align itself such that the wing forward edge is normal to the fluid flow direction. The fluid flow exerts on the wing a lifting force which is normal to the direction of fluid flow a drag force which is exerted on the wing in the direction of fluid flow and a pitching moment which acts at the hydrodynamic axis of the wing and tends to increase the angle of incidence of the wing . The pitching moment is independent of the lifting force.

The connector rods allow the wing to move in a vertical swimming motion induced by the lift force while the trailing arm steadies the wing against horizontal motion that would otherwise be induced by the drag force.

The pivot points of the connector rods on the wing are symmetrically located forward and aft of the wing hydrodynamic axis . The trailing arm pivot point is located on the hydrodynamic axis . The after end of the trailing arm is pivotally connected to the fin . The wing supporting connector rods drive a transmission system to cause the electrical generator to rotate in response to the wing swimming motion.

The wing is free to pivot about the connector rods and the trailing rigid arm such that the angle of the wing relative to the direction of fluid flow may oscillate in a smooth symmetrical fashion between a peak upward angle of attack that results in an upward directed flow induced force on the wing a neutral high position that results in no flow induced force on the wing a peak downward angle of attack that results in a downward directed flow induced force on the wing and a neutral low position that results in no flow induced force on the wing . As the oscillation continues the force caused by the fluid flow varies in a nearly sinusoidal manner between a peak upward force and a peak downward force. The symmetry of the structure insures that the magnitude of the peak upward force is substantially equal to the magnitude of the peak downward force. The magnitude of the total flow induced force depends upon the fluid flow velocity the area of the wing and the angle of attack of the wing relative to the direction of fluid flow.

An alternative system not shown includes a plurality of wings each connected to another by a plurality of connector rods and each held in fore and aft place by a pivoting rigid trailing arm so that all wings are free to move in parallel with each other and flow induced forces on the wings result in appropriate forces on the crank members. The flow induced total force is proportional to the total area of the plurality of wings.

The above described apparatus is adapted for use in seawater where corrosion and organic growth are major concerns. The apparatus permits most of the mechanical parts to be disposed out of the water environment. Six pivot points are located in the water four to support the wing by means of the connector rods and two to allow the rigid trailing arm which holds the wing against the force of the water current to move through a small angle to follow the up and down motion of the wing . If desired these six pivot points can be sealed not shown and permanently lubricated for close to friction free operation.

The wing may also be used for lift for navigating the apparatus from one site to another. After reaching an operational site the wing is used to generate electrical power from local tidal currents.

Using the above described apparatus the invention provides a method for converting the undulating motion of a wing suspended in a moving fluid into circular motion of a flywheel which is used to drive an electrical generator. The undulating motion is similar to the action of a whale or other sea creature with a horizontal tail fin.

It will be understood that many additional changes in the details materials steps and arrangement of parts which have been herein described and illustrated in order to explain the nature of the invention may be made by those skilled in the art within the principles and scope of the invention as expressed in the appended claims. For example while the apparatus is immediately intended for use of the type set forth hereinabove it is recognized that the apparatus described herein can be upscaled to provide power similar to current off shore wind mills but with no danger to birds which is a problem with off shore wind farms .

