---

title: Methods and compositions for treatment of myotonia
abstract: The present invention provides methods and compositions for the treatment of diseases associated with aberrant microsatellite expansions. Methods of the present invention comprise the use of recombinant adeno-associated virus vectors containing a transgene encoding at least one muscleblind protein. The present invention also provides an animal model for a disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07964570&OS=07964570&RS=07964570
owner: University of Florida Research Foundation, Inc.
number: 07964570
owner_city: Gainesville
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050310
---
The present application is a U.S. national stage application based on PCT US05 007631 entitled Methods and Compositions for Treatment of Diseases Associated with Aberrant Microsatellite Expansion filed Mar. 10 2005 which claims priority to U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 551 748 filed on Mar. 10 2004 the entire contents of each of which is incorporated herein by reference.

Each of the applications and patents cited in this text as well as each document or reference cited in each of the applications and patents including during the prosecution of each issued patent application cited documents and each of the PCT and foreign applications or patents corresponding to and or claiming priority from any of these applications and patents and each of the documents cited or referenced in each of the application cited documents are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and may be employed in the practice of the invention. More generally documents or references are cited in this text either in a Reference List before the claims or in the text itself and each of these documents or references herein cited references as well as each document or reference cited in each of the herein cited references including any manufacturer s specifications instructions etc. is hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference.

This work was supported in part by a grant from the National Institutes of Health U54 NS48843 . The United States Government has certain rights to the invention

Aberrant expansion of microsatellites in DNA is associated with a number of neurological and neuromuscular diseases O Donnell W T Warren S T 2002 25 315 . These diseases are caused by microsatellite repeat expansions in coding and non coding regions. The characterized coding region expansion diseases include Dentatorubral pallidoluysian atrophy DRPLA Huntington chorea HD Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy OPMD Spinobulbar muscular atrophy SBMA and Spinocerebellar ataxia types 1 2 3 6 7 and 17 SCA1 SCA2 SCA3 SCA6 SCA7 SCA17 . The characterized non coding region expansion diseases include Fragile XA Fragile XE Friedrich s ataxia Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 DM1 Myotonic Dystrophy type 2 DM2 and Spinocerebellar ataxia types 8 10 and 12 SCA8 SCA10 SCA12 . Huntington s disease like type 2 HDL2 is likewise caused by a microsatellite expansion.

Microsatellite expansion diseases have been most commonly associated with trinucleotide expansion mutations. In fact at least 16 of the microsatellite expansion diseases reported to date have been characterized as trinucleotide expansion diseases. More recently however microsatellite expansion diseases have also been associated with tetranucleotide and even pentanucleotide expansion mutations. Disease severity and age of onset have both been related to the size of the expansion mutation eventually leading to muscle weakness and premature cataract formation and in severe cases to hypotonia muscle heart block and nervous system dysfunction Korade Mirnics Z Babitzke P Hoffman E 1998 26 6 1363 1368 .

Myotonic dystrophy dystrophia myotonica DM is a multisystemic dominantly inherited disorder often characterized by myotonia or delayed muscle relaxation due to repetitive action potentials in myofibers and muscle degeneration. Manifestations of DM may also include heart block ocular cataracts hypogonadism and nervous system dysfunction.

Myotonic dystrophy type 1 DM1 is caused by a trinucleotide CTG expansion n 50 to 3000 in the 3 untranslated region 3 UTR of the Dystrophia myotonica protein kinase DMPK gene. Myotonic dystrophy type 2 DM2 is caused by a tetranucleotide CCTG expansion n 75 to 11 000 in the first intron of zinc finger protein 9 ZNF9 gene Ranum L P W Day J W 2002 12 266 271 .

Although the expansions are located on different chromosomes there appears to be a common pathogenic mechanism involving the accumulation of transcripts into discrete nuclear RNA foci containing long tracts of CUG or CCUG repeats expressed from the expanded allele Liquori C L Ricker K Moseley M L Jacobsen J F Kress W Naylor S L Day J W Ranum L P 2001 293 864 867 .

In effect both DM1 and DM2 mutant transcripts accumulate as foci within muscle nuclei Liquori et al. 2001 . An indication that these transcripts are pathogenic comes from studies on HSAmice which express a large CTG repeat in the 3 UTR of a human skeletal actin transgene Mankodi A Logigian E Callahan L McClain C White R Henderson D Krym M Thornton C A 2000 289 1769 1773 . These transgenic mice develop myonuclear RNA foci myotonia and degenerative muscle changes similar to those seen in human DM. The myotonia in HSAmice is caused by loss of skeletal muscle chloride ClC 1 channels due to aberrant pre mRNA splicing Mankodi A Takahashi M P Jiang H Beck C L Bowers W J Moxley R T Cannon S C Thornton C A 2002 10 35 44 . Similar ClC 1 splicing defects exist in DM1 and DM2. However the connection between accumulation of mutant DM transcripts in the nucleus and altered splice site selection has not been established Faustino N A Cooper T A 2003 17 419 437 .

The RNA gain of function hypothesis proposes that mutant DM transcripts alter the function and localization of alternative splicing regulators which are critical for normal RNA processing. Consistent with this proposal misregulated alternative splicing in DM1 has been demonstrated for six pre mRNAs cardiac troponin T cTNT insulin receptor IR muscle specific chloride channel ClC 1 tau myotubularin related protein 1 MTMR1 and fast skeletal troponin T TNNT3 Kanadia R N Johnstone K A Mankodi A Lungu C Thornton C A Esson D Timmers A M Hauswirth W W Swanson M S 2003 302 1978 1980 .

In all cases normal mRNA splice variants are produced but the normal developmental splicing pattern is disrupted resulting in expression of fetal protein isoforms that are inappropriate for adult tissues. The insulin resistance and myotonia observed in DM1 correlate with the disruption of splicing of two pre mRNA targets IR and ClC 1 respectively Savkur R S Philips A V Cooper T A Dalton J C Moseley M L Ranum L P Day J W 2004 74 1309 1313 .

The mechanism by which expanded repeats alter the regulation of pre mRNA alternative splicing is unclear. Two families of RNA binding proteins have been implicated in DM1 pathogenesis CUG BP1 and ETR 3 like factors CELF and muscleblind like MBNL proteins Ladd A N Charlet B N Cooper T A 2001 21 1285 1296 . Six CELF also called BRUNOL genes have been identified in humans Ladd A N Nguyen N H Malhotra K Cooper T A 2004 279 17756 17764 . All six CELF proteins have been shown to regulate pre mRNA alternative splicing and two CUG BP1 and ETR 3 CUG BP2 have been shown to have cytoplasmic RNA associated functions Mukhopadhyay D Houchen C W Kennedy S Dieckgraefe B K Anant S 2003 11 113 126 .

A functional link has been established between splicing regulation by CELF proteins and DM1 pathogenesis. CUG BP1 regulates alternative splicing of at least three of the pre mRNAs cTNT IR and ClC 1 that are misregulated in DM striated muscle Charlet B N Savkur R S Singh G Philips A V Grice E A Cooper T A 2002b 10 45 53 . The splicing patterns observed for all three pre mRNAs are consistent with increased CUG BP1 activity and an increase in CUG BP1 steady state levels in DM1 striated muscle Charlet B N Savkur R S Singh G Philips A V Grice E A Cooper T A 2002b 10 45 53 .

Furthermore cTNT minigenes expressed in DM1 muscle cultures or cTNT and IR pre mRNAs co expressed with CUG repeat RNA in normal cells reproduce the aberrant splicing patterns observed for endogenous genes in DM cells Philips A V Timchenko L T Cooper T A 1998 280 737 741 Savkur R S Philips A V Cooper T A 2001 29 40 47 . The trans dominant effects of endogenous or co expressed CUG repeat RNA on cTNT and IR splicing regulation require the intronic CUG BP1 binding sites indicating that binding by CUG BP1 and or other CELF family members to their cognate intronic regulatory elements is required for induction of aberrant splicing regulation by CUG repeat RNA Philips A V Timchenko L T Cooper T A 1998 280 737 741 Savkur R S Philips A V Cooper T A 2001 29 40 47 .

The CNS symptoms of DM1 may include cognitive impairment hypersomnolence heightened sensitivity to anesthetic agents central hypoventilation neuroendocrine dysfunction and effects on personality and behavior reviewed by Harper Harper P. S. 2001 . Saunders London and Ashizawa Ashizawa T. 1998 55 291 293 . Some of these effects such as mental retardation in individuals with congenital DM1 occur during development Dyken P. R. Harper P. S. 1973 23 465 473 . Other symptoms such as hypersomnolence appear during adult life. The mechanism and neuropathologic correlates for CNS involvement in DM1 are unknown.

It is presently unclear whether any steps in the pathogenic sequence of poly CUG expression formation of RNA inclusions sequestration of RNA binding proteins and disruption of alternative splicing can take place in the CNS. There is controversy about which cells in the mature brain if any express DMPK Lam L. T. Pham Y. C. Nguyen T. M. and Morris G. E. 2000 9 2167 2173 .

Microtubule associated protein tau MAPT pre mRNA is alternatively spliced at exons 2 3 and 10 Goedert M. Spillantini M. G. Jakes R. Rutherford D. and Crowther R. A. 1989 3 519 526 . Tau transcripts in fetal brain do not include exon 10 whereas 50 of transcripts in adult brain include this exon which encodes an additional microtubule binding domain Hong M. Zhukareva V. Vogelsberg Ragaglia V. Wszokek Z. Reed L. Miller B. I. Geschwind D. H. Bird T. D. McKeel D. Goate A. et al. 1998 282 1914 1917 . Alternative splicing of exons 2 and 3 also is developmentally regulated neither exon is included in the fetus adults mainly include exon 2 .

The relative proportion of tau splice products is tightly regulated as shown by kindreds with frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism FTDP 17 due to mutations in MAPT. Silent mutations in MAPT exon 10 or in the flanking intron lead to FTDP 17 by disrupting cis elements that regulate splicing of tau pre mRNA D Souza I. Poorkaj P. Hong M. Nochlin D. Lee V. M. Bird T. D. and Schellenberg G. D. 1999 96 5598 5603 . Usually these mutations lead to increased inclusion of exon 10 Lee V. M. Goedert M. and Trojanowski J. Q. 2001 24 1121 1159 . However some MAPT mutations that segregate with FTDP 17 have the opposite effect of reducing exon 10 inclusion Stanford P. M. Shepherd C. E. Halliday G. M. Brooks W. S. Schofield P. W. Brodaty H. Martins R. N. Kwok J. B. and Schofield P. R. 2003 126 814 826 .

RNA binding proteins that regulate alternative splicing bind to sequence specific elements in the pre mRNA to enhance or repress inclusion of alternative exons. Aberrant regulation of alternative splicing can cause the expression of inappropriate splicing patterns leading to human disease Faustino and Cooper 2003 . Myotonic dystrophy constitutes an example of a disease that alters the function of RNA binding proteins to cause misregulated alternative splicing.

The present disclosure provides methods and compositions for treating diseases associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion employing recombinant adeno associated virus rAAV expressing human muscleblind MBNL proteins.

One embodiment of the invention is directed to a method of treating a disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion comprising administering to a mammal in need thereof a therapeutically effective amount of recombinant adeno associated virus rAAV containing a transgene that encodes a protein selected from the group consisting of MBNL1 MBNL2 MBNL3 and combinations thereof. In one embodiment of the invention treating comprises ameliorating or eliminating the symptoms of a neuromuscular or neurological condition caused by the aberrant microsatellite expansion. In an additional embodiment of the invention the neuromuscular condition is myotonic dystrophy.

In other embodiments of the invention treating comprises reversing the mis splicing of the Clcn1 skeletal muscle chloride channel reversing the mis splicing of the Amyloid beta A4 precursor protein APP reversing the mis splicing of the NMDA receptor NR1 GRIN1 reversing the mis splicing of the Microtubule associated protein tau MAPT or reversing the mis splicing of TNNT2 cTNT respectively.

One embodiment of the invention is directed to a method of treating a disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion comprising administering to a mammal in need thereof a therapeutically effective amount of recombinant adeno associated virus rAAV containing a transgene that encodes MBNL1.

One embodiment of the invention is directed to a method of treating a disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion comprising administering to a mammal in need thereof a therapeutically effective amount of recombinant adeno associated virus rAAV containing a transgene that encodes a protein selected from the group consisting of MBNL1 MBNL2 MBNL3 and combinations thereof wherein the mammal is human. In another embodiment of the invention the mammal in need of treatment has RNA inclusions in neuronal cells.

One embodiment of the invention is directed to pharmaceutical compositions comprising a recombinant adeno associated virus rAAV containing a transgene that encodes at least one protein selected from the group consisting of MBNL1 MBNL2 MBNL3 and combinations thereof. In another embodiment of the invention the protein is MBNL1.

The present disclosure also provides a mouse model for myotonic dystrophy wherein the mouse has a substantial deletion of a muscleblind exon in its genome. Such an animal model for human disease allows the identification and testing of potential therapeutic and preventive agents.

Accordingly one embodiment of the invention is directed to a mouse model for disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion comprising a mouse having a substantial deletion of Mbnl1 exon 3 E3 in the mouse genome wherein said mouse exhibits symptoms typical of a disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion in humans. In another embodiment the invention is directed to a cell isolated from said mouse. In one embodiment of the invention the mouse exhibits symptoms such as muscle weakness and ocular cataracts.

In one embodiment the invention is directed to a mouse model for disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion comprising a mouse having a substantial deletion of Mbnl1 exon 3 E3 in the mouse genome wherein said mouse exhibits symptoms typical of a disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion in humans wherein the microsatellite repeat expansion disease is caused by a microsatellite expansion in a coding region of DNA. In another embodiment of the invention the microsatellite repeat expansion disease is caused by a microsatellite expansion in a non coding region of DNA.

In one embodiment the invention is directed to a mouse model for disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion comprising a mouse having a substantial deletion of Mbnl1 exon 3 E3 in the mouse genome wherein said mouse exhibits symptoms typical of a disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion in humans wherein the mouse exhibits abnormal muscleblind proteins. In other embodiments of the invention the mouse may have a loss of functional ClC 1 protein a loss of functional Amyloid beta A4 precursor protein a loss of functional NMDA receptor NR1 a loss of functional Microtubule associated protein tau a loss of functional TNNT2 protein or a loss of functional TNNT3 protein respectively.

One embodiment of the invention is directed to a method of identifying a compound useful in the treatment of disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion comprising administering a test compound to a mouse having a substantial deletion of Mbnl1 exon 3 E3 in the mouse genome wherein said mouse exhibits symptoms typical of a disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion in humans wherein the mouse exhibits abnormal muscleblind proteins and monitoring said mouse for reduction or inhibition of the symptoms associated with said disease. In an additional embodiment the mouse may be monitored for effects other than those associated with the disease. In one embodiment of the invention the disease is myotonic dystrophy.

Proteins in the muscleblind like MBNL family bind to expanded CUG repeats in vitro and colocalize with mutant DM and HSAtranscripts in vivo. Human muscleblind genes MBNL1 SEQ ID NO 1 MBNL2 SEQ ID NO 2 and MBNL3 SEQ ID NO 3 are homologous to the gene muscleblind which is essential for muscle and eye differentiation. MBNL1 the major MBNL gene expressed in human skeletal muscle encodes multiple protein isoforms including some that bind to expanded CUG repeats 41 to 42 kD and others that fail to bind 31 kD isoform generated by exon 3 skipping.

In fact MBNL1 was identified in HeLa cells based on its ability to bind double stranded CUG repeats Miller J W Urbinati C R Teng Umnuay P Stenberg M G Byrne B J Thornton C A Swanson M S 2000 19 4439 4448 . All three MBNL gene products colocalize with the expanded repeat RNA foci in vivo Fardaei M Rogers M T Thorpe H M Larkin K Hamshere M G Harper P S Brook J D 2002 11 805 814 . Loss of MBNL function due to sequestration on CUG repeat RNA is proposed to play a role in DM pathogenesis Miller J W Urbinati C R Teng Umnuay P Stenberg M G Byrne B J Thornton C A Swanson M S 2000 19 4439 4448 . Thus while expression of CUG and CCUG expansion RNAs induces MBNL recruitment into nuclear RNA foci there is no evidence that this relocalization results in muscleblind depletion and functional impairment.

Recombinant AAV rAAV vectors have been used for expressing gene products in animals see for example U.S. Pat. No. 5 193 941 and WO 94 13788. Other patents and publications describe AAV vectors and uses the uses generally being related to expression of gene products either in vitro usually tissue cultures or in vivo usually in the lungs or oral mucosa the normal sites of AAV infection but expression in other tissues such as the central nervous system and in cardiac tissue has been observed .

AAV vectors have certain advantages over other well characterized vector systems. First like adenovirus AAV infects non dividing cells. Second all the AAV viral genes are eliminated in the vector. Since the viral gene expression induced immune reaction is no longer a concern AAV vectors are safer than adenovirus vectors. As AAV is an integration virus integration into the host chromosome will maintain the transgene in the cells. AAV is an extremely stable virus resistant to many detergents pH changes and heat stable at 56 C. for about an hour . AAV can be lyophilized and redissolved without losing significant activity. Finally AAV causes no known diseases or pathogenic symptoms in humans. Therefore AAV is a very promising delivery vehicle for gene therapy.

Transduction of rAAV vectors harboring the bacterial galactosidase gene by single injection into the quadriceps of mice demonstrated that expression was maintained long term and the expression did not decrease substantially during that time Xiao et al. J. Virol. 70 8098 8108 1996 . Other targets successfully transduced with rAAV vectors include T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes human erythroleukemia cells different regions of the rat brain the striatum of the rat brain in a Parkinson s Disease model with the tyrosine hydroxylase gene heart of the pig and rat with the LacZ gene the peripheral auditory system of the guinea pig and bronchial epithelia of the rabbit and monkey.

In one embodiment the invention provides a vector for effective expression of a protein with MBNL1 MBNL2 or MBNL3 or combinations thereof function to treat conditions associated with aberrant microsatellite expansions. In an additional embodiment the vector of the invention is recombinant adeno associated virus rAAV vectors. In one embodiment of the invention the rAAV contains a transgene that expresses an MBNL1 MBNL2 or MBNL3 or combinations thereof protein. In an additional embodiment the invention provides a rAAV containing a transgene that expresses MBNL1 for example the 41 kD isoform .

Isolation of the DNA encoding MBNL polypeptides allows one to use methods well known to the person of ordinary skill in the art to make changes in the codons for specific amino acids such that the codons are preferred usage codons for a given species.

In one embodiment the rAAV of the invention includes a promoter which directs the initiation of RNA transcription in the cell of interest. The promoter may be constitutive or regulated. Regulated promoters include inducible promoters and repressible promoters. In an additional embodiment of the invention the regulation of the promoter is associated with an operator to which an inducer or repressor binds. The promoter may be a ubiquitous promoter active in essentially all cells of the host organism or may be a promoter with expression more or less specific to the target cells. Known strong promoters that find common use to obtain high levels of recombinant protein expression include the herpes simplex thymidine kinase promoter SV40 promoter and LTRs such as that obtained from Moloney leukemia retrovirus. For the gene to be expressed the coding sequence must be operably linked to a promoter sequence functional in the target cell.

It is not necessary that the AAV derived sequences correspond exactly with wild type AAV prototypes. For example in one embodiment the rAAV vectors of the invention may feature modified inverted terminal repeats and other sequences provided that the rAAV vectors can replicate and be packaged with the assistance of helper virus and establish a nonpathogenic latent infection in target cells. Typically because of the packaging limitations of AAV the polynucleotides encoding MBNL1 domain sequences and the regulatory elements can have a length of up to about 5 500 bases.

Numerous applications of the present invention e.g. making transgenic constructs involve the cloning synthesis maintenance mutagenesis and other manipulations of nucleic acid sequences that can be performed using routine techniques in the field of recombinant genetics. Basic texts disclosing the general methods of use in this invention include Sambrook et al. Molecular Cloning A Laboratory Manual 2nd ed. 1989 Kriegler Gene Transfer and Expression A Laboratory Manual 1990 and Current Protocols in Molecular Biology Ausubel et al. eds. 1994 .

For propagation of the rAAV vectors in vitro susceptible cells are co transfected with an AAV derived vector DNA and a suitable AAV derived helper virus or plasmid harboring the AAV rep gene AAV cap gene or both and infected by a helper virus including herpesvirus adenovirus or a suitable non AAV helper plasmid using any number of transfection methods including inter alia calcium phosphate transfection lipofection or other techniques known to those skilled in the art. The ratio of helper plasmids to the quantity of vector plasmid containing the gene of interest range from 1 1 1 10. This procedure produces recombinant AAV vectors the vector plasmid contains the recombinant AAV genome flanked by the AAV ITRs. The AAV derived helper virus or helper plasmid may be any virus or plasmid which is capable on expression of the AAV genes it carries of providing proteins necessary for the replication and packaging of the rAAV vector in a suitable host cell for the purpose of producing rAAV vector stock.

In one embodiment the target cells of the rAAV vectors of the invention are cells capable of expressing polypeptides with MBNL1 activity. In another embodiment of the invention the cells are normal cells cultured in vitro. In further embodiments the target cells of the rAAV vectors of the invention are human cells or cells of other mammals such as nonhuman primates and mammals of the orders Rodenta mice rats rabbit and hamsters Carnivora cats and dogs and Arteriodactyla cows pigs sheep goats and horses . In one embodiment of the invention the cells are part of a living mammal at the time the rAAV vectors are delivered to the cell. The mammal may be at any stage of development at the time of delivery e.g. embryonic fetal infantile juvenile or adult. Additionally the cells may be healthy or diseased.

In one embodiment the rAAV vectors of the invention may be administered as viral particles alone whether as an in vivo direct delivery to the vasculature or as an ex vivo treatment comprising administering the rAAV vector viral particles in vitro to cells from the animal receiving treatment followed by introduction of the transduced cells back into the donor. Alternatively the rAAV vector virus particles can be used to transduce cells in conjunction with secondary agents known to enhance the efficiency of transduction see e.g. WO Ser. No. 95 33824 for a variety of secondary agents. The effective amount of rAAV vectors to be administered will vary from patient to patient. Accordingly effective amounts are best determined by the physician administering the rAAV vectors and appropriate dosages can be determined readily by one of ordinary skill in the art.

In one embodiment the rAAV construct of the invention expresses human MBNL1 rAAV MBNL1 rAAV MBNL1 41 . In an additional embodiment of the invention injection of the rAAV MBNL1 41 into the tibialis anterior TA muscles of a transgenic model for DM that expresses a human skeletal actin transgene carrying 250 CTG repeats HSA a mouse model which develops myotonia and muscle degeneration similar to muscle abnormalities seen in DM patients results in a functional reversal of a DM related phenotype namely reversal of mis splicing of the Clcn1 skeletal muscle chloride channel which results in myotonia.

In one embodiment the invention is directed to methods for treating or preventing various disorders and conditions associated with aberrant microsatellite expansions in a mammal said method comprising administering to the mammal a therapeutically effective amount of rAAV containing a transgene that encodes a protein selected from the group consisting of MBNL1 MBNL2 MBNL3 and combinations thereof. In a further embodiment of the invention the protein is MBNL1. In another embodiment of the invention the mammal is a human. In another embodiment the transgene is human. In one embodiment of the invention the disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion is a neurological or neuromuscular disease. In an additional embodiment of the invention the disease is myotonic dystrophy. In yet another embodiment of the invention the disease is SCA8.

In additional embodiments the present invention provides methods for treating or preventing a disease or condition related to any physiological process affected by MBNL1 said method comprising administering to the mammal a therapeutically effective amount of rAAV containing a transgene that expresses the MBNL1 protein.

In one embodiment the invention is directed to methods for treating or preventing various disorders and conditions associated with aberrant microsatellite expansions in a mammal said method comprising administering to the mammal a therapeutically effective amount of rAAV containing a transgene that encodes a protein selected from the group consisting of MBNL1 MBNL2 MBNL3 and combinations thereof wherein treating comprises reversing the mis splicing of the Clcn1 skeletal muscle chloride channel.

In another embodiment of the invention treating comprises reversing the mis splicing of the Amyloid beta A4 precursor protein APP . The mis splicing may correspond to alternative splicing of exon 7. In another embodiment of the invention treating comprises reversing the mis splicing of the NMDA receptor NR1 GRIN1 . The mis splicing may correspond to alternative splicing of exon 5. In yet another embodiment of the invention treating comprises reversing the mis splicing of the Microtubule associated protein tau MAPT . The mis splicing may correspond to alternative splicing of exon 2. In yet another embodiment of the invention treating comprises reversing the mis splicing of the TNNT2 cTNT . The mis splicing may correspond to alternative splicing of exon 5.

In one embodiment the invention is directed to methods for treating or preventing various disorders and conditions associated with aberrant microsatellite expansions in a mammal said method comprising administering to the mammal a therapeutically effective amount of rAAV containing a transgene that encodes a protein selected from the group consisting of MBNL1 MBNL2 MBNL3 and combinations thereof wherein the mammal has RNA inclusions in neuronal cells.

One embodiment of the invention is directed to a pharmaceutical composition comprising rAAV containing a transgene that encodes at least one protein selected from the group consisting of MBNL1 MBNL2 MBNL3 and combinations thereof. In one embodiment of the invention the protein is MBNL1. Pharmaceutically acceptable carriers are determined in part by the particular composition being administered as well as by the particular method used to administer the composition. Accordingly there is a wide variety of suitable formulations of pharmaceutical compositions of the present invention see e.g. Remington s Pharmaceutical Sciences 17.sup.th ed. 1985 .

Formulations for both ex vivo and in vivo administrations include suspensions in liquid or emulsified liquids. The active ingredient rAAV vector is often mixed with excipients that are pharmaceutically acceptable and compatible with the active ingredient. Suitable excipients include for example water saline dextrose glycerol ethanol or the like and combinations thereof. In addition the composition may contain minor amounts of auxiliary substances such as wetting or emulsifying agents pH buffering agents stabilizing agents or other reagents that enhance the effectiveness of the pharmaceutical composition.

Formulations suitable for administration include aqueous and non aqueous solutions isotonic sterile solutions which can contain antioxidants buffers bacteriostats and solutes that render the formulation isotonic and aqueous and non aqueous sterile suspensions that can include suspending agents solubilizers thickening agents stabilizers and preservatives. In the practice of this invention compositions can be administered for example orally nasally topically intravenously intraperitoneally intravesically or intrathecally. The formulations of compounds can be presented in unit dose or multi dose scaled containers such as ampules and vials. Solutions and suspensions can be prepared from sterile powders granules and tablets of the kind previously described. The modulators can also be administered as part a of prepared food or drug.

The dose administered to a patient in the context of the present invention is often varied to assess the effect of various concentrations of a compound on a transgenic animal. The dose will also be determined by e.g. the body weight or surface area of the area to be exposed to the compound. In general the dose equivalent of a modulator is from about 1 ng kg to 10 mg kg for a typical subject. Administration can be accomplished via single or divided doses.

Pharmaceutical preparations of the disclosed gene vectors may be administered intravenously parenterally or intraperitoneally. Solutions of pharmaceutically acceptable salts can be prepared in water suitable mixed with a surfactant such as hydroxypropylcellulose. Dispersions can also be prepared in glycerol liquid polyethylene glycols and mixtures thereof and in oils. Under ordinary conditions of storage and use these preparations will contain a preservative to prevent growth of microorganisms.

The pharmaceutical forms suitable for injectable use include sterile aqueous solutions or dispersions and sterile powders for the extemporaneous preparation of sterile injectable solutions or dispersions. In all cases the form must be sterile and must be fluid to the extent that easy syringability exists. It must be stable under the conditions of manufacture and storage and must be preserved against the contaminating action of microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi. The carrier may be a solvent or dispersion medium containing for example water ethanol polyol such as glycerol propylene glycol and liquid polyethylene glycol and the like suitable mixtures thereof and vegetable oils. The proper fluidity can be maintained for example by the use of a coating such as lecithin by the maintenance of the required particle size in the case of dispersion and by the use of surfactants. The prevention of the action of microorganisms can be brought about by various antibacterial and antifungal agents such as parabens chlotobutanol phenol sorbic acid thimerosal and the like. In many cases it will be preferable to include isotonic agents for example sugars or sodium chloride.

Solutions of the AAV vector as a free acid DNA contains acidic phosphate groups or a pharmacologically acceptable salt can be prepared in water suitably mixed with a surfactant such as hydroxypropylcellulose. A dispersion of AAV particles also can be prepared in glycerol liquid polyethylene glycols and mixtures thereof and in oils. Under ordinary conditions of storage and use the preparations contain a preservative to prevent the growth of microorganisms. The sterile aqueous media employed are obtainable by standard techniques well known to those skilled in the art.

Prolonged absorption of the injectable compositions can be brought about by the use in the compositions of agents delaying absorption for example aluminum monostearate and gelatin. Sterile injectable solutions are prepared by incorporating the active compounds in the required amount in the appropriate solvent with various of the other ingredients enumerated above as required followed by filtered sterilization. Generally dispersions are prepared by incorporating the various sterilized active ingredients into a sterile vehicle which contains the basic dispersion medium and the required other ingredients from those enumerated above. In the case of sterile powders for the preparation of sterile injectable solutions the preferred methods of preparation are vacuum drying and freeze drying techniques which yield a powder of the active ingredient plus any additional desired ingredient from a previously sterile filtered solution thereof.

The composition can be formulated in a neutral or salt form. Pharmaceutically acceptable salts include the acid addition salts formed with the free amino groups of the protein and which are formed with inorganic acids such as for example hydrochloric or phosphoric acids or such organics acids as acetic oxalic tartaric mandelic and the like. Salts formed with the free carboxyl groups can also be derived from inorganic bases such as for example sodium potassium ammonium calcium or ferric hydroxides and such organic bases as isopropylamine trimethylamine histidine procaine and the like.

Upon formulation solutions will be administered in a manner compatible with the dosage formulation and in such amount as is therapeutically effective. The formulations are easily administered in a variety of dosage forms such as injectable solutions drug release capsules and the like.

For parenteral administration in an aqueous solution the solution should be suitably buffered if necessary and the liquid diluent first rendered isotonic with sufficient saline or glucose. These particular aqueous solutions are especially suitable for intravenous intramuscular subcutaneous and intraperitoneal administration. In this connection sterile aqueous media that can be employed will be known to those of skill in the art in light of the present disclosure. For example one dosage could be dissolved in 1 ml of isotonic NaCl solution and either added to 1000 ml of hypodermoclysis fluid or injected at the proposed site of infusion. Some variation in dosage will necessarily occur depending on the condition of the subject being treated. The person responsible for administration will in any event determine the appropriate dose for the individual subject. Moreover for human administration preparations should meet sterility pyrogenicity general safety and purity standards as required by FDA Office of Biologics standards.

The pharmaceutical forms suitable for parenteral administration include sterile aqueous solutions or dispersions and sterile powders for the extemporaneous preparation of sterile injectable solutions or dispersions. In all cases the form must be sterile and must be fluid to the extent that parenteral administration is possible. The formulation must be stable under the conditions of manufacture and storage and must be preserved against the contaminating action of microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi. The carrier can be a solvent or dispersion medium containing for example water ethanol polyol for example glycerol propylene glycol liquid polyethylene glycol and the like suitable mixtures thereof and vegetable oils. The proper fluidity can be maintained for example by the use of a coating such as lecithin by the maintenance of the required particle size in the case of a dispersion and by the use of surfactants. The prevention of the action of microorganisms can be brought about by various antibacterial and antifungal agents for example parabens chlorobutanol phenol sorbic acid thimerosal and the like. In many cases it will be preferable to include isotonic agents for example sugars or sodium chloride. Prolonged absorption of the injectable compositions can be brought about by use of agents delaying absorption for example aluminum monostearate and gelatin.

Sterile parenteral formulations are prepared by incorporating the AAV vector in the required amount in the appropriate solvent with various of the other ingredients enumerated above as required followed by filtered sterilization. Generally dispersions are prepared by incorporating the sterilized active ingredient into a sterile vehicle which contains the basic dispersion medium and the required other ingredients from those enumerated above. In the case of sterile powders for the preparation of sterile injectable solutions the preferred methods of preparation are vacuum drying and freeze drying which yield a powder of the active ingredient plus any additional desired ingredient from the previously sterile filtered solution thereof.

The rAAV containing a transgene that expresses the MBNL1 protein may for example be prepared by culturing a composition comprising cells transiently transfected with an AAV helper plasmid comprising AAV rep and cap nucleic acid sequences encoding AAV rep and cap proteins an adenoviral helper plasmid comprising essential adenovirus helper genes selected from the group consisting of E1A E1B E2A E4 E4O RF6 E4O RF6 7 VA and combinations thereof and an AAV vector comprising first and second AAV ITRs flanking a DNA sequence encoding MBNL1 polypeptide said sequence being operably linked to a promoter DNA sequence in the absence of adenovirus particles and under conditions suitable for production of recombinant AAV and purifying rAAV therefrom.

In one embodiment the invention is directed to a transgenic animal having a substantial deletion of one or more MBNL1 exon s . The transgenic animals of the invention can be any mammal other than humans. In one embodiment the mammal is a rodent. In another embodiment of the invention the rodent is a mouse. An additional embodiment is directed to a cell isolated from the transgenic animal of the invention.

In a further embodiment the transgenic animal of the invention has a substantial deletion of Mbnl1 exon 3. In one embodiment Mbnl1 exon 3 in the transgenic animal of the invention is deleted in its entirety.

In one embodiment of the invention the transgenic mouse having a substantial deletion of Mbnl1 exon 3 constitutes an animal model for microsatellite expansion disease in mammals. In another embodiment of the invention the mammal is a primate. In yet another embodiment of the invention the primate is a human.

In one embodiment of the invention the microsatellite expansion disease is caused by a microsatellite expansion in a coding region of DNA. In another embodiment of the invention the microsatellite expansion disease is caused by a microsatellite expansion in a non coding region of DNA. In one embodiment of the invention the disease associated with aberrant expansion of microsatellites is myotonic dystrophy. Accordingly in one embodiment of the invention the mouse Mbnl1 gene knockout model exhibits myotonia and ocular cataracts.

In one embodiment the invention is directed to a mouse model for disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion comprising a mouse having a substantial deletion of Mbnl1 exon 3 E3 in the mouse genome wherein said mouse exhibits symptoms typical of a disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion in humans wherein said mouse has loss of functional ClC 1 protein. In another embodiment of the invention mouse has loss of functional Amyloid beta A4 precursor protein. In another embodiment of the invention the mouse has loss of functional NMDA receptor NR1. In yet another embodiment of the invention the mouse has loss of functional Microtubule associated protein tau. In another embodiment of the invention the mouse has loss of functional TNNT2 protein. In another embodiment of the invention the mouse has loss of functional TNNT3 protein.

One embodiment is directed to methods for preparing the transgenic animals of the invention. The transgenic animal of the invention may for example be prepared by transfecting a plurality of mouse embryonic stem cells with a nucleic acid comprising an MBNL1 gene with a substantial deletion of exon 3 selecting for transgenic embryonic stem cells having incorporated said nucleic acid into their genome introducing at least one of said transgenic embryonic stem cells into an embryo to produce a chimeric mouse comprising at least one of said transgenic embryonic stem cells breeding said chimeric mouse with a wild type mouse to obtain F1 progeny heterozygous for the MBNL1 gene with a deletion of exon 3 and breeding a male mouse of said F1 progeny with a female mouse of said F1 progeny to obtain F2 progeny homozygous for MBNL1 gene with a deletion of exon 3 wherein the said mouse exhibits a phenotype indicative disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion for example myotonic dystrophy.

Additional embodiments are directed to methods for using the transgenic animals of the invention as animal models to study MBNL1 function in vivo and for evaluating side effects of MBNL1 inhibiting compounds. For example if a compound known to inhibit MBNL1 is administered to an MBNL1 knockout mouse any detected effects of the compound on the mouse can be concluded to be MBNL1 independent.

In further embodiments the transgenic mammals of the invention and cells thereof can be used as animal models to identify compounds useful in the treatment of diseases associated with aberrant microsatellite expansions such as in one embodiment myotonic dystrophy and to assess the functional effect of a test compound on cells or animals afflicted with such disease. Such compounds can be any small chemical compound including polypeptides polynucleotides amino acids nucleotides carbohydrates lipids or any other organic or inorganic molecule. Alternatively the compounds can be genetically altered versions of the MBNL1 gene.

In one embodiment of the invention assessing the effects of a compound on cells or animals e.g. the transgenic animals of the invention having a substantial deletion of MBNL1 exon 3 involves providing a combinatorial chemical or peptide library containing a large number of potential therapeutic compounds potential modulator or binding compounds . Such combinatorial chemical libraries are then screened in one or more assays to identify those library members particular chemical species or subclasses that display as desired characteristic activity. The compounds thus identified can serve as conventional lead compounds or can themselves be used as potential or actual therapeutics.

A combinatorial chemical library is a collection of diverse chemical compounds generated by either chemical synthesis or biological synthesis by combining a number of chemical building blocks such as reagents. Preparation and screening of combinatorial chemical libraries is well known to those of skill in the art. Such combinatorial chemical libraries include but are not limited to peptide libraries see e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 5 010 175 Furka 1991 Int. J. Pept. Prot. Res. 37 487 493 and Houghton et al. 1991 Nature 354 84 88 .

To assess the effect of a compound on an animal or to treat or prevent a condition associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion for example myotonic dystrophy in an animal administration of the compound can be achieved by any of the routes normally used for introducing a compound into ultimate contact with the tissue to be treated. The compounds are administered in any suitable manner optionally with pharmaceutically acceptable carriers. Suitable methods of administering such compounds are available and well known to those of skill in the art and although more than one route can be used to administer a particular composition a particular route can often provide a more immediate and more effective reaction than another route.

Although MBNL1 is referred to in the individual descriptions of the embodiments of the invention MBNL2 and MBNL3 may likewise be contemplated for each embodiment.

A transgene refers to genetic material that is introduced or is capable of being introduced into cells of a host animal. Typically once a transgene is introduced into the cells of the host animal it is maintained either transiently or permanently by e.g. insertion into the host genome. In preferred embodiments of the present invention a transgene is inserted into the host genome by homologous recombination thereby replacing the endogenous gene with the transgene. Often a transgene contains a coding sequence operably linked to a promoter that encodes a protein e.g. a marker protein that allows the detection of the transgene in the cell. Transgenic refers to any cell or organism that comprises a transgene.

A host animal or mammal refers to any animal that is used to practice the herein described methods i.e. animals into which a transgene is introduced to disrupt an endogenous MBNL1 gene. For use in the present invention such animals include any non human mammals including but not limited to mice rats rabbits and hamsters.

 Nucleic acid refers to deoxyribonucleotides or ribonucleotides and polymers thereof in either single or double stranded form. The term encompasses nucleic acids containing known nucleotide analogs or modified backbone residues or linkages which are synthetic naturally occurring and non naturally occurring which have similar binding properties as the reference nucleic acid and which are metabolized in a manner similar to the reference nucleotides. Unless otherwise indicated a particular nucleic acid sequence also implicitly encompasses conservatively modified variants thereof e.g. degenerate codon substitutions and complementary sequences as well as the sequence explicitly indicated. The term nucleic acid is used interchangeably with gene cDNA and nucleotide.

The terms polypeptide peptide and protein are used interchangeably herein to refer to a polymer of amino acid residues. The terms apply to amino acid polymers in which one or more amino acid residue is an artificial chemical mimetic of a corresponding naturally occurring amino acid as well as to naturally occurring amino acid polymers and non naturally occurring amino acid polymer.

The term amino acid refers to naturally occurring and synthetic amino acids as well as amino acid analogs and amino acid mimetics that function in a manner similar to the naturally occurring amino acids. As to amino acid sequences one of skill will recognize that individual substitutions deletions or additions to a nucleic acid peptide polypeptide or protein sequence which alters adds or deletes a single amino acid or a small percentage of amino acids in the encoded sequence is a conservatively modified variant where the alteration results in the substitution of an amino acid with a chemically similar amino acid. Conservative substitution tables providing functionally similar amino acids are well known in the art. Such conservatively modified variants are in addition to and do not exclude polymorphic variants interspecies homologs and alleles of the invention.

A label or a detectable moiety is a composition detectable by spectroscopic photochemical biochemical immunochemical or chemical means. For example useful labels include P fluorescent dyes electron dense reagents enzymes e.g. as commonly used in an ELISA biotin digoxigenin or haptens and proteins which can be made detectable e.g. by incorporating a radiolabel into the peptide or used to detect antibodies specifically reactive with the peptide.

The term recombinant when used with reference e.g. to a cell or nucleic acid protein or vector indicates that the cell nucleic acid protein or vector has been modified by the introduction of a heterologous nucleic acid or protein or the alteration of a native nucleic acid or protein or that the cell is derived from a cell so modified. Thus for example recombinant cells express genes that are not found within the native non recombinant form of the cell or express native genes that are otherwise abnormally expressed under expressed or not expressed at all.

The term heterologous when used with reference to portions of a nucleic acid indicates that the nucleic acid comprises two or more subsequences that are not found in the same relationship to each other in nature. For instance the nucleic acid is typically recombinantly produced having two or more sequences from unrelated genes arranged to make a new functional nucleic acid e.g. a promoter from one source and a coding region from another source. Similarly a heterologous protein indicates that the protein comprises two or more subsequences that are not found in the same relationship to each other in nature e.g. a fusion protein .

A promoter is defined as an array of nucleic acid control sequences that direct transcription of a nucleic acid. As used herein a promoter includes necessary nucleic acid sequences near the start site of transcription such as in the case of a polymerase II type promoter a TATA element. A promoter also optionally includes distal enhancer or repressor elements which can be located as much as several thousand base pairs from the start site of transcription. A constitutive promoter is a promoter that is active under most environmental and developmental conditions. An inducible promoter is a promoter that is active under environmental or developmental regulation. The term operably linked refers to a functional linkage between a nucleic acid expression control sequence such as a promoter or array of transcription factor binding sites and a second nucleic acid sequence wherein the expression control sequence directs transcription of the nucleic acid corresponding to the second sequence.

The terms identical or percent identity in the context of two or more nucleic acids or polypeptide sequences refer to two or more sequences or subsequences that are the same or have a specified percentage of amino acid residues or nucleotides that are the same i.e. 60 identity optionally 65 70 75 80 85 90 or 95 identity over a specified region when compared and aligned for maximum correspondence over a comparison window or designated region as measured using one of the following sequence comparison algorithms or by manual alignment and visual inspection. Such sequences are then said to be substantially identical. 

The term immunoassay is an assay that uses an antibody to specifically bind an antigen. The immunoassay is characterized by the use of specific binding properties of a particular antibody to isolate target and or quantify the antigen.

The phrase specifically or selectively binds to an antibody or specifically or selectively immunoreactive with when referring to a protein or peptide refers to a binding reaction that is determinative of the presence of the protein in a heterogeneous population of proteins and other biologics. Thus under designated immunoassay conditions the specified antibodies bind to a particular protein at least two times the background and do not substantially bind in a significant amount to other proteins present in the sample. Specific binding to an antibody under such conditions may require an antibody that is selected for its specificity for a particular protein For example polyclonal antibodies raised to an MBNL1 polypeptide from specific species such as rat mouse or human can be selected to obtain only those polyclonal antibodies that are specifically immunoreactive with the MBNL1 protein and not with other proteins except for polymorphic variants and alleles of the MBNL1 protein.

The term transfection refers to the introduction of foreign DNA into cells in culture in vitro . Genetic modification of eukaryotic cells by introduction of foreign DNA using chemical means. In transient transfection expression occurs from unintegrated foreign DNA and can be detected for a few days after transfection.

The term titer refers to the number of virus particles produced per ml. The assay system to determine the number of virus particles produced varies considerably depending on the virus in question. High titers are generally essential for successful gene therapy since they allow introduction of the therapeutic gene carried by the virus into the maximum number of cells.

The terms treating and treatment as used herein include any treatment of a condition or disease in a subject and include inhibiting the disease or condition i.e. arresting its development relieving the disease or condition i.e. causing some degree of regression of the condition or delaying progression in the disease or relieving to some degree the conditions caused by the disease i.e. symptoms of the disease .

The term vector refers to a vehicle usually a biological entity such as a virus used for the delivery of genes into an organism. A reagent that facilitates the introduction of foreign genes into cells.

The phrase packaging cells refers to cells that have been transfected with plasmids containing the cap and rep genes from AAV.

As used herein pharmaceutically acceptable carrier includes any and all solvents dispersion media coatings antibacterial and antifungal agents isotonic and absorption delaying agents and the like. The use of such media and agents for pharmaceutically active substances is well known in the art. Except insofar as any conventional media or agent is incompatible with the active ingredient its use in the therapeutic compositions is contemplated. Supplementary active ingredients can also be incorporated into the compositions.

The phrase pharmaceutically acceptable refers to molecular entities and compositions that do not produce an allergic or similar untoward reaction when administered to a human. The preparation of an aqueous composition that contains a protein as an active ingredient is well understood in the art. Typically such compositions are prepared as injectables either as liquid solutions or suspensions solid forms suitable for solution in or suspension in liquid prior to injection can also be prepared. The preparation can also be emulsified.

A substantial deletion of exon 3 signifies a deletion extensive enough to lend to the phenotype indicative of a disease associated with aberrant microsatellite expansion.

Use of the terms an a and the and similar terms used in claiming or describing the invention are intended to be construed as including both the singular and plural unless clearly otherwise indicated or contraindicated. The terms including having and containing are to be construed as open ended in the same manner as the terms comprising or comprises are commonly accepted as including but not limiting to the explicitly set forth subject matter. The term comprising and the like are construed to encompass the phrases consisting of and consisting essentially of .

The methods and processes described herein may be performed in any suitable order unless otherwise indicated or clearly rendered inoperable by a modification in order.

Limited and narrow interpretation of descriptive language intended to better illustrate the invention is not to be construed as limiting in any way nor to limit the scope of the invention contemplated by the inventors.

The invention now described generally and in some detail will be understood more readily by reference to the following examples which are provided by way of reference and are in no manner intended to limit the scope of what the inventors regard as their invention.

Targeted disruption of Mbnl1 to test whether or not sequestration of MBNL proteins contributes to DM pathogenesis mice with a targeted deletion of MbnlI exon 3 E3 were generated. The pMbnl1targeting plasmid was constructed using pTKflNeo gift of E. Scott University of Florida which contains the Herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase HSV TK negative selection marker and a loxP flanked phosphoglycerate kinaseneomycin PGK Neo positive selection cassette. A 2.5 kb Xbal fragment 5 arm of homology corresponding to the upstream region bordering Mhnl1 exon 3 was inserted 5 of PGK Neo. For the 3 arm of homology a 6 kb Mbnl1 BamHI fragment was subcloned into pBluescript II KS Stratagene La Jolla Calif. excised with XhoI NotI and cloned into the XhoI NotI sites of pTKflNeo 3 of PGK Neo.

The pMbnl1plasmid was linearized with NotI and electroporated into CJ.7 ES cells P. J. Swiatek T. Gridley 7 2071 1993 . ES cells were cultured and selected as described in T. Yang et al. 19 25 1998 . Clones resistant to G418 and FIAU were isolated and screened for homologous recombination by utilizing a forward primer 5 TGGGATGGAATTGTGGTGTGTTGTTGCTCATG 3 SEQ ID NO 4 outside the 5 homologous region and a reverse primer 5 TCCATTTGTCACGTCCTGCACCGACGC 3 SEQ ID NO 5 in PGKNeo. Amplification 25 cycles consisted of 98 C. for 20 s followed by 68 C. for 4 min. Targeted ES cell clones yielded a 2.9 kb PCR product. This targeting strategy was predicted to approximate the situation in DM by eliminating synthesis of CUG binding isoforms Miller et al 2000 .

Genomic DNA analysis of Mbnl1 mice genomic blot analysis demonstrated successful deletion of Mbnl1mice . Five ES cell clones 35 56 92 111 120 that were positive for homologous recombination were confirmed by genomic DNA blot analysis. Based on restriction map analysis of genomic fragments flanking E3 ES genomic DNA digested with EcoRV produces a 16 kb band when a 300 nt Mbnl1 BamHI EcoRV fragment outside the 3 arm of homology is used as a hybridization probe probe II of . In the targeted allele a new EcoRV site from pBluescript II KS is introduced generating a novel 6.7 kb EcoRV fragment. All five clones that were positive by PCR were also positive by genomic DNA blot analysis. When the 5 arm of homology 2.5 kb XbaI fragment was used as probe two bands at 16 kb wild type and 7.5 kb mutant were detected. To check for additional insertion events in these five clones PGK Neo fragment was used as probe on genomic DNA digested with EcoRV. A single band at 7.5 kb confirmed the absence of any additional insertion events.

One ES clone ES.35 was expanded and transiently transfected with Crerecombinase to excise PGK Neo. To detect PGK Neo loss forward 5 CTACGATGGCTGGCTGCAATATGCCTCACTGTAAG 3 SEQ ID NO 6 and reverse 5 GGGTTGAATCTCGTTAGGGACACTGGGTGTCTGTAA 3 SEQ ID NO 7 primers were used for a PCR screen. PCR was performed for 30 cycles each cycle consisting of 96 C. for 30 see 60 C. for 30 sec and 72 C. for 2 min. Clones positive for PGK Neo deletion yielded a 1 kb band and cassette excision was confirmed by genomic DNA blot analysis. Utilization of a PCR generated subfragment of the 5 arm of homology as a hybridization probe yielded EcoRV bands at 16 kb and 6.5 kb. The loss of PGK Neo results in decrease in the size of the mutant allele digested with EcoRV from 7.5 to 6.5 kb. The Neo excised allele was designated Mbnl1.

Two Mbnl1ES clones 1B3 2C1 were transferred to 3.5 dpc C57BL 6J blastocysts which were then carried to term by B6D2F1 J recipients. One chimeric male was obtained from each clone. Contribution of CJ.7 129S1 SvlmJ ES cells to the germline was determined by mating the chimeric males with C57BL 6J females. Agouti pups in litters sired by the 1B3 chimeric male indicated germline transmission.

To detect heterozygotes in the F1 population derived from 1 B3 a combination of one forward primer 5 CTACGATGGCTGGCTGCAATATGCCTCACTGTAAG 3 SEQ ID NO 8 and two reverse primers for the mutant allele 5 GGGTTGAATCTCGTTAGGGACACTGGGTGTCTGTAA 3 SEQ ID NO 9 for the wild type allele 5 TGGCAGACCCTTTGACACCG 3 SEQ ID NO 10 were used for PCR. Amplification was performed for 30 cycles each cycle consisting of 96 C. for 30 sec 60 C. for 30 sec and 72 C. for 2 min. Heterozygotes were then mated to obtain Mbnl1mice.

Loss of Mbnl1 E3 expression in Mbnl1 loss of E3 expression was confirmed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction RT PCR primers in exons 3 and 6 were used to amplify a cDNA product from either Mbnl1 or Mbnl1mice that was absent in Mbnl1mice . To confirm loss of exon 3 an RT PCR strategy was used with the forward primer positioned in exon 3 5 TAGTGTCACACCAATTCGGGACACAAA 3 SEQ ID NO 11 and an exon 6 reverse primer 5 CCCTTGATGTAATCCATGCAGACAGTGA 3 SEQ ID NO 12 . Continued transcription of Mbnl1 in Mbnl1lines was examined using exon 10 forward 5 TGCACGGTGCTACGCCAGCC 3 SEQ ID NO 13 and exon 12 reverse 5 GTGACGACAGCTCTACATCTGGGTAACA 3 SEQ ID NO 14 primers as well as exon 13 forward 5 CCTGCTGCACACTGTTGCCTACAC 3 SEQ ID NO 15 and reverse 5 TGTCAGTTCCCTCCCTCACCATGT 3 SEQ ID NO 16 primers. For amplification 27 cycles were performed each consisting of 45 sec at 95 C. 45 sec at 55 C. and 45 sec at 72 C. followed by a final 10 min extension at 72 C. As expected Mbnl1 expression was not fully eliminated in Mbnl1mice RT PCR products were apparent with primers in constitutively spliced exons 10 and 12 or within exon 13.

Immunoblot analysis total spleen protein for immunological detection of Mbnl1 tissues were placed in homogenization buffer 50 mM Tris Cl pH 8.0 150 mM NaCl 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride 6 g ml aprotinin 1 g ml leupeptin and disrupted using a Polytron homogenizer and brief sonication 3 5 sec using a microtip sonicator . Following addition of IGEPAL CA 630 Sigma to 1 homogenates were incubated on ice for 15 min centrifuged at 16 000 g for 10 min. Proteins 30 g per lane were detected following SDS PAGE and immunoblotting using anti Mbnl1 mAb 3A4 J. W. Miller et al. 19 4439 2000 A. Mankodi et al. in press . Total spleen was analyzed because this tissue contains relatively high levels of both Mbnl1 and Cugbp1.

To confirm elimination of the Mbnl1 41 to 42 kD proteins in Mbnl1mice monoclonal antibody 3A4 was used which recognizes Mbnl1 proteins containing exon 5 MS1 . The 41 to 42 kD isoforms in Mbnl1 and Mbnl1mice were missing in Mbnl1 . Previous studies suggested that elevated levels of another RNA binding protein CUGBP1 are responsible for DM associated RNA splicing changes. However Mbnl1mice did not show increased CUGBP1 expression .

Electromyography electromyography was performed under general anesthesia intraperitoneal ketamine 100 mg kg xylazine 10 mg kg and acepromazine 3 mg kg using 30 gauge concentric needle electrodes to examine three hindlimb tibialis anterior gastrocnemius vastus two forelimb flexor compartment of distal forelimb triceps and thoracolumbar paraspinal muscles. At least 10 needle insertions were performed in each muscle and myotonic discharges were graded on a 4 point scale 0 no myotonia 1 occasional myotonic discharge in 50 of insertions and 3 myotonic discharge with nearly all insertions. The mean score across all Mbnl1limb muscles was 2.9 in mice age 7 to 11 weeks n 10 . Myotonic discharges were not observed in any muscle in heterozygous Mbnl1mice n 9 or wild type littermates n 9 .

Mbnl1mice display overt myotonia beginning around 6 weeks of age. Delayed muscle relaxation was most noticeable after a period of rest and showed improvement during activity. A similar warm up phenomenon is characteristic of myotonia in human DM. Electromyographic recordings confirmed myotonic discharges in all Mbnl1mice tested n 10 .

ClC 1 splicing in DM mouse models because myotonia in DM1 and DM2 muscle is associated with aberrant ClC 1 splicing RT PCR assays were used to investigate the effect of loss of Mbnl1 E3 on ClC 1 encoded by Clcn1 expression . Total cellular RNA was extracted from either quadriceps or heart muscle of Mbnl1 Mbnl1and Mbnl1mice by homogenizing the tissues in TRI REAGENT Sigma St. Louis Mo. according to manufacturer s protocol. First strand cDNA was generated by reverse transcription RT using 5 g of total RNA and SuperScript II RNase H RT Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. following the manufacturer s protocol. For subsequent PCR reactions 20 of the RT reaction was used as template. Each PCR reaction was spiked with 10 Ci of P dCTP PerkinElmer Life Sciences Boston Mass. . PCR products were resolved on 5 8 non denaturing polyacrylamide gels followed by autoradiography using Biomax MS film Eastman Kodak Rochester N.Y. .

For ClC 1 mRNA analysis the forward primer used corresponded to exon 5 5 GGAATACCTCACACTCAAGGCC 3 SEQ ID NO 17 and the reverse primer to exon 8 5 CACGGAACACAAAGGCACTGAATGT 3 SEQ ID NO 18 . PCR was performed for 27 cycles each consisting of 45 sec at 95 C. 45 sec at 55 C. and 45 sec at 72 C. followed by a final 10 min extension at 72 C. Full length ClC 1 cDNA clones were generated from muscle RNA by RT PCR as previously described A. Mankodi et al. 10 35 2002 . Sequence analysis of 10 clones from Mbnl1mice revealed 6 clones with inclusion of exon 7a and 2 clones with retention of intron 2. All splice junctions were normal in 10 clones derived from wild type littermates.

Remarkably Mbnl1mice showed abnormal inclusion of Clcn1 cryptic exons 7a and 8a in a pattern similar to that seen in HSAmice. Also some full length ClC 1 cDNA clones from Mbnl1mice showed abnormal inclusion of intron 2 as has been observed in DM and HSAmuscle. Notably these abnormal splice isoforms have premature termination codons and do not encode functional chloride channels. By contrast splicing of the Scn4a sodium channel the only other ion channel previously associated with myotonia was normal in Mbnl1muscle. These results suggested that changes in splice site selection result in the loss of functional ClC 1 from myofiber membranes.

ClC 1 Dys2 and sarcoglycan immunostaining frozen sections of vastus 6 m were immunostained using polyclonal antibodies directed against the C terminus of ClC 1 Alpha Diagnostic San Antonio or monoclonal antibodies to dystrophin Dys2 or a sarcoglycan NovoCastra Newcastle upon Tyne as described in A. Mankodi et al. 10 35 2002 .

Immunofluorescence analysis confirmed a major reduction of ClC 1 protein in Mbnl1muscle relative to the muscle of wild type sibs C and D whereas the membrane associated proteins dystrophin E and F and sarcoglycan were unaffected. Because abnormalities of ClC 1 splicing in Mbnl1muscle are more pronounced than in HSAmuscle and considering that HSAmice have a 80 reduction of chloride conductance it is likely that myotonia in Mbnl1mice is due to improper ClC 1 pre mRNA splicing.

Analysis of muscle histology frozen sections 10 m of vastus and gastrocnemius muscle were prepared for routine histologic hematoxylin and eosin modified Gomori trichrome periodic acid Schiff and histochemical cytochrome oxidase acid phosphatase nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide tetrazolium reductase myosin ATPase succinate dehydrogenase stains V. Dubowitz Bailliere Tindall London ed. 2 1996 .

Histological analysis of Mbnl1mice up to 11 weeks of age did not show major degeneration of muscle fibers. Pathological features in Mbnl1muscle included an increase in nuclei with an abnormal central position and splitting of myofibers G and H . Histologic abnormalities were not observed in Mbnl1 or Mbnl1muscle.

Cataract development besides muscle abnormalities distinctive ocular cataracts that progress from subcapsular dust like opacities to mature cataracts are a prominent DM associated feature. Similar cataracts were observed in all Mbnl1eyes examined n 24 3 to 8 months old but not in wild type siblings I to L .

For ocular lens evaluation mice were sedated using intra peritoneal injection of 100 mg kg ketamine Ketaset Fort Dodge Iowa and 10 mg kg xylazine Xylaject Phoenix St Joseph Mo. and anterior chambers and lenses were examined using a slit lamp Haag Streit Mason Ohio . In vivo images were obtained using a Nikon 990 digital camera attached to the slit lamp. Immediately after euthanasia globes were enucleated fixed in paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin blocks before being processed overnight in a Shandon Excelsior tissue processor Thermo Electron Waltham Mass. . Sections 4 m were cut using an HM 315 microtome Richard Allan Kalamazoo Mich. dried and H E stained. Sections were photographed using a Canon EOS D60 digital camera attached to an Olympus Vanox microscope.

Abnormal regulation of alternative splicing Tnnt2 abnormal regulation of alternative splicing has been observed in DM1 muscle for cardiac troponin T TNNT2 insulin receptor INSR and ClC 1. Tnnt2 was analyzed using exon 2 forward 5 GCCGAGGAGGTGGTGGAGGAGTA 3 SEQ ID NO 19 exon 6 reverse 5 GTCTCAGCCTCACCCTCAGGCTCA 3 SEQ ID NO 20 and 27 PCR cycles 45 sec at 96 C. 45 sec at 58 C. and 45 sec at 72 C. followed by a final 10 min extension at 72 C. . Analysis of INSR is uninformative because human patterns of INSR alternative splicing are not conserved in mice. However Mbnl1adult heart shows abnormal retention of the Tnnt2 fetal exon 5 as was observed for DM1.

Abnormal regulation of alternative splicing Tnnt3 to determine whether alternative splicing of other genes is disrupted in Mbnl1 fast skeletal muscle troponin T Tnnt3 was assessed. For mouse Tnnt3 the forward primer overlaps exons 2 and 3 5 TCTGACGAGGAAACTGAACAAG 3 SEQ ID NO 21 while the reverse primer 5 TGTCAATGAGGGCTTGGAG 3 SEQ ID NO 22 corresponds to exon 11. For human TNNT3 exon 2 forward 5 TTCACCATGTCTGACGAGGAAG 3 SEQ ID NO 23 and exon 10 reverse 5 CTTCTGGGATCTTAGGAGCAGTG 3 SEQ ID NO 24 primers were used. For mouse Tnnt3 and human TNNT3 25 PCR cycles were performed each consisting of 45 sec at 95 C. 45 sec at 50 C. and 30 sec at 72 C. followed by a final 10 min extension at 72 C. The same amplification protocol was used to amplify the mouse Tnnt3 carboxyl terminal region using an exon 15 forward primer 5 CCTTGTACCAACTGGAGACTGAC 3 SEQ ID NO 25 and an exon 18 reverse primer 5 TGATGGTCTCTGCTGCAGTG 3 SEQ ID NO 26 .

Primers in Tnnt3 exons 2 and 11 produced a single major RT PCR product in adult Mbnl1 and Mbnl1mice that was undetectable in Mbnl1mice . Instead a cluster of larger cDNAs all containing a fetal F exon was prominent. In contrast mutually exclusive splicing of Tnnt3 exons 16 and 17 was unaffected in Mbnl1mice this finding shows that altered Mbnl1 expression has specific effects on splice site selection even within the same pre mRNA . Similar alterations of TNNT3 splicing in adult DM1 muscle were found.

Abnormal regulation of alternative splicing Scn4a missense mutations in the Scn4a muscle specific sodium channel are also associated with myotonia. The Scn4a pre mRNA has two rare AT AC splice sites but is not known to undergo alternative splicing. To screen for abnormalities of Scn4a splicing that might contribute to myotonia RT PCR analysis of muscle RNA was carried out. Partial cDNAs covering the entire Scn4a coding region GenBank accession AJ278787 were generated by PCR using the following primers set 1 exon 1 GACCTGGAAGCTGGCAAGAAC SEQ ID NO 27 to exon 6 TCCCTTCGTCATTGATGTAGGC SEQ ID NO 28 set 2 exon 6 CCATGAATGACACCAACACCAC SEQ ID NO 29 to exon 12 CTGAGGGTGACGATGAAGCTG SEQ ID NO 30 set 3 exon 12 TCTTCACGGGCATCTTCACTG SEQ ID NO 31 to exon 17 CGCCGCTGTTCAATGTAGATG SEQ ID NO 32 and set 4 exon 16 TGCCTCTATGTGGACATCTCCC SEQ ID NO 33 to exon 24 CGACTCTTTCTTGACGTAGGCG SEQ ID NO 34 . RT PCR products from primer sets 1 2 3 and 4 was analyzed on 1 agarose gels before and after restriction digest with ApaI NcoI BspEI and BsrGl HindIII respectively. Results showed no difference in the length of Scn4a cDNA fragments in Mbnl1 Mbnl11or HSAmice data not shown .

Loss of specific Mbnl1 isoforms that associate with expanded CUG and CCUG RNAs is sufficient to cause myotonia cataracts and RNA splicing defects that are similar to those seen in DM. Although muscleblind like proteins may influence gene expression at multiple levels these proteins may play a direct role in splice site selection. Recent co transfection analysis in HEK293 cells using a Tnnt3 mini gene indicated that the Mbnl1 41 kDa protein regulates alternative splice site choice by binding to a discrete RNA element upstream of the fetal F exon. Thus MBNL proteins bind to distinct RNA sequence elements and influence exon use during splicing.

Young Mbnl1mice do not develop the severe neonatal muscle weakness associated with congenital DM1 and it is not yet known whether cardiac conduction problems develop in this model. Thus some aspects of the DM phenotype may not result from loss of MBNL1 function alone. Additional muscleblind proteins MBNL2 and MBNL3 are also recruited to nuclear RNA foci. It is contemplated that their sequestration may be required to fully replicate the multisystemic DM phenotype.

HSAmice were anesthetized using isoflurane and the left tibialis anterior TA muscle was injected with 13.4 L PBS containing 1 10rAAV1Myc hMBNL1 or the right leg was injected with PBS uninjected . Four weeks post injection the mice were anesthetized using 2.5 avertin and the left and right TAs were collected for total RNA preparation and assayed for recovery of the normal Clcn1 pre mRNA splicing pattern 

Reverse transcription was carried out using 5 g of total RNA and 300 ng of random hexamers in a final volume of 20 l. After RNase H treatment for 15 minutes at 37 C. 4 l of cDNA was used for PCR. The final volume of the PCR reaction was 50 l which contained 30 pmoles of forward primer 5 TGAAGGAATACCTCACACTCAAGGCC 3 SEQ ID NO 40 in exon 5 of Clcn1 and 30 pmoles of reverse primer 5 CACGGAACACAAAGGCACTGAATGT 3 SEQ ID NO. 41 in exon 8 of Clcn1. In addition the reaction was spiked with 10 Ci of dCTP P . 27 cycles were carried out at annealing and extension temperatures of 55 C. and 72 C. respectively. Thirty percent of the total PCR products were resolved on a 5 acrylamide gel followed by exposure of the gel to an autoradiography film.

Mice number 188 and 189 were injected on the same day and processed together. Mouse number 190 and 191 were littermates that were neither injected with virus nor with PBS included as uninjected controls . The results show that the levels of the abnormal splicing products were decreased while the level of the normal splicing product was increased following rAAV1Myc hMBNL1 injection.

The mice were also tested for myotonia by electromyography EMG . Four weeks post injection EMG was performed on the injected and uninjected the latter corresponding for this example to those mice not injected with virus but rather with PBS alone TA of six HSAmice. The Y axis shows the observed severity of myotonia following insertion of the electrode. Five out of six mice showed virtual elimination of myotonia in the injected TA muscles injected with virus while in the uninjected TA of the same animal robust myotonia grade level 3 was observed. The results show that injection of the HSAmice with rAAV1Myc hMBNL1 41 kDa isoform expressed into the tibialis anterior results in reduced myotonia in as little as four weeks time.

To determine whether MBNL proteins can alter the splicing patterns of pre mRNAs known to be abnormally regulated in DM1 striated muscle GFP fusion proteins of all three MBNL proteins were transiently expressed with human and chicken cTNT minigenes in primary chicken skeletal muscle cultures. GFP fusions with MBNL1 2 and 3 were provided by Dr J D Brook Fardaei M Rogers M T Thorpe H M Larkin K Hamshere M G Harper P S Brook J D 2002 11 805 814 . The cTNT IR and clathrin light chain B minigenes were previously described Kosaki A Nelson J Webster N J 1998 273 10331 10337 Philips A V Timchenko L T Cooper T A 1998 280 737 741 Stamm S Casper D Hanson V Helfman D M 1999 64 108 118 Ladd A N Charlet B N Cooper T A 2001 21 1285 1296 . The MBNL mutant human cTNT minigene was generated by inverse PCR.

Transient transfection and RT PCR analysis HEK293 cells were plated at 500 000 cells per well in a six well plate in DMEM supplemented with 10 FBS and Gibco penicillin streptomycin. At 24 h after plating the cells were transfected with 1 g of minigene and 2 g of protein expression plasmid using Fugene6 Roche Indianapolis Ind. according to the manufacturer s directions. Protein and RNA were harvested 36 48 h after transfection.

Human and chicken cTNT and human IR minigenes were expressed with or without each of the three GFP MBNL fusion proteins or with GFP alone. Duplicate transfections were used for extraction of RNA and protein. Inclusion of cTNT exon 5 or IR exon 11 was assayed by RT PCR.

Chicken primary muscle cultures were prepared maintained and transfected as previously described using 0.5 g minigene reporter and 1 g expression plasmid Xu R Teng J Cooper T A 1993 13 3660 3674 . COSM6 cells were plated at 150 000 cells per well in a six well plate in DMEM supplemented with 10 FBS Gibco penicillin streptornycin and L glutamine. At 24 h after plating the cells were transfected with 500 ng of minigene and 1 g of protein expression plasmid using Fugene6 Roche Indianapolis Ind. according to the manufacturer s directions. Protein and RNA were harvested 36 48 h after transfection. RNA isolation and RT PCR analysis for the cTNT IR and clathrin light chain B minigenes were performed as described previously Philips A V Timchenko L T Cooper T A 1998 280 737 741 Stamm S Casper D Hanson V Helfman D M 1999 64 108 118 Savkur R S Philips A V Cooper T A 2001 29 40 47 .

Western blot analysis to investigate alternative splicing related to MBNL cells were harvested in protein loading buffer 62.5 mM Tris HCl pH 6.8 2 SDS 10 glycerol and 5 2 mercaptoethanol and the protein concentration was quantitated with the Non Interfering Protein Assay Genotech St Louis Mo. . Total protein lysates from HEK293 20 g and primary chicken skeletal 30 g cultures were loaded on a 12.5 acrylamide gel and transferred to Immobilon P membranes Millipore Bedford Mass. . GFP was detected using JL 8 monoclonal antibody BD Biosciences Palo Alto Calif. at a dilution of 1 2000. The secondary antibody was a goat anti mouse HRP conjugate Jackson Immunoresearch West Grove Pa. at a dilution of 1 5000.

To detect endogenous MBNL1 HeLa 50 g protein lysates were loaded on a 12.5 acrylamide gel. Blots were probed with the monoclonal 3A4 16 mg ml at a dilution of 1 500. The secondary antibody was a sheep anti mouse HRP conjugate Amersham Biosciences Piscataway N.J. at a dilution of 1 5000. For GAPDH in HeLa cells 15 g of total protein lysates was run on a 12.5 acrylamide gel transferred to membranes and detected using the 6G5 monoclonal Biogenesis Kingston N.H. at a dilution of 1 100 000. The secondary antibody was a goat anti mouse HRP conjugate Jackson Immunoresearch West Grove Pa. at a dilution of 1 5000.

GFP MBNL1 2 and 3 strongly repressed inclusion of both human and chicken cTNT exon 5 in primary chicken skeletal muscle cultures while expression of GFP to levels comparable to or greater than GFP MBNL fusion proteins had no effect on splicing . Of note GFP MBNL1 was found to have a novel MBNL1 isoform lacking exons 7 9 and 10 and containing a frameshift in exon 12. In addition there were no differences in the splicing activity of GFP fusion proteins compared to Xpress epitope tagged MBNL proteins data not shown . Therefore MBNL proteins are directly antagonistic to endogenous CELF activity which activates cTNT exon inclusion in muscle Charlet B N Logan P Singh G Cooper T A 2002a 9 649 658 .

Another pre mRNA target that is misregulated in DM striated muscle is the IR Savkur R S Philips A V Cooper T A 2001 29 40 47 Savkur R S Philips A V Cooper T A Dalton J C Moseley M L Ranum L P Day J W 2004 74 1309 1313 . To test whether the MBNL family can also regulate human IR the three MBNL family members were co expressed with a human IR minigene. In contrast to the inhibitory effect of MBNL on cTNT splicing coexpression of MBNL family members with an IR minigene strongly induces exon inclusion whereas GFP alone had no effect .

To determine whether the MBNL family has a general effect on alternative splicing all three MBNL proteins were co expressed with a clathrin light chain minigene containing the neuron specific exon EN. The EN alternative exon in this minigene strongly responds to over expression of the SR family of proteins and htra2 1 but not CELF proteins Stamm S Casper D Hanson V Helfman D M 1999 64 108 118 Singh G Charlet B N Han J Cooper T A 2004 32 1232 1241 data not shown . Over expression of GFP MBNL1 2 and 3 with the clathrin light chain minigene had no effect on alternative splicing of exon EN . MBNL expression also did not affect splicing of an artificial alternative exon flanked by splice sites from human globin intron 1 data not shown . These results demonstrate that MBNL proteins do not have a general effect on alternative splicing but rather regulate specific pre mRNA targets. In summary MBNL1 2 and 3 regulate splicing of cTNT and IR alternative exons.

To determine whether depletion of endogenous MBNL1 protein could also affect the splicing patterns of known DM pre mRNA targets in human cells siRNA constructs were designed to target MBNL1 but not MBNL2 and MBNL3. To confirm the specificity of the effects two siRNA constructs were designed to target different regions of the MBNL1 mRNA.

SiRNA construct design and transfection two custom siRNA duplexes were designed for RNAi against human MBNL1 using the Dharmacon siDESIGN program available on the world wide web at dharmacon.com and were synthesized by Dharmacon. The sequences are as follows THH31 mRNA target AA N19 format 5 3 AACAGACAGACUUGAGGUAUG SEQ ID NO 35 THH2 mRNA target AA N19 format 5 43 3 AACACGGAAUGUAAAUUUGCA SEQ ID NO 36 GFP siRNA duplex Dharmacon Lafayette Colo. cat. no. D 001300 01 20 . 300 000 HeLa cells were plated in 2 ml of antibiotic free growth media DMEM supplemented with 10 FBS per well in a six well plate. HeLa cells were chosen because they express MBNL1 Miller J W Urbinati C R Teng Umnuay P Stenberg M G Byrne B J Thornton C A Swanson M S 2000 EMBO J 19 4439 4448 and are amenable to siRNA mediated depletion Elbashir S M Harborth J Lendeckel W Yalcin A Weber K Tuschl T 2001 Nature 411 494 498 .

At 12 h after plating the media was exchanged with 800 l serum free media DMEM per well. siRNA duplex 2.66 g was transfected using Oligofectamine Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . 1 ml of 3 serum containing media DMEM supplemented with 30 FBS was added after 4 h. After 12 h the 3 serum containing media was replaced with antibiotic free growth media and the cells were transfected with 1 g of minigene and 2.66 g of siRNA duplex using Lipofectamine 2000 Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . The media was exchanged with antibiotic free growth media 6 h later. RNA and protein were harvested 48 h after transfection of the minigene.

Independent transient transfection of each siRNA construct resulted in a knockdown of endogenous MBNL1 protein to less than 10 20 based on comparisons to serial dilutions of the untransfected or mock transfected lysates data not shown .

Immunofluorescence analysis of MBNL1 depletion HeLa cells were grown on coverslips in six well plates and transfected with 2.66 g siRNA using Oligofectamine. The coverslips were washed with cold PBS pH 7.4 and fixed in 4 paraformaldehyde PBS for 15 min. After three washes with PBS the cells were dehydrated with 70 ethanol overnight at 4 C. The coverslips were then rehydrated with PBS for 10 min and incubated with 3 BSA PBS for 15 min at room temperature. The cells were washed once with PBS and incubated with the primary antibody 3A4 10 mg ml at a dilution of 1 1000 in 3 BSA PBS at room temperature for 1 h. The cells were then washed three times with PBS and incubated with the secondary antibody Alexa Fluor labeled goat anti mouse IgG 2 mg ml Molecular Probes Eugene Oreg. at a dilution of 1 100 in 3 BSA PBS at room temperature for 1 h. The cells were then washed with PBS three times counterstained with DAPI MolecularProbes Eugene Oreg. and mounted for visualization by fluorescence microscopy.

Analysis of MBNL1 depletion by immunofluorescence demonstrated predominantly nuclear expression that was greatly reduced in the majority of cells by each siRNA construct . In addition the siRNA constructs silenced effectively the expression of GFP MBNL1 but not GFP MBNL2 GFP MBNL3 or GFP from transiently transfected plasmids and neither MBNL1 siRNA affected the levels of endogenous MBNL2 protein data not shown . These results indicate that the siRNAs preferentially silence MBNL1.

MBNL1 depletion and cTNT and IR minigene splicing to determine whether depletion of endogenous MBNL1 affected alternative splicing of cTNT IR and clathrin light chain the minigenes were transfected with each siRNA construct. Depletion of MBNL1 promoted exon inclusion in cTNT exon skipping in IR and only minimal splicing changes in the clathrin light chain minigene . siRNA mediated depletion of MBNL1 with two independent constructs reproduces the DM splicing patterns for cTNT and IR minigenes. GFP siRNA had no effect on splicing of any of the tested minigenes. MBNL1 siRNA had minimal effects on splicing of a rat clathrin light chain minigene.

These splicing effects were not caused by general activation of the mammalian RNAi machinery because siRNA targeting GFP or luciferase and nonspecific pools of siRNA had minimal effects on splicing of the three minigenes plus data not shown . Furthermore the alteration in cTNT splicing caused by MBNL1 depletion in HeLa cells can be reversed by expression of GFP MBNL2 or GFP MBNL3 but not GFP data not shown demonstrating that adding back MBNL isoforms not targeted by MBNL1 siRNA rescues the splicing effects of MBNL1 deficiency.

The data indicate that endogenous MBNL1 regulates the splicing of human cTNT and IR minigenes. Interestingly siRNA mediated depletion of MBNL1 reproduces the splicing pattern observed in DM1 for cTNT exon inclusion and IR exon skipping and is opposite to the pattern observed when MBNL1 is over expressed. The over expression and depletion data indicate that endogenous MBNL1 regulates the alternative splicing of cTNT and IR minigenes and suggest that MBNL1 regulates these pre mRNAs via specific cis regulatory elements. The effects of MBNL on the cTNT and IR alternative exons are the opposite of the splicing patterns induced by CELF proteins implying an antagonistic relationship between these protein families.

UV cross linking analysis of MBNL1 binding to human cTNT to determine whether the splicing effects of MBNL1 on pre mRNA targets were direct or indirect a UV cross linking assay was performed using purified recombinant GST MBNL1 and uniformly labeled in vitro transcribed segments from the human cTNT gene. Uniformly P labeled RNAs were transcribed in vitro using P GTP and P UTP Perkin Elmer Wellesley Mass. from PCR products or cloned regions of the human or chicken introns 4 and 5 as represented in .

UV cross linking assays were performed using radiolabeled transcripts standardized for picomoles of G and U. UV cross linking assays included 1 g of purified GST MBNL1 in the presence of 1 g BSA 1 g tRNA 0.3 g heparin 0.3 mM magnesium acetate in 2 mM magnesium acetate 2 mM ATP 16 mM HEPES pH 7.9 65 mM potassium glutamate 0.16 mM EDTA 0.4 mM DTT and 16 glycerol. Binding was for 10 min at 30 C. Recombinant GST MBNL1 protein was produced as described Miller J W Urbinati C R Teng Umnuay P Stenberg M G Byrne B J Thornton C A Swanson M S 2000 19 4439 4448 . Competitions were performed as described previously Singh G Charlet B N Han J Cooper T A 2004 32 1232 1241 . The indicated amounts of non labeled competitor RNAs were added to the binding reaction 10 min prior to addition of labeled substrate RNA.

The human cTNT minigene contains a 732 nucleotide nt cTNT genomic fragment that is necessary and sufficient to respond to MBNL1 over expression and depletion . To identify MBNL1 binding sites within this cTNT pre mRNA region uniformly P labeled in vitro transcribed RNAs covering the entire region were used for UV cross linking binding assays. As shown in the binding of GST MBNL1 on human cTNT was mapped to a 41 nt region within the 3 splice site of exon 5 compare RNAs C D E and F located between a near consensus branch point sequence and the 3 cleavage site of the upstream intron.

Scanning mutagenesis identification of binding sites scanning mutagenesis identified two MBNL1 binding sites located 18 and 36 nt upstream from exon 5 . The absence of binding to long intronic segments RNAs F and C and RNAs containing nucleotide substitutions RNAs H J and M see below demonstrate binding specificity. This analysis indicates that for cTNT the MBNL1 binding site is distinct from the CUG BP1 binding site which is located downstream from the alternative exon Philips A V Timchenko L T Cooper T A 1998 280 737 741 .

UV cross linking analysis of binding of MBNL1 with nucleotide substitutions nucleotide substitutions that disrupt both MBNL1 binding sites were introduced into the human cTNT minigene to test whether MBNL1 binding was required to affect responsiveness to MBNL1 expression in vivo. As the MBNL binding site is located within the 3 splice site of intron 4 only four nucleotide substitutions were introduced to reduce the effects of MBNL binding site mutations on basal splicing efficiency RNA M . These substitutions prevented binding of recombinant MBNL1 to an RNA that is otherwise identical to RNA G containing the wild type sequence . In addition non labeled RNA M was much less efficient than RNA G in competing binding of MBNL1 to labeled RNA G .

When introduced into the human cTNT minigene the MBNL1 binding site mutation significantly reduced MBNL1 and MBNL3 or eliminated MBNL2 responsiveness to MBNL proteins demonstrating that loss of MBNL1 binding in vitro directly correlates with decreased responsiveness to MBNL1 in vivo. These results demonstrate that regulation by MBNL protein is mediated via binding the pre mRNA and suggest that all three MBNL proteins regulate human cTNT splicing by binding to the same site. In contrast the MBNL1 binding site mutations had little effect on responsiveness to CUG BP1 . GFP alone had minimal effects on splicing. Thus MBNL proteins regulate splicing by binding to the human cTNT pre mRNA and regulation by CUG BP1 does not require the MBNL1 binding site.

UV cross linking analysis of MBNL1 binding to chicken cTNT UV cross linking analysis was performed to identify MBNL1 binding site s associated with the chicken cTNT alternative exon 5. The genomic segment of chicken cTNT that responds to MBNL expression contains 99 and 142 nt of upstream and downstream introns flanking the alternative exon respectively. Within the intronic segments are four muscle specific splicing enhancers MSEs previously shown to be required for enhanced exon inclusion in embryonic striated muscle Ryan K J Cooper T A 1996 16 4014 4023 Cooper T A 1998 18 4519 4525 and required for regulation by all the six CELF family members Ladd A N Charlet B N Cooper T A 2001 21 1285 1296 Ladd A N Nguyen N H Malhotra K Cooper T A 2004 279 17756 17764 . RNAs containing MSEs 1 4 or individual MSEs were transcribed in vitro as uniformly P labeled RNAs and used for UV cross linking. GST MBNL1 bound strongly to MSE4 and slightly to MSE1 .

In competition studies non labeled MSE1 RNA poorly competed in the binding of GST MBNL1 to RNA containing MSE1 4 while MSE4 effectively competed in binding consistent with the UV cross linking results. The absence of competition by MSE2 or MSE3 demonstrates the sequence specificity of MBNL1 binding . To define the MBNL1 binding site s within MSE4 scanning mutagenesis was performed. Two regions required for MBNL1 binding were identified at 94 and 120 nt downstream from the exon . Alignment of the four MBNL1 binding sites in chicken and human cTNT revealed a common motif of YGCU U G Y . Taken together these data indicate that MBNL1 directly binds to introns adjacent to the human and chicken cTNT alternative exons.

Of note proteins from all three MBNL genes contain two pairs of Cys3His zinc finger related motifs with identical spacing between cysteine and histidine residues in fingers 1 and 3 CX7CX6CX3H and fingers 2 and 4 CX7CX4CX3H Miller J W Urbinati C R Teng Umnuay P Stenberg M G Byrne B J Thornton C A Swanson M S 2000 19 4439 4448 Fardaei M Rogers M T Thorpe H M Larkin K Hamshere M G Harper P S Brook J D 2002 11 805 814 Squillace R M Chenault D M Wang E H 2002 250 218 230 . The Cys3His type zinc finger is an evolutionarily conserved motif found in a number of proteins that perform diverse RNA processing functions and mutation of this motif results in a loss of RNA binding and disrupts protein function Bai C Tolias P P 1996 16 6661 6667 Bai C Tolias P P 1998 26 1597 1604 Lai W S Carballo E Strum J R Kennington E A Phillips R S Blackshear P J 1999 19 4311 4323 Stoecklin G Colombi M Raineri I Leuenberger S Mallaun M Schmidlin M Gross B Lu M Kitamura T Moroni C 2002 21 4709 4718 .

MBNL1 also binds to specific sequences within single stranded RNA consistent with the results from other Cys3His zinc finger proteins Cheng Y Kato N Wang W Li J Chen X 2003 4 53 66 Michel S L Guerrerio A L Berg J M 2003 42 4626 4630 . The above delineated results demonstrate that MBNL1 binds to cis elements in chicken cTNT intron 5 required for muscle specific splicing.

The CUG BP1 binding site located downstream from exon 5 in the human cTNT minigene is required for regulation by all six CELF proteins Philips A V Timchenko L T Cooper T A 1998 280 737 741 T Ho unpublished data and is distinct from the MBNL binding site mapped in . The results shown previously demonstrate that CUG BP1 regulates minigenes in which MBNL1 binding site mutations have greatly reduced or eliminated MBNL responsiveness .

Analysis of the importance of the CUG BP1 binding site to minigene regulation by MBNL1 to determine whether MBNL1 can regulate minigenes lacking the CUG BP1 binding site GFP MBNL1 or MBNL1 siRNA was cotransfected with a human cTNT minigene containing mutated CUG BP1 binding sites. Plasmids expressing DMPK exons 11 15 containing 960 interrupted CUG repeats in exon 15 were cloned using techniques as previously described Philips A V Timchenko L T Cooper T A 1998 280 737 741 . The over expression and depletion results demonstrate that cTNT minigenes containing the mutant and wild type CUG BP1 binding sites are equally responsive to MBNL1 . GFP MBNL2 and 3 also showed similar regulation of wild type and mutant human cTNT minigenes data not shown . These results indicate that the regulation of human cTNT by MBNL1 is independent of CELF regulation.

Similarly for the IR minigene regulation by CUG BP1 requires a CUG BP1 binding site in a 110 nt region located upstream of IR exon 11 Savkur R S Philips A V Cooper T A 2001 29 40 47 . A mutant IR minigene lacking the CUG BP1 binding site was co expressed with GFP MBNL1 2 and 3 in HEK293 cells or MBNL1 siRNA constructs in HeLa cells to determine whether regulation by MBNL proteins requires the CUG BP1 binding site. The mutant IR minigenes displayed regulation by MBNL proteins which was comparable to the wild type IR minigenes compare and B and C . These results indicate that regulation of human cTNT and IR by MBNL proteins does not require the CUG BP1 binding site. In other words the deletion of the human IR CUG BP1 binding site does not affect regulation by MBNL1. All three of the MBNL proteins promoted exon 11 inclusion of the mutant human IR minigene lacking the CUG BP1 binding site in HEK293 cells . Furthermore RNAi depletion of MBNL1 in HeLa cells using the indicated siRNA constructs promoted exon 11 skipping in the human IR minigene lacking the CUG BP1 binding site .

Mutant cTNT and IR minigenes lacking the CUG BP1 binding site respond as strongly as non mutated minigenes to MBNL1 depletion by RNAi . However neither of these minigenes respond to the trans dominant effects of co expressed CUG repeat RNA as do the non mutated minigenes Philips A V Timchenko L T Cooper T A 1998 280 737 741 Savkur R S Philips A V Cooper T A 2001 29 40 47 960CTG . The RNAi results demonstrate that the mutated cTNT and IR minigenes are competent to respond to MBNL1 depletion and yet they do not respond to co expression of CUG repeat RNA. Therefore while it has been demonstrated that MBNL proteins are alternative splicing regulators of cTNT and IR alternative exons these results indicate that MBNL depletion by CUG repeat RNA is not sufficient to account for the trans dominant effect of CUG repeat RNA on splicing.

As shown previously and in here the cTNT and IR minigenes made insensitive to CELF regulation by mutations in the CUG BP1 binding site no longer respond to expanded CUG repeat RNA suggesting that the trans dominant effect is mediated at least in part via an intact CUG BP1 binding site Philips A V Timchenko L T Cooper T A 1998 280 737 741 Savkur R S Philips A V Cooper T A 2001 29 40 47 . The present results show that the mutated cTNT and IR minigenes are competent to respond to MBNL depletion by RNAi as strongly as the non mutated minigenes yet they do not respond to CUG repeat RNA. If expanded CUG repeats affected cTNT and IR splicing simply by sequestering and depleting MBNL then the co expression of CUG repeats should have affected splicing of the mutated as well as non mutated minigenes. It is thus indicated that the repeats have a trans dominant effect on splicing by a mechanism more complex than MBNL depletion alone.

Origin and preparation of tissue samples to study the expression and distribution of expanded poly CUG RNA in relation to putative RNA binding proteins in the brain autopsy materials were obtained from ten DM1 patients mean age 56 years range 44 78 years 7 men and 3 women and 13 controls 6 with no neurologic disease 2 with Alzheimer disease 4 with Huntington disease and one with refractory epilepsy . The mean post mortem interval for DM1 patients was 6 hours range 2 to 14 hours . At the time of autopsy coronal sections of brain were prepared and placed on aluminum slabs cooled on dry ice. In addition selected regions were dissected and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. All samples were stored at 70 C.

Nine of the DM1 patients had signs of classical DM1 before age and died of complications related to the disease respiratory failure in 7 sudden cardiac death in 2 . The other DM1 patient had minimal symptoms of DM1 and died at age 78 yrs of unrelated disease. Genetic confirmation was performed as previously described by PCR or Southern blot on DNA isolated from postmortem brain tissue Thornton C. A. Johnson K. an Moxley R. T. 1994 35 104 107 . Southern blots of cortical DNA samples showed a broad range of expanded alleles ranging in size from 5 to 12 kb not shown . The individual with the minimal DM phenotype had a CTG repeat expansion length of 77 repeats in DNA isolated from peripheral blood brain and other tissues.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization FISH analysis of brain sections FISH was performed as described Mankodi A. Urbinati C. R. Yuan Q. P. Moxley R. T. Sansone V. Krym M. Henderson D. Schalling M. Swanson M. S. and Thornton C. A. 2001 10 2165 2170 with slight modifications. Frozen sections 12 m were fixed in 3 paraformaldehyde PBS for 30 min permeabilized in 2 acetone PBS pre chilled at 20 C. for 5 min and then prehybridized in 30 fornamide and 2 SSC at room temperature for 10 min. Next sections were hybridized with probe 1 ng l for 2 h at 37 C. in buffer 30 formamide 2 SSC 0.02 BSA 66 g ml yeast rRNA 2 mM vanadyl complex and then washed for 30 min in 30 formamide 2 SSC at 42 C. followed by 1 SSC for 30 min at room temperature. Probes were HPLC purified 2 O methyl RNA 20 mers IDT Coralville Iowa composed of CAG CUG or GUC repeats and labeled with Texas Red at the 5 end. Images were obtained on an Olympus AX70 epifluorescence microscope at 1 000 fold magnification. To compare the relative fluorescence intensities for RNA foci sections were processed on the same slide imaged under the same illumination and exposure settings and then analyzed using MCID v6.0 software Imaging Research Inc. St. Catherines Ontario .

Fluorescence in situ hybridization FISH of brain sections with CAG repeat probes revealed nuclear RNA foci in every individual with DM1 n 10 but not in controls with n 7 or without n 6 neurologic disease. RNA foci were not observed with CUG sense or GUC repeat probes. The hybridization of CAG probes to nuclear foci in DM1 did not require denaturation of genomic DNA. These results indicate that CAG repeat probes recognize CUG expansion RNA rather than a cross reactive RNA or DNA.

Nuclear RNA foci ranged in diameter from 0.2 to 2 m. Resolution of these small structures required direct fluorescence detection methods. However the autofluorescent material in brain lipofuscin was a complicating factor. The RNA foci were clearly distinguished from lipofuscin when the epifluorescence from three color channels was merged in a single image. As shown in the nuclear foci appeared in a single channel determined by the probe label Texas red . Lipofuscin which excites and emits at a broad spectrum of wavelengths generated signal in all channels and appeared as a different color typically yellow brown in the merged image. These observations formed the basis for distinguishing RNA foci in subsequent experiments. RNA foci were red sharply demarcated structures in the nucleus. Lipofuscin was yellow brown perinuclear material with indistinct margins.

Immunofluorescence IF combined with FISH to determine which cells express mutant DMPK and form RNA inclusions different brain regions were surveyed using FISH in combination with antibodies that mark specific cell types. In cerebral cortex the nuclear foci were distributed throughout all cortical layers and were confined to neurons as determined by immunofluorescence IF for neuronal markers NeuN or MAP2 .

Following the 1 SSC post hybridization wash of the FISH procedure sections were incubated in primary antibodies Table 1 above overnight at 4 C. washed five times with PBS for 2 min and then incubated in secondary antibody Alexa 488 labeled goat anti rabbit polyclonal or Alexa 488 labeled goat anti mouse polyclonal Molecular Probes and 33 nM diamidino 2 phenylindole DAPI for 30 min at room temperature. The antibody sources were as follows CELF4 and ETR3 T. Cooper TX PKR and C23 nucleolin and PML Biosource Intl CA RNA helicase A C. Lee NJ ADAR1 D. Cho PA NF90 G. Sen OH Staufen and NeuN Chemicon CA proteasome Affiniti UK Ubiquitin DAKO DK p80 coilin K L Chan CA PTB E. Wagner NC PM Scl 75 and hn RNP H and F J. Wilusz NJ and D. Black CA CNPase and MAP2 Sigma MO Sp1 and RAR Santa Cruz Biotechnology CA and SUMO 1 Zymed Laboratories Inc. CA . Sections were washed five times in PBS prior to mounting.

To estimate relative MBNL1 concentration in nucleoplasm in DM1 nuclei vs. controls sections of temporal cortex were processed on the same slide and imaged under the same exposure settings. Merged images for Texas red to visualize RNA foci Alexa 488 for MBNL1 and DAP1 for nuclear DNA were obtained. Regions of interest were manually defined as nuclear area excluding nucleolus RNA foci and overlapping lipofuscin. MBNL1 fluorescence intensity mean optical density in monochrome mode in arbitrary units in the region of interest was determined for 20 cortical neuronal nuclei per subject. Because of the difficulty of estimating background fluorescence from brain sections the results are not corrected for background. This approach provides a conservative estimate of the fold reduction for MBNL1 in DM1 nucleoplasm.

Counts of 100 NeuN positive cells from temporal and frontal cortex of 4 patients with classical DM1 selected for best relative preservation of cortical architecture showed RNA foci in 85 of cortical neurons in each case. More than one focus was visible in 30 of cortical neurons and occasional neurons had up to 15 small foci. In contrast the individual having a small CTG repeat expansion 77 repeats and mild phenotype cataracts mild weakness and cognitive impairment after age 60 years had foci in only 39 of NeuN positive neurons in temporal cortex.

RNA foci were widely distributed in other neuronal populations including the hippocampus all sectors dentate gyrus thalamus and also the substantia nigra and brain stem tegmentum each of 4 patients examined . The main exception was in cerebellar cortex where small foci were detected in some Purkinje cells but not in neurons of the molecular or granular cell layers n 6 patients examined .

RNA foci were also present in the subcortical white matter and corpus callosum in occasional cells expressing 2 3 cyclic nucleotide 3 phosphodiesterase CNPase a marker for oligodendrocytes . However these foci were smaller and less intense than those in cortical neurons. In sections processed on the same slide and imaged under the same exposure settings quantitation of FISH signals indicated that the amount of CUG expansion RNA in frontal cortical neurons was 2.9 fold greater area intensity than in Purkinje cells p

Paired samples of frontal cortex and biceps muscle were available for three patients. When sections of skeletal muscle and cerebral cortex from same patient were processed on the same slide and imaged under the same exposure settings the RNA inclusions were larger and more intense 3.1 fold greater area intensity in frontal cortical neurons than in skeletal muscle from the same individual p

To determine if mutant RNA resides in a previously identified nuclear domain mutant RNA was tested for colocalization with proteins that mark different nuclear compartments. These and subsequent experiments localizing protein relative to expanded poly CUG RNA were performed on a subset of 4 DM1 and 3 non disease control samples showing the best preservation of cortical architecture. In contrast to nuclear inclusions of polyglutamine proteins Skinner P. J. Koshy B. T. Cummings C. J. Klement I. A. Helin K. Servadio A. Zoghbi H. Y. and Orr H. T. 1997 389 971 974 RNA foci did not colocalize with PML bodies .

Colocalization of mutant RNA was likewise not found with the nucleolus visualized by DNA staining or antibodies to C23 nucleolin perinucleolar compartment antibodies to polypyrimidine tract binding protein or speckles antibodies to hnRNP C data not shown . The possibility of colocalization with Cajal bodies cannot be eliminated because p80 coilin antibodies did not consistently identify Cajal bodies in cortical neurons stained by the presently described methods.

Recruitment of proteasome and exosome to nuclear RNA foci the proteasome and exosome are multisubunit complexes responsible for protein and RNA degradation respectively. To determine if these complexes are recruited to nuclear RNA foci FISH analysis was combined with immunofluorescence using antibodies to components of the proteasome or exosome. Three components of the proteasome 20Sa 11Sy and 11Sa subunits were recruited to RNA foci in cortical neurons . No evidence was found however for ubiquitination or sumoylation of the foci not shown . In contrast antibodies to the PM Scl75 or PM Scl100 components of the exosome did not colocalize with RNA foci . This observation indicates that the proteasome may be recruited by conformational changes in MBNL1 MBNL2 or other poly CUG binding proteins. In such a case loss of muscleblind function in DM1 may result from the combined effects of sequestration and accelerated degradation.

Monoclonal antibody 3B1 showed strong expression of CUGBP1 in cortical neurons . The distribution of this protein in neuronal nucleus and cytoplasm appears similar in DM1 patients and controls and FISH IF analysis shows that CUGBP1 is not recruited into RNA foci. Polyclonal antibodies to other members of the CUGBP1 family ETR3 and CELF4 also fail to colocalize with foci not shown . None of six different dsRNA binding proteins in neuronal nuclei staufen NF90 ADAR1 PACT PKR RNA helicase A colocalize with RNA foci representative images for NF90 are shown in and ADAR1 in .

The RNA binding proteins hnRNP Al hnRNP I hnRNP M KSRP and HuR did not colocalize with RNA foci representative image for hnRNP M is shown in . In contrast hnRNPs H and F colocalized with foci in cortical neurons to a limited extent and these results were verified using two different polyclonal antibodies for each protein. The intensity of immunofluorescence for these proteins was greatest at the site of RNA foci however there did not appear to be significant depletion of hnRNP H or hnRNP F elsewhere in the neuronal nucleoplasm.

The splicing of neuron specific exon N1 of c src which is promoted by hnRNPs H and F Min H. Chan R. C. and Black D. L. 1995 9 2659 2671 Chou M. Y. Rooke N. Turck C. W. and Black D. L. 1999 19 69 77 was not reduced in DM1 cerebral cortex. Indeed inclusion of the N1 exon showed a slight 1.3 fold p

Mutant DMPK mRNA is reported to interact with transcription factors retinoic acid receptor gamma RAR and Sp1 Ebralidze A. Wang Y. Petkova V. Ebralidse K. and Junghans R. P. 2004 303 383 387 . In cortical neurons these transcription factors were readily detected by immunofluorescence but they did not colocalize with RNA foci and their distribution was similar in DM1 patients and controls .

Polyclonal antisera recognizing all members of the muscleblind family MBNL1 MBNL2 and MBNL3 showed strong colocalization with RNA foci not shown . We used monoclonal antibodies raised against epitopes specific for MBNL1 or MBNL2 to determine which muscleblind proteins interact with CUG expansion RNA in neurons. MBNL3 was not examined because its expression in adults is mainly restricted to placenta Fardaei M. Rogers M. T. Thorpe H. M. Larkin K. Hamshere M. G. Harper P. S. and Brook J. D. 2002 11 805 814 Kanadia R. N. Urbinati C. R. Crusselle V. J. Luo D. Lee Y. J. Harrison J. K. Oh S. P. and Swanson M. S. 2003 3 459 462 . In normal controls monoclonal antibody 3A4 showed expression of MBNL1 in nuclei and cytoplasm of cortical neurons .

In DM1 MBNL1 was strongly recruited into RNA foci whereas staining elsewhere in the nucleus was markedly reduced . Quantitative analysis was performed on 3 DM1 patients and non neurologic disease controls having the shortest postmortem intervals and best preservation of cortical architecture . The mean immunofluorescence intensity for MBNL1 in the nucleoplasm excluding RNA foci and nucleoli was 2.3 fold lower in DM1 neurons than in non disease controls 26 9 area intensity units in DM1 patients vs 61 17 in controls 20 neuronal nuclei per subject p

To determine if DM1 is associated with altered regulation of alternative splicing in brain 45 exons in 31 genes known to undergo alternative splicing in brain Table 2 below were examined.

RT PCR analysis of alternative splicing total RNA was isolated from temporal cortex gray matter of 7 DM1 patients and 5 non neurologic disease controls using TriReagent Molecular Research Center Cincinnati . cDNA was synthesized using SuperScript II reverse transcriptase Invitrogen with a mixture of oligo dT 12 18 and random hexamer primers. The cDNA was digested with RNase H and then amplified using PCR primers flanking alternatively spliced exons Table 2 .

PCR products were resolved on agarose gels stained with SybrGreenII Molecular Probes and analyzed on a fluorimager. An initial screen was performed on a subset of samples 4 DM1 and 2 control . Four exons appeared to show deregulated splicing in DM1. These differences were quantified in a second experiment including the full panel of 7 DM1 and 5 control samples. The fraction of exon inclusion was determined on triplicate reactions using ImageQuant software Amersham Piscataway .

For each exon the ratio of inclusion versus exclusion isoforms was determined by reverse transcriptase PCR RT PCR using primers flanking the regulated exon. An initial screen was performed using total RNA extracted from superior temporal cortex from two controls without neurological disease and four DM1 patients. Among 45 exons screened 4 appeared to show a change in the ratio of exon inclusion exclusion splice products in DM1. These differences were then confirmed and quantified in triplicate assays using temporal cortex RNA from 7 patients with DM1 and 5 controls . DM1 was associated with decreased inclusion of amyloid precursor protein exon 7 10 1 in DM1 30 11 in controls p

MBNL regulates fetal exon skipping in adults. The associated disease constitutes the failure in tissues to splice out specific fetal exons. Without MBNL the fetal exons are retained. Other exons similarly regulated by MBNL remain to be identified.

Notably DM1 is associated with reduced exon 10 inclusion and FTDP 17 and DM1 are both associated with neurofibrillary tangles and neuronal aggregates of hyperphosphorylated tau Foster N. L. Wilhelmsen K. Sima A. A. Jones M. Z. D Amato C. J. and Gilman S. 1997 41 706 715 Kiuchi A. Otsuka N. Namba Y. Nakano I. and Tomonaga M. 1991 82 1 5 Yoshimura N. Otake M. Igarashi K. Matsunaga M. Takebe K. and Kudo H. 1990 9 234 239 Vermersch P. Sergeant N. Ruchoux M. M. Hofmann Radvanyi H. Wattez A. Petit H. Dwailly P. and Delacourte A. 1996 47 711 717.

Neuronal intranuclear inclusions are characteristic of several neurological disorders. In the polyglutamine disorders the core component of the inclusion is mutant protein or a cleavage product containing the polyglutamine tract Davies S. W. Turnaine k M. Cozens B. A. DiFiglia M. Sharp A. H. Ross C. A. Scherzinger E. Wanker E. E. Mangiarini L. and Bates G. P. 1997 90 537 548 DiFiglia M. Sapp E. Chase K. O. Davies S. W. Bates G. P. Vonsattel J. P. and Aronin N. 1997 277 1990 1993 . In Fragile X tremor ataxia syndrome FXTAS FMR1 mRNA having an expanded CGG repeat leads to formation of nuclear inclusions Greco C. M. Hagerman R. J. Tassone F. Chudley A. E. Del Bigio M. R. Jacquemont S. Leehey M. and Hagerman P. J. 2002 125 1760 1771 . The above delineated results indicate that DM1 should be added to the list of disorders characterized by neuronal intranuclear inclusions.

Furthermore in DM1 muscle tissue evidence indicates that RNA inclusions are directly involved in disease pathogenesis through a mechanism that involves sequestration of muscleblind proteins and mis regulation of alternative splicing Kanadia R. N. Johnstone K. A. Mankodi A. Lungu C. Thornton C. A Esson D. Timmers A. M. Hauswirth W. W. and Swanson M. S. 2003 302 1978 1980 Mankodi A. Logigian E. Callahan L. McClain C. White R. Henderson D. Krym M. and Thornton C. A. 2000 289 1769 1773 . The strong expression of expanded poly CUG RNA in DM1 neurons formation of RNA inclusions redistribution of muscleblind proteins and altered regulation of alternative splicing shown above indicate that CNS symptoms of DM1 may also be triggered by RNA inclusions.

Despite evidence that mutant DMPK RNA accumulates to higher levels in cortical neurons the cell degeneration is more severe in muscle. The present results also indicate that splicing abnormalities are less frequent and less severe in cerebral cortex than in skeletal muscle suggesting that muscleblind proteins are more effectively sequestered in muscle nuclei or that compensation for muscleblind deficiency is more effective in neurons perhaps due to expression of additional RNA binding proteins. The exact determinants of cell vulnerability in DM1 are unknown but the stoichiometry of CUG expansion RNA in relation to muscleblind proteins is likely to play an important role. Of note while the present studies establish that the mutant DMPK mRNA is widely expressed in cortical and subcortical neurons the failure to detect DMPK immunologically likely reflects its relatively low concentration in brain homogenates.

The 3 fold increase in the fraction of NMDA receptor 1 NMDAR1 mRNA that includes exon 5 observed in DM1 brain is of significance since inclusion of this exon influences the pharmacologic behavior gating and cellular distribution somatic rather than somatodendritic expression of NMDAR1 Pal R. Agbas A. Bao X. Hui D. Leary C. Hunt J. Naniwadekar A. Michaelis M. L. Kumar K. N. and Michaelis E. K. 2003 Brain Res. 994 1 18 .

NMDAR1 function is required for normal long term potentiation in the hippocampus and learning Tsien J. Z. Huerta P. T. and Tonegawa S. 1996 87 1327 1338 . Thus altered splicing of exon 5 may contribute to the memory impairment observed in DM1 Rubinsztein J. S. Rubinsztein D. C. McKenna P. J. Goodburn S. and Holland A. J. 1997 34 229 233 .

Inclusion of tau exon 2 is reduced in DM1 confirming previous observations Sergeant N. Sablonniere B. Schraen Maschke S. Ghestem A. Maurage C. A. Wattez A. Vermersch P. and Delacourte A. 2001 10 2143 2155 . These results predict that fetal isoforms of tau excluding exons 2 3 and 10 are inappropriately expressed in adult DM1 brain findings that correlate well with previous studies of tau protein in DM1 brain Sergeant N. Sablonniere B. Schraen Maschke S. Ghestem A. Maurage C. A. Wattez A. Vermersch P. and Delacourte A. 2001 10 2143 2155 .

Expression of human fetal tau in transgenic mice leads to formation of neurofibrillary tangles and axonopathy Ishihara T. Zhang B. Higuchi M. Yoshiyama Y. Trojanowksi J. Q. and Lee V. M. 2001 158 555 562 . It is unclear however whether the extent of the tau missplicing in DM1 is sufficient to cause neuronal dysfunction. Together with the above described finding that DM1 is associated with increased expression of fetal splice isoforms for APP exon 7 exclusion products it is indicated that accumulation of mutant DMPK mRNA in the neuronal nucleus compromises a specific developmental program of alternative splicing.

The methods techniques and compositions disclosed and claimed herein can be made and executed without undue experimentation in light of the present disclosure. While the compositions and methods of this invention have been illustrated with several examples and preferred embodiments it will be apparent to those of skill in the art that variations may be applied to the methods and compositions in the steps or in the sequence of steps and in modifications of the compositions without departing from the concept spirit and scope of the invention. Accordingly the exclusive rights sought to be patented are as described in the claims below.

