---

title: SSX-2 peptide analogs
abstract: Some embodiments relate to analogs of peptides corresponding to class I MHC-restricted T cell epitopes and methods for their generation. These analogs can contain amino acid substitutions at residues that directly interact with MHC molecules, and can confer improved, modified or useful immunologic properties. Additionally classes of analogs, in which the various substitutions comprise the non-standard residues norleucine and/or norvaline, are disclosed.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08202841&OS=08202841&RS=08202841
owner: MannKind Corporation
number: 08202841
owner_city: Valencia
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050617
---
This application claims priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 e to U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 581 001 filed on Jun. 17 2004 entitled SSX 2 PEPTIDE ANALOGS and to U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 580 962 filed on Jun. 17 2004 entitled NY ESO PEPTIDE ANALOGS each of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

In certain embodiments the invention disclosed herein relates to analogs of peptides corresponding to class I MHC restricted T cell epitopes and methods for their generation. These analogs can contain amino acid substitutions at residues that directly interact with MHC molecules and can confer improved modified or useful immunologic properties. In particular epitope analogs from the tumor associated antigens SSX 2 NY ESO 1 PRAME PSMA tyrosinase and melan A are identified. Additionally classes of analogs in which the various substitutions comprise the non standard residues norleucine and or norvaline are disclosed.

T lymphocytes T cells are antigen specific immune cells that function in response to specific antigen signals. B lymphocytes and the antibodies they produce are also antigen specific entities. However unlike B lymphocytes T cells do not respond to antigens in a free or soluble form. For a T cell to respond to an antigen it requires the antigen to be bound to a presenting complex known as the major histocompatibility complex MHC .

MHC proteins provide the means by which T cells differentiate native or self cells from foreign cells. MHC molecules are a category of immune receptors that present potential peptide epitopes to be monitored subsequently by the T cells. There are two types of MHC class I MHC and class II MHC. CD4 T cells interact with class II MHC proteins and predominately have a helper phenotype while CD8 T cells interact with class I MHC proteins and predominately have a cytolytic phenotype but each of them can also exhibit regulatory particularly suppressive function. Both MHC are transmembrane proteins with a majority of their structure on the external surface of the cell. Additionally both classes of MHC have a peptide binding cleft on their external portions. It is in this cleft that small fragments of proteins native or foreign are bound and presented to the extracellular environment.

Cells called antigen presenting cells APCs display antigens to T cells using the MHC. T cells can recognize an antigen if it is presented on the MHC. This requirement is called MHC restriction. If an antigen is not displayed by a recognizable MHC the T cell will not recognize and act on the antigen signal. T cells specific for the peptide bound to a recognizable MHC bind to these MHC peptide complexes and proceed to the next stages of the immune response.

Embodiments include analogs of the MHC class I restricted T cell epitope SSX 2 KASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 1 polypeptides comprising these analogs that can be processed by pAPC to present the epitope analogs and nucleic acids that express the analogs. The analogs can have similar or improved immunological properties compared to the wild type epitope.

One embodiment relates to an isolated SSX 2 peptide having a sequence comprising 1 or more amino acid substitutions of the sequence KASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO 1 in an amount sufficient to elicit cytokine production from a T cell line generated by immunization against an epitope with the sequence KASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO 1 . In one aspect the amount sufficient can be not more than 10 uM. In a further aspect the amount is not more than 3 uM. In a further is not more than 1 uM. In a further aspect the amount can be not more than 0.3 uM. In one aspect the substitutions can include a standard amino acid. In a further aspect the amount can be not more than 0.3 uM. In one aspect the substitutions can include a standard amino acid for example Tyr Val Leu Ala Ile Met Trp Phe Asp Asn or Ser. In a further aspect the substitutions can include a non standard amino acid. In one aspect the non standard amino acid can be for example Nle Nva Abu or a D stereoisomer of a standard amino acid. In a further aspect the substitutions can include a modified terminal amino acid. In one aspect the modified terminal amino acid can be an amidated C terminal amino acid. In a further aspect at least one of the substitutions can be the addition of an amino acid wherein the addition is a C terminal addition. In a further aspect the peptide further can include the substitution of conserved amino acids at any site but preferably at the P3 P5 or P7 sites which are not expressly involved in any MHC interactions.

A further embodiment relates to an isolated peptide of 9 amino acids P1 to P9 which can include one amino acid at each site. For example P1 can be K F Y W Phg Phe 4 F Phe 4 NO MeTyr 3 benzothienyl Ala or D Lys P2 can be A L V I M D Ala Nal 2 Abu Aib Nle or Nva P3 can be S P4 can be E Q Nle or Nva P5 can be K P6 can be I L V Nle or Nva P7 can be F P8 can be Y F Phe 4 F and P P omega at P9 can be V I A Nva MeVal or Abu. In some instances the sequence is not KASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 1 .

A further embodiment relates to an isolated peptide of 9 amino acids P1 to P9 which can include one amino acid at each site. For example P1 can be K F Y W Phg Phe 4 F Phe 4 NO MeTyr 3 benzothienyl Ala or D Lys P2 can be V L M Abu Nle or Nva P3 can be S P4 can be E Q Nle or Nva P5 can be K P6 can be I L V Nle or Nva P7 can be F P8 can be Y F Phe 4 F and P at P9 can be V I A Nva MeVal Abu or V NH.

A further embodiment relates to an isolated peptide of 9 amino acids P1 to P9 which can include one amino acid at each site. For example P1 can be K F Y W Phg Phe 4 F Phe 4 NO MeTyr 3 benzothienyl Ala or D Lys P2 can be A L V M Abu Nle or Nva P3 can be S P4 can be E Q Nle or Nva P5 can be K P6 can be I L V Nle or Nva P7 can be F P8 can be Y F Phe 4 F P9 can be V and P at P10 can be I or L.

A further embodiment relates to an isolated peptide of 9 amino acids P1 to P9 which can include one amino acid at each site. For example P1 can be K F Y W Phg Phe 4 F Phe 4 NO MeTyr 3 benzothienyl Ala or D Lys P2 can be V P3 can be S P4 can be E Q Nle or Nva P5 can be K P6 can be I L V Nle or Nva P7 can be F P8 can be Y F Phe 4 F P9 can be V and P at P10 can be I L V or Nle.

A further embodiment relates to an isolated peptide of 9 amino acids P1 to P9 which can include one amino acid at each site. For example P1 can be K F Y W Phg Phe 4 F Phe 4 NO MeTyr 3 benzothienyl Ala or D Lys P2 can be L P3 can be S P4 can be E Q Nle or Nva P5 can be K P6 can be I L V Nle or Nva P7 can be F P8 can be Y F Phe 4 F P9 can be V and P at P10 can be I L V Nle or Nva.

A further embodiment relates to an isolated peptide having the sequence KL V M I D Ala D Val Nal 2 Aib Abu Nle or NvaSEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 116 or F Phg Y Phe 4 F Phe 4 NO O methyl Tyr or 3 benzothienyl AlaASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 117 or Y F or WV M or ISEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 118 or F or WLSEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 119 or KA V or LSEKIFYI SEQ ID NO. 120 or KL or VSEKIFYV NH SEQ ID NO. 121 or FVSEKIFYI A Nva Abu or MeVal SEQ ID NO. 122 or FVSQ Nle NvaKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 123 or FVSEKL V Nle or NvaFYV SEQ ID NO. 124 or FVSEKIFF Phe 4 F V SEQ ID NO. 125 or KASEKIFYVI L SEQ ID NO. 126 or KVSEKIFYV I L V or Nle SEQ ID NO. 127 or KLSEKIFYV L V Nle or Nva SEQ ID NO. 128 .

A further embodiment relates to an isolated peptide having the sequence KL V M Abu Nle or Nva SEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 129 or F or PhgA SEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 130 or YVSEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 131 or FL V or ISEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 132 or WL or ISEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 133 or KV or LSEKIFYI SEQ ID NO. 134 or FVSEKIFYI or Nva SEQ ID NO. 135 .

A further embodiment relates to an isolated peptide having the sequence KV or LSEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 136 or F or YASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 137 or FVSEKIFYI SEQ ID NO. 138 .

A further embodiment relates to a class I MHC peptide complex wherein the peptide has the sequence of any of the peptides in the embodiments described above and elsewhere herein. In one aspect the complex can be cross reactive with a TCR that recognizes a class I MHC SSX 2complex. In a further aspect the complex can be an HLA A2 SSX 2complex.

A further embodiment relates an immunogenic composition that can include any of the peptide embodiments described above and elsewhere herein. In one aspect the peptide can have for example the sequence KL V M Abu Nle or Nva SEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 129 or F or PhgASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 130 or YVSEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 131 or FL V or ISEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 132 or WL or ISEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 133 or KV or LSEKIFYI SEQ ID NO. 134 or FVSEKIFYI or Nva SEQ ID NO. 135 or KV or LSEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 136 or F or YASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 137 or FVSEKIFYI SEQ ID NO. 138 .

Some further embodiments relate to analogs of the MHC class I restricted T cell epitope NY ESO 1 SLLMWITQC SEQ ID NO. 98 polypeptides that include these analogs that can be processed by pAPC to present the epitope analogs and nucleic acids that express the analogs. The analogs can have similar or improved immunological properties compared to the wild type epitope.

One embodiment relates to an isolated NY ESO 1peptide having a sequence comprising 1 or more amino acid substitutions of the sequence SLLMWITQC SEQ ID NO. 98 in an amount sufficient to elicit cytokine production from a T cell line generated by immunization against an epitope with the sequence SLLMWITQC SEQ ID NO. 98 . For example in one aspect the amount sufficient can be not more than 10 uM. In a further aspect the amount can be not more than 3 uM. Also in a further aspect the amount can be not more than 1 uM. In a further aspect the amount is not more than 0.3 uM. In one aspect the substitutions can include a standard amino acid. In a further aspect the substitutions can include a non standard amino acid. In one aspect the non standard amino acid can be for example Tyr Val Leu Ala Ile Met Nle Nva Trp Phe Asp Asn Ser Abu and a D stereoisomer of a standard amino acid. In a further aspect the substitutions can include a modified terminal amino acid. In one aspect the modified terminal amino acid can be an amidated C terminal amino acid. In a further aspect at least one of the substitutions can be the addition of an amino acid wherein the addition is a C terminal addition.

A further embodiment relates to an isolated decamer peptide having a sequence S YLLMWITQC VL I Nle SEQ ID NO. 104 .

Yet another embodiment relates to an isolated peptide having a sequence SILMWITQC V L A SEQ ID NO. 105 YLLMWITQNva Nle SEQ ID NO. 106 FL VLMWITQV L I SEQ ID NO. 107 YI Nva NleLMWITQV SEQ ID NO. 108 YLLLWITQV SEQ ID NO. 109 or TVLMWITQV SEQ ID NO. 110 .

A further embodiment relates to an isolated peptide having a sequence S FVLMWITQV SEQ ID NO. 111 SLMWITQNva SEQ ID NO. 112 or SNvaLMWITQV SEQ ID NO. 113 .

Still another embodiment relates to an isolated peptide having a sequence SNvaLMWITQV SEQ ID NO. 113 .

Some embodiments relate to an isolated peptide. The peptide can include or consist essentially of a sequence in which 

Further the isolated peptide can include or consist essentially of the sequence KVSEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 3 .

The isolated peptide can have affinity for a class I MHC peptide binding cleft. The MHC can be for example HLA A2.

Some embodiments relate to a class I MHC peptide complex wherein the peptide can have the sequence of the peptide of claim . The class I MHC peptide complex can be cross reactive with a TCR that recognizes a class I MHC SSX 2complex. The class I MHC peptide complex can be an HLA A2 SSX 2complex.

Other embodiments relate to a polypeptide that includes a polypeptide as described above and elsewhere herein in association with a liberation sequence.

Still further embodiments relate to immunogenic compositions that include a peptide as described above or elsewhere herein.

Others relate to nucleic acids encoding or nucleic acid means for expressing a polypeptide as described above or elsewhere herein. Also some relate to immunogenic compositions that include such nucleic acids or nucleic acid means.

Some embodiments relate to methods of inducing maintaining or amplifying a CTL response. The methods can include intranodal administration of a composition as described above and elsewhere herein.

Other embodiments relate to methods of entraining a class I MHC restricted T cell response which methods can include intranodal administration a composition as described above or elsewhere herein plus an immunopotentiating agent.

Further embodiments relate to methods of inducing maintaining or entraining a CTL response which methods can include intranodal administration of a composition as described above and elsewhere herein.

Some embodiments relate to isolated peptides that include 1 to 3 substitutions in the sequence KASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 1 having an affinity for a class I MHC binding cleft that is similar to or greater than the affinity of KASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 1 for said class I MHC binding cleft. The halftime of dissociation can be similar to or greater than the halftime of dissociation of KASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 1 from said class I MHC binding cleft. The isolated peptide can be recognized by T cells with specificity for the peptide KASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 1 .

Still further embodiments relate to isolated peptides that include or consisting essentially of a sequence in which 

Some embodiments relate isolated peptides that include or consist essentially of a sequence in which 

A further embodiment relates to a class I MHC peptide complex wherein the peptide can have the sequence of any of the peptides in the embodiments described above or elsewhere herein. In one aspect the complex can be cross reactive with a TCR that recognizes a class I MHC NY ESO 1complex. In a further aspect the complex can be an HLA A2 NY ESO 1complex.

In one aspect of the above embodiments the peptide can have affinity for a class I MHC peptide binding cleft such as HLA A2.

A further embodiment relates to a polypeptide comprising the peptide sequence of any of the embodiments in association with a liberation sequence.

A further embodiment relates to an immunogenic composition that includes any of the peptide embodiments. In one aspect the peptide can have a sequence as set forth herein.

A further embodiment relates to a nucleic acid encoding any of the peptide embodiments but preferably those which do not have non standard amino acid substitutions. In a further aspect the nucleic acid can be encoded in a vector.

A further embodiment relates to an immunogenic composition that includes the nucleic acid encoding any of the peptide embodiments.

A further embodiment relates to a method of inducing a CTL response by intranodal administration of any of the compositions or peptides of the embodiments. In a further aspect the method can allow for maintaining a CTL. In a further aspect the method can allow for amplifying a class I MHC restricted T cell response. In a further aspect the method can allow for entraining a class I MHC restricted T cell response. In a further aspect the method also can include an immunopotentiating agent.

Some embodiments relate to isolated peptides having a sequence comprising 1 to 3 or 4 amino acid substitutions in a native epitope sequence wherein a concentration of the peptide required to elicit cytokine production from a T cell line generated by immunization against an epitope with the sequence is not more than a particular concentration for example 10 uM 1 uM 0.3 uM and the like. The substitutions can include a standard amino acid a non standard amino acid and the like. The non standard amino acid can be any of those described herein for example a D stereoisomer of a standard amino acid Nva or Nle. The substitutions can include a modified terminal amino acid and the modified terminal amino acid can be an amidated C terminal amino acid. One of the substitutions can be the addition of an amino acid for example the addition can be a C terminal addition.

Other embodiments relate to peptides having an amino acid sequence that includes at least one difference from a sequence of a segment of a target associated antigen the segment having known or predicted affinity for the peptide binding cleft of a MHC protein wherein the at least one difference can be a Nle or Nva residue replacing a residue at an MHC binding motif anchor position in said segment. The anchor position can be a primary anchor position for example P2 or P . The anchor position can be an auxiliary anchor position. The difference can include a Nle or Nva residue replacing a hydrophobic residue in said segment. In some aspects I L or V can be a preferred residue in the MHC binding motif anchor position. In some aspects the peptide can have a length of about 8 to about 14 amino acids or more preferably a length of 9 to 10 amino acids for example.

The protein can be a human MHC protein for example class I MHC protein. The MHC protein can be for example a type such as HLA A2 A3 A24 A30 A66 A68 A69 B7 B8 B15 B27 B35 B37 B38 B39 B40 B48 B51 B52 B53 B 60 B61 B62 B63 B67 B70 B71 B75 B77 C4 Cw1 Cw3 Cw4 Cw6 Cw7 and Cw10. In some aspects the MHC protein can be HLA A2 or A24. The MHC can have an anchor residue binding pocket wherein the pocket is homologous to the B or F pocket of HLA A 0201. The MHC residues responsible for forming binding pockets and which binding pockets accommodate epitope anchor residues and thus define the binding specificity of the MHC molecule are well understood in the art. One compilation of such information is found at the FIMM Functional Immunology web site at the hypertext transfer protocol http sdmc.lit.org.sg 8080 fimm . See also Sch nbach C. Koh J. L. Y. Sheng X. Wong L. and V. Brusic. FIMM a database of functional molecular immunology. 2000281 222 224 and Sch nbach C. Koh J L Flower D R Wong L. and Brusic V. FIMM a database of functional molecular immunology update 20022002301 226 229 each of which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Also the peptide can have at least one binding characteristic that is substantially the same as or better than a corresponding characteristic of said segment for said MHC. For example the binding characteristic can be elevated compared with that of said segment. Also the binding characteristic can be affinity or stability of binding for example.

The peptide can have an immunogenicity that is substantially the same as or better than the immunogenicity of the segment. The immunogenicity can be increased. The immunogenicity can evoke an immune response that is cross reactive to said segment or can evoke a CTL response. The immunogenicity can be assessed for example using an MHC tetramer assay a cytokine assay a cytotoxicity assay by measuring an immune response recognizing the peptide by measuring an immune response recognizing said segment using an in vitro immunizations system or any other suitable method. The immunization system can include human cells. The immunogenicity can be assessed using an in vivo immunization system for example one that includes a transgenic mouse. The peptide can have an at least similar binding characteristic as said segment for said MHC. For example in some aspects what is considered to be similar can be determined based upon the instant disclosure. In some particular aspects similarity can be based upon for example peptide concentration for half maximal binding relative affinity stability half time of dissociation and cross reactivity functional avidity. As an example a peptide can be considered similar if it has results or characteristics that are within twofold even threefold four five or 10 fold of the value for the native peptide. Also as an example for cross reactivity functional avidity a similar result can be one where the data are within three and 10 fold of the native peptide. As another example percentage of binding values can be considered similar when within 2 3 4 5 6 7 10 15 or 20 of the native peptide. Also ED50 values can be considered similar in some aspects when within 2 or 3 fold of native sequence. Similar halftime of dissociation can be for example within 2 or 3 fold. As still another example for cross reactivity a value that is about 2 fold different from wild type can be considered similar. These similar values are exemplary only and given in the context of some aspects of some embodiments. Other similar values can be determined based upon the other experiments and teachings herein.

The peptides can be immunologically cross reactive with the segment. The cross reactivity can be assessed by immunizing with the segment and assaying recognition of the peptide. The cross reactivity can be assessed by immunizing with the peptide and assaying recognition of the segment.

The peptide as described above and elsewhere herein can be modified to include two differences for example. In some instances each difference independently can include a Nle or Nva residue. In some instances one difference can not include a Nle or Nva residue. Also the peptide as described above and elsewhere herein can include three or more differences.

The target associated antigen can be a tumor associated antigen. The target associated antigen can be a pathogen associated antigen.

Other embodiments relate to immunogenic composition that include the instant peptides as described above and elsewhere herein. Further embodiments relate to methods of immunization that include administering such compositions to a mammal for example administering directly to the lymphatic system.

Still other embodiments relate to methods of making a T cell epitope analogue. The methods can include providing an amino acid sequence of a segment of a target associated antigen the segment can have known or predicted affinity for the peptide binding cleft of a MHC protein changing at least one amino acid of the sequence corresponding to an anchor position of a MHC binding motif to Nle or Nva and synthesizing a peptide comprising the changed sequence. The synthesis can be for example chemical synthesis or any other synthetic method.

Some embodiments relate to T cell epitopes peptide analogue wherein the analogue differs from a native epitope peptide by replacement of at least one native residue corresponding to an anchor position of a MHC binding motif with a Nle or Nva residue.

Further embodiments relate to methods to generate and resulting compositions representing peptides that are immune active and carry unnatural amino acids at one or multiple MHC anchor residues.

Peptides encompassing T cell epitopes are usually poor immunogens or immune modulators due to one of multiple factors a suboptimal pharmacokinetics profile limited binding to MHC molecules reduced Kand increased K decreased intrinsic recognition by T cells present in the normal immune repertoire e.g through various forms of tolerance . Various strategies have been pursued to improve the immunologic properties of peptides particularly the screening and use of peptides in which the sequence differs from the natural epitope. Such analogs are known by various names in the art such as heteroclytic peptides and altered peptide ligands APL . The generation of such analogs has most often utilized amino acids from the standard set of genetically encoded residues see for example Valmori D. et al. 160 1750 1758 1998 . Use of non standard amino acids has typically been associated with efforts to improve the biochemical stability of the peptide see for example Blanchet J. S. et al. 167 5852 5861 2001 .

Generally analogs can be categorized into the following two main classes 1 modification of peptide anchor residues to achieve better HLA binding profiles and higher immune responses and 2 modification of peptide anchor residues and TCR contact residues to circumvent T cell tolerance for self antigens.

Some embodiments relate to analogs that have at least one of the following retained or improved properties including but not limited to 

Some embodiments relate to peptide sequences including analogs where the amino acids of the sequence are referred to with a position designator for example P1 P2 P3 P etc. In addition the peptide sequences can be referred to as including a P0 and or P 1 designator. In some aspects P0 can be X XX or XXX where X is any amino acid or no amino acid. Similarly in some aspects P 1 can be X XX or XXX where X is any amino acid or no amino acid. Thus for example XXX can mean any combination of any amino acid residues or no amino acid. Thus these embodiments can encompass polypeptides having up to three additional amino acids with any combination of amino acid residues on the N terminus or C terminus of the specified sequence. Also in some aspects the embodiments can encompass no additional amino acids on the N terminus or the C terminus.

The MHC residues responsible for forming binding pockets and which binding pockets accommodate epitope anchor residues and thus define the binding specificity of the MHC molecule are well understood in the art. One compilation of such information is found at the FIMM Functional Immunology web site at the hypertext transfer protocol http sdmc.lit.org.sg 8080 fimm . See also Sch nbach C. Koh J. L. Y. Sheng X. Wong L. and V. Brusic. FIMM a database of functional molecular immunology. 2000281 222 224 and Sch nbach C. Koh J L Flower D R Wong L. and Brusic V. FIMM a database of functional molecular immunology update 20022002301 226 229 each of which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

The phrase liberation sequence refers to a peptide comprising or encoding an epitope or an analog which is embedded in a larger sequence that provides a context allowing the epitope or analog to be liberated by immunoproteasomal processing directly or in combination with N terminal trimming or other physiologic processes. In some aspects the analog or epitope can be designed or engineered.

Other embodiments relate to epitope arrays and other polypeptides that include the epitope analog sequences that can be processed to liberate the analog. Further embodiments relate to nucleic acids particularly DNA plasmids encoding such polypeptides or simply an analog and their expression therefrom. The analogs the polypeptides comprising them and the encoding nucleic acids can all be components of immunogenic compositions particularly compositions suitable for intralymphatic delivery all of which relate to further embodiments.

Peptide analogs with improved immunologic properties can be designed by modifying the anchor residues involved in the interaction with MHC molecules so as to increase the binding and stabilize the formation of MHC peptide complexes. Such modifications can be guided by knowledge of the binding motif or preferred anchor residues of the restricting MHC molecule. There further exist various rules indexes and algorithms that can be used to predict the properties of analogs bearing various substitutions with the limitation that the substitution is selected from the standard set of genetically encodable amino acids.

However there are no databases or algorithms to predict the outcome of replacing anchor residues with non standard amino acids and their usefulness is previously not well explored. It is herein disclosed that the non standard amino acids norleucine Nle and norvaline Nva can be advantageously substituted into the anchor residue positions of MHC binding peptides. It is preferred that they be placed in a position favorably occupied by a hydrophobic or a large amino acid especially I L or V.

MHC binding motifs are generally defined in terms of preferred residue side chains at nominal positions within a span of 8 to 10 amino acids see for example Rammensee et al. MHC Ligands and Peptide Motifs Molecular Biology Intelligence Unit Springer Verlag Germany 1997 Landes Bioscience Austin Tex. and Parker et al. Scheme for ranking potential HLA A2 binding peptides based on independent binding of individual peptide side chains J. Immunol. 152 163 175. Website algorithms are also available which can be used to predict MHC binding. See for example the world wide web page of Hans Georg Rammensee Jutta Bachmann Niels Emmerich Stefan Stevanovic SYFPEITHI An Internet Database for MHC Ligands and Peptide Motifs hypertext transfer protocol access via syfpeithi.bmi heidelberg.com scripts MHCServer.dll home.htm and another is bimas.dcrt.nih.gov molbio hla bind. For class I restricted epitopes the C terminal position P is typically a primary anchor. The 2position P2 is also often a primary anchor or alternatively P3 and or P5 can serve this role. Positions P2 through P7 have all been recognized as secondary or auxiliary anchor positions for one or another MHC see Rammensee et al. and see Table 6 from U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 2003 0215425 U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 026 066 filed on Dec. 7 2001 entitled EPITOPE SYNCHRONIZATION IN ANTIGEN PRESENTING CELLS which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety for all of its disclosure . For class II restricted epitopes P1 P4 P6 P7 and P9 have been recognized as anchor positions. The foregoing is intended as a general guide and should be considered exemplary and not exhaustive or limiting. Many analyses and compilations of binding motifs anchor residues and the like are available in the scientific and patent literature and over the internet. Their conventions and results further provide those of skill in the art useful guide to the design of epitope analogs when coupled with the teaching herein.

The length of the peptide actually bound to the presenting MHC molecule can be longer than the nominal motif sequence. The ends of the binding cleft for class II MHC molecules are open so that the bound peptide can be extended at either end of the core motif. In contrast the binding cleft is closed at both ends in class I MHC molecules so that the ends of the bound peptide must generally correspond to the motif however significant variation in length can be accommodated through bulging and folding of the central region of the bound peptide so that peptides of up to at least about 14 amino acids in length can be presented see for example Probst Kepper M. et al. 173 5610 5616 2004 .

Epitope analogs can have improved Kand Krelated to the interaction with class I MHC molecules as well as preserved or increased interaction with T cell receptors recognizing the original epitope modified or improved in vivo or ex vivo activity reflected in enhanced expansion of specific T cell populations improved cytokine production by specific T cells or in vivo or in vitro cytotoxicity against targets carrying natural epitopes mediated by T cells that reacted with the peptide. In addition such analogs may interact in a more optimal fashion with multiple distinct MHC class I molecules.

Such peptide analogs with improved immune properties may encompass one or multiple substitutions including one or multiple non standard amino acids. Among non standard amino acids substitutions for primary anchor residues consisting of norvaline or norleucine are preferred since as exemplified below they can not only improve on the interaction with MHC class I but can also preserve cross reactivity with TCR specific for the native epitope and show improved in vivo immune profile. More specifically mutating the P2 amino acid residue from A L or V to norvaline or norleucine improved immune properties and is thus preferred. In addition modifying the C terminal residue to norvaline or preferably norleucine improved immune features of the analogs. In addition analogs that encompass multiple substitutions at primary and or secondary anchor residues including norvaline and or norleucine at P2 or P can be associated with improved immune properties.

Certain uses of norvaline Nva and norleucine Nle are mentioned in U.S. Pat. No. 6 685 947 PCT Publication Nos. WO 03 076585 A2 and WO 01 62776 A1 and U.S. Patent Publication No. 20040253218A1. None of these references teaches the general usefulness of Nva or Nle substituted at an anchor position of a MHC biding peptide to improve an immunological property. The 218 publication teaches that the substituted residues should be incorporated at TCR interacting positions and not at MHC interacting positions 

In still another embodiment of the invention the peptide is an analog of a peptide derived from an NS specific antigen that is immunogenic but not encephalitogenic. The most suitable peptides for this purpose are those in which an encephalitogenic self peptide is modified at the T cell receptor TCR binding site and not at the MHC binding site s so that the immune response is activated but not anergized Karin et al 1998 Vergelli et al 1996 .

HLA A2.1 restricted peptides incorporating Nle disclosed in the 776 publication are derived from CEA p53 and MAGE 3. In the CEA peptide I Nle GVLVGV SEQ ID NO. 143 and the p53 peptide S Nle PPPGTRV SEQ ID NO. 144 Nle is present at the P2 position. No teaching about the general usefulness of norleucine is provided and no disclosure is provided indicating how or if these substitutions altered the properties of the analogs as compared to the native sequence.

Some of the instant embodiments relate to epitope analogs that incorporate Nva and or Nle at a position promoting binding to MHC. Some embodiments specifically exclude the use Nle and or Nva in HLA A2.1 restricted epitopes HLA A2.1 epitopes from CEA p53 and or MAGE 3 or other peptides derived from MAGE 3 CEA and or p53. In some embodiments one or more of the specific sequences as disclosed in the above referenced patent references are specifically excluded. Other exemplary embodiments include the use of Nle and or Nva at P3 P5 and or P anchor positions at an auxiliary anchor position to make an analog of a non A2 or non A2.1 HLA restricted epitope in an anchor position of a peptide that is not derived from an oncogene or oncofetal protein and in an anchor position of a peptide derived from a CT antigen.

In general such analogs may be useful for immunotherapy and or prophylaxis of various diseases such as infectious cancerous or inflammatory as single agents or in combination therapies due to their optimized interaction with MHC molecules and T cell receptors key to onset and regulation of immune responses.

The analogs may be produced using any method known to one of skill in the art including manufacturing the peptides using a method of peptide synthesis or expressing nucleic acids that code for the desired peptide analogs. Thus when the analogs include one or more non standard amino acids it is more likely that they will be produced by a method of peptide production. When the analogs include only one or more substitutions with standard amino acids they may be expressed from an expression vector using any method known to one of skill in the art. Alternatively the peptides may be expressed using a method of gene therapy.

The usefulness and or the activity of the analogs was identified. In this way useful and or improved analogs can be identified. To be useful an analog may not necessarily be found to be improved in the identified assays. Thus a useful peptide may contain other properties such as being useful in a tolerized patient or resistant to proteolysis. To be improved a peptide can be found to have a clear improvement in binding to the TCR binding to the MHC molecule and an improved immune response or any other biological activity. To be useful the peptide may be found not to be improved when using a murine test system but because of the differences in the human immune system may be improved when tested in a human. Alternatively the usefulness may stem from a potential to break tolerance in a tolerized human. Alternatively the usefulness may stem from the ability to use the peptide as a base for further substitutions to identify improved analogs.

In order to evaluate usefulness improved properties and to compare the analogs in any way to the wild type one or more of the following assays were conducted peptide binding affinity for HLA A 0201 peptide HLA A 0201 complex stability assay cross reactivity assay recognition of peptide analogs by wild type peptide specific CTL or recognition of wild type peptide by CTL generated using peptide analogs immunogenicity assays such as an IFN secretion assay a cytotoxicity assay and or an Elispot assay antigenicity assays such as an in vitro tumor cell lysis assay an ex vivo tumor cell lysis and an in vivo tumor cell lysis and proteolysis assays to identify increased resistance to proteolysis. Details of exemplary assays are presented in the Examples.

Useful methods for using the disclosed analogs in inducing entraining maintaining modulating and amplifying class I MHC restricted T cell responses and particularly effector and memory CTL responses to antigen are described in U.S. patent application Ser. Nos. 09 380 534 and 09 776 232 both entitled A METHOD OF INDUCING A CTL RESPONSE U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 479 393 filed on Jun. 17 2003 entitled METHODS TO CONTROL MHC CLASS I RESTRICTED IMMUNE RESPONSE and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 871 707 Pub. No. 2005 0079152 and Provisional U.S. Patent Application No. 60 640 402 filed on Dec. 29 2004 both entitled METHODS TO ELICIT ENHANCE AND SUSTAIN IMMUNE RESPONSES AGAINST MHC CLASS I RESTRICTED EPITOPES FOR PROPHYLACTIC OR THERAPEUTIC PURPOSE. The analogs can also be used in research to obtain further optimized analogs. Numerous housekeeping epitopes are provided in U.S. application Ser. Nos. 10 117 937 filed on Apr. 4 2002 Pub. No. 20030220239 A1 and 10 657 022 2004 0180354 and in PCT Application No. PCT US2003 027706 Pub. No. WO04022709A2 filed on Sep. 5 2003 and U.S. Provisional Application Nos. 60 282 211 filed on Apr. 6 2001 60 337 017 filed on Nov. 7 2001 60 363 210 filed on Mar. 7 2002 and 60 409 123 filed on Sep. 5 2002 each of which applications is entitled EPITOPE SEQUENCES. The analogs can further be used in any of the various modes described in those applications. Epitope clusters which may comprise or include the instant analogs are disclosed and more fully defined in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 561 571 filed on Apr. 28 2000 entitled EPITOPE CLUSTERS. Methodology for using and delivering the instant analogs is described in U.S. patent application Ser. Nos. 09 380 534 and 09 776 232 Pub. No. 20020007173 A1 and in PCT Application No. PCTUS98 14289 Pub. No. WO9902183A2 each entitled A METHOD OF INDUCING A CTL RESPONSE. Beneficial epitope selection principles for such immunotherapeutics are disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. Nos. 09 560 465 filed on Apr. 28 2000 10 026 066 Pub. No. 20030215425 A1 filed on Dec. 7 2001 and 10 005 905 filed on Nov. 7 2001 all entitled EPITOPE SYNCHRONIZATION IN ANTIGEN PRESENTING CELLS 09 561 074 entitled METHOD OF EPITOPE DISCOVERY 09 561 571 filed Apr. 28 2000 entitled EPITOPE CLUSTERS 10 094 699 Pub. No. 20030046714 A1 filed Mar. 7 2002 entitled ANTI NEOVASCULATURE PREPARATIONS FOR CANCER application Ser. Nos. 10 117 937 Pub. No. 20030220239 A1 and PCTUS02 11101 Pub. No. WO02081646A2 both filed on Apr. 4 2002 and both entitled EPITOPE SEQUENCES and application Ser. Nos. 10 657 022 and PCT Application No. PCT US2003 027706 Pub. No. WO04022709A2 both filed on Sep. 5 2003 and both entitled EPITOPE SEQUENCES. Aspects of the overall design of vaccine plasmids are disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. Nos. 09 561 572 filed on Apr. 28 2000 entitled EXPRESSION VECTORS ENCODING EPITOPES OF TARGET ASSOCIATED ANTIGENS and 10 292 413 Pub. No. 20030228634 A1 filed on Nov. 7 2002 entitled EXPRESSION VECTORS ENCODING EPITOPES OF TARGET ASSOCIATED ANTIGENS AND METHODS FOR THEIR DESIGN 10 225 568 Pub No. 2003 0138808 filed on Aug. 20 2002 PCT Application No. PCT US2003 026231 Pub. No. WO 2004 018666 filed on Aug. 19 2003 both entitled EXPRESSION VECTORS ENCODING EPITOPES OF TARGET ASSOCIATED ANTIGENS and U.S. Pat. No. 6 709 844 entitled AVOIDANCE OF UNDESIRABLE REPLICATION INTERMEDIATES IN PLASMID PROPAGATION. Specific antigenic combinations of particular benefit in directing an immune response against particular cancers are disclosed in Provisional U.S. patent Application No. 60 479 554 filed on Jun. 17 2003 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 871 708 filed on Jun. 17 2004 and PCT Patent Application No. PCT US2004 019571 Pub. No. WO 2004 112825 all entitled COMBINATIONS OF TUMOR ASSOCIATED ANTIGENS IN VACCINES FOR VARIOUS TYPES OF CANCERS. Antigens associated with tumor neovasculature e.g. PSMA VEGFR2 Tie 2 are also useful in connection with cancerous diseases as is disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 094 699 Pub. No. 20030046714 A1 filed Mar. 7 2002 entitled ANTI NEOVASCULATURE PREPARATIONS FOR CANCER. Methods to trigger maintain and manipulate immune responses by targeted administration of biological response modifiers are disclosed U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 640 727 filed on Dec. 29 2004. Methods to bypass CD4 cells in the induction of an immune response are disclosed in U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 640 821 filed on Dec. 29 2004. Exemplary diseases organisms and antigens and epitopes associated with target organisms cells and diseases are described in U.S. application Ser. No. 09 776 232 Pub. No. 20020007173 filed Feb. 2 2001 and entitled METHOD OF INDUCING A CTL RESPONSE. Exemplary methodology is found in U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 580 969 filed on Jun. 17 2004 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 155 288 filed on Jun. 17 2005 both entitled COMBINATIONS OF TUMOR ASSOCIATED ANTIGENS IN DIAGNOSTICS FOR VARIOUS TYPES OF CANCERS. Methodology and compositions are also disclosed in U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 640 598 filed on Dec. 29 2004 entitled COMBINATIONS OF TUMOR ASSOCIATED ANTIGENS IN COMPOSITIONS FOR VARIOUS TYPES OF CANCER. The integration of diagnostic techniques to assess and monitor immune responsiveness with methods of immunization including utilizing the instant analogs is discussed more fully in Provisional U.S. Patent Application No. 60 580 964 filed on Jun. 17 2004 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 155 928 filed on Jun. 17 2005 both entitled IMPROVED EFFICACY OF ACTIVE IMMUNOTHERAPY BY INTEGRATING DIAGNOSTIC WITH THERAPEUTIC METHODS. The immunogenic polypeptide encoding vectors are disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 292 413 Pub. No. 20030228634 A1 filed on Nov. 7 2002 entitled EXPRESSION VECTORS ENCODING EPITOPES OF TARGET ASSOCIATED ANTIGENS AND METHODS FOR THEIR DESIGN and in U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 691 579 filed on Jun. 17 2005 entitled METHODS AND COMPOSITIONS TO ELICIT MULTIVALENT IMMUNE RESPONSES AGAINST DOMINANT AND SUBDOMINANT EPITOPES EXPRESSED ON CANCER CELLS AND TUMOR STROMA. Additional useful disclosure including methods and compositions of matter is found in U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 691 581 filed on Jun. 17 2005 entitled MULTIVALENT ENTRAIN AND AMPLIFY IMMUNOTHERAPEUTICS FOR CARCINOMA. Further methodology compositions peptides and peptide analogs are disclosed in U.S. Provisional Application Nos. 60 581 001 and 60 580 962 both filed on Jun. 17 2004 and respectively entitled SSX 2 PEPTIDE ANALOGS and NY ESO PEPTIDE ANALOGS. All of these applications mentioned in this paragraph are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety for all that they teach. Additional analogs peptides and methods are disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 155 929 entitled NY ESO 1 PEPTIDE ANALOGS and U.S. Prov. Application No. 60 691 889 entitled EPITOPE ANALOGS and PCT Application No. 2007 516810 entitled EPITOPE ANALOGS all filed on Jun. 17 2005. As an example without being limited thereto the references are incorporated by reference for what they teach about class I MHC restricted epitopes analogs the design of analogs uses of epitopes and analogs methods of using and making epitopes and the design and use of nucleic acid vectors for their expression.

There are many antigens epitopes of which can be recognized by T cells in an MHC restricted manner for which manipulation of an immune response directed against them has therapeutic or prophylactic potential. The principles for making analogs of MHC binding peptides described herein are generally applicable to any of these antigens and their epitopes. A particular focus of the present disclosure is epitopes from the tumor associated antigens TuAA SSX 2 NY ESO 1 PRAME PSMA tyrosinase and Melan A.

SSX 2 also know as Hom Mel 40 is a member of a family of highly conserved cancer testis antigens Gure A. O. et al. Int. J. Cancer 72 965 971 1997 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety . Its identification as the TuAA antigen is taught in U.S. Pat. No. 6 025 191 entitled ISOLATED NUCLEIC ACID MOLECULES THAT ENCODE A MELANOMA SPECIFIC ANTIGEN AND USES THEREOF which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Cancer testis antigens are found in a variety of tumors but are generally absent from normal adult tissues except testis. SSX 2 is expressed in many different types of tumors including synovial sarcomas melanoma head and neck cancers breast colon and ovarian cancers. In addition to its widespread expression in a variety of cancers it is also immunogenic in patients with late stage disease. Further there is evidence of spontaneous humoral and cellular immune responses towards this antigen in metastatic tumor patients Ayyoub M et al. Cancer Res. 63 17 5601 6 2003 Ayyoub M et al. J. Immunol. 168 4 1717 22 2002 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. Two HLA A2 restricted T cell epitopes have been identified recently using reverse T cell immunology namely SSX 2 Ayyoub M et al. J. Immunol. 168 4 1717 22 2002 U.S. Pat. No. 6 548 064 entitled ISOLATED PEPTIDES CONSISTING OF AMINO ACID SEQUENCES FOUND 1N SSX OR NY ESO 1 MOLECULES THAT BIND TO HLA MOLECULE U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 117 937 entitled EPITOPE SEQUENCES and SSX 2 Wagner C et al. Cancer Immunity 3 18 2003 each of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. The C termini of both epitopes can be efficiently generated by in vitro proteasome digestion. Isolated HLA A 0201 SSX 2multimer CD8 T cells from tumor infiltrated lymph nodes of SSX 2 positive patients exhibited high functional avidity and can effectively recognize SSX 2 positive tumors however the spontaneously occurring immunological responses were not sufficient for stopping tumor growth possibly because these immune response did not develop until fairly late in the disease progression and the activated T cells were not numerous enough. U.S. Pat. No. 6 548 064 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety further describes substituting a T or A residue at both the P2 and P position of an SSX 2 epitope.

NY ESO 1 is a cancer testis antigen found in a wide variety of tumors and is also known as CTAG 1 Cancer Testis Antigen 1 and CAG 3 Cancer Antigen 3 . NY ESO 1 as a tumor associated antigen TuAA is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 5 804 381 entitled ISOLATED NUCLEIC ACID MOLECULE ENCODING AN ESOPHAGEAL CANCER ASSOCIATED ANTIGEN THE ANTIGEN ITSELF AND USES THEREOF that is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. A paralogous locus encoding antigens with extensive sequence identity LAGE 1a s and LAGE 1b L have been disclosed in publicly available assemblies of the human genome and have been concluded to arise through alternate splicing. Additionally CT 2 or CTAG 2 Cancer Testis Antigen 2 appears to be either an allele a mutant or a sequencing discrepancy of LAGE 1b L. Due to the extensive sequence identity many epitopes from NY ESO 1 can also induce immunity to tumors expressing these other antigens. The proteins are virtually identical through amino acid 70. From 71 134 the longest run of identities between NY ESO 1 and LAGE is 6 residues but potentially cross reactive sequences are present. And from 135 180 NY ESO and LAGE 1a s are identical except for a single residue but LAGE 1b L is unrelated due to the alternate splice. The CAMEL and LAGE 2 antigens appear to derive from the LAGE 1 mRNA but from alternate reading frames thus giving rise to unrelated protein sequences. More recently GenBank Accession AF277315.5 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety chromosome X clone RP5 865E 18 RP5 1087L19 complete sequence reports three independent loci in this region that are labeled as LAGE1 corresponding to CTAG 2 in the genome assemblies plus LAGE2 A and LAGE2 B both corresponding to CTAG 1 in the genome assemblies .

NY ESO 1is identified as an HLA A2 restricted epitope in U.S. Pat. No. 6 274 145 entitled ISOLATED NUCLEIC ACID MOLECULE ENCODING CANCER ASSOCIATED ANTIGEN THE ANTIGEN ITSELF AND USES THEREOF and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 117 937 Pub. No. 20030220239 entitled EPITOPE SEQUENCES reports that this C terminus is generated by the housekeeping proteasome in an in vitro assay. Analogs substituting A V L I P F M W or G at P alone or in combination with A at another position are disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 417 165 and 6 605 711 both entitled NY ESO 1 PEPTIDE DERIVATIVES AND USES THEREOF. The references described in this paragraph are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

PRAME also know as MAPE DAGE and OIP4 was originally observed as a melanoma antigen. Subsequently it has been recognized as a CT antigen but unlike many CT antigens e.g. MAGE GAGE and BAGE it is expressed in acute myeloid leukemias. PRAME is a member of the MAPE family which consists largely of hypothetical proteins with which it shares limited sequence similarity. The usefulness of PRAME as a TuAA is taught in U.S. Pat. No. 5 830 753 entitled ISOLATED NUCLEIC ACID MOLECULES CODING FOR TUMOR REJECTION ANTIGEN PRECURSOR DAGE AND USES THEREOF which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 181 499 entitled METHODS FOR SELECTING AND PRODUCING T CELL PEPTIDE EPITOPES AND VACCINES INCORPORATING SAID SELECTED EPITOPES which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety identifies a variety of potential epitopes including PRAME using in vitro digestion with immunoproteasome.

PSMA prostate specific membranes antigen a TuAA described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 538 866 entitled PROSTATE SPECIFIC MEMBRANES ANTIGEN which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety is expressed by normal prostate epithelium and at a higher level in prostatic cancer. It has also been found in the neovasculature of non prostatic tumors. PSMA can thus form the basis for vaccines directed to both prostate cancer and to the neovasculature of other tumors. This later concept is more fully described in U.S. Patent Publication No. 20030046714 PCT Publication No. WO 02 069907 and a provisional U.S. Patent application No. 60 274 063 entitled ANTI NEOVASCULAR VACCINES FOR CANCER filed Mar. 7 2001 and U.S. application Ser. No. 10 094 699 filed on Mar. 7 2002 entitled ANTI NEOVASCULAR PREPARATIONS FOR CANCER each of which are hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. The teachings and embodiments disclosed in said publications and applications are contemplated as supporting principals and embodiments related to and useful in connection with the present invention. Briefly as tumors grow they recruit ingrowth of new blood vessels. This is understood to be necessary to sustain growth as the centers of unvascularized tumors are generally necrotic and angiogenesis inhibitors have been reported to cause tumor regression. Such new blood vessels or neovasculature express antigens not found in established vessels and thus can be specifically targeted. By inducing CTL against neovascular antigens the vessels can be disrupted interrupting the flow of nutrients to and removal of wastes from tumors leading to regression.

Alternate splicing of the PSMA mRNA also leads to a protein with an apparent start at Met thereby deleting the putative membrane anchor region of PSMA as described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 935 818 entitled ISOLATED NUCLEIC ACID MOLECULE ENCODING ALTERNATIVELY SPLICED PROSTATE SPECIFIC MEMBRANES ANTIGEN AND USES THEREOF which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. A protein termed PSMA like protein Genbank accession number AF261715 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety is nearly identical to amino acids 309 750 of PSMA and has a different expression profile. Thus the more preferred epitopes are those with an N terminus located from amino acid 58 to 308. PSMAwas identified as possessing an HLA A2 binding motif in WO 01 62776 entitled HLA BINDING PEPTIDES AND THEIR USES which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Its production in vitro by digestion with housekeeping proteasome and actual binding to HLA A2 was disclosed in U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 2003 0220239 entitled EPITOPE SEQUENCES.

Tyrosinase is a melanin biosynthetic enzyme that is considered one of the most specific markers of melanocytic differentiation. Tyrosinase is expressed in few cell types primarily in melanocytes and high levels are often found in melanomas. The usefulness of tyrosinase as a TuAA is taught in U.S. Pat. No. 5 747 271 entitled METHOD FOR IDENTIFYING INDIVIDUALS SUFFERING FROM A CELLULAR ABNORMALITY SOME OF WHOSE ABNORMAL CELLS PRESENT COMPLEXES OF HLA A2 TYROSINASE DERIVED PEPTIDES AND METHODS FOR TREATING SAID INDIVIDUALS which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

Melan A also called MART 1 Melanoma Antigen Recognized by T cells is another melanin biosynthetic protein expressed at high levels in melanomas. The usefulness of Melan A MART 1 as a TuAA is taught in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 874 560 and 5 994 523 both entitled MELANOMA ANTIGENS AND THEIR USE IN DIAGNOSTIC AND THERAPEUTIC METHODS as well as U.S. Pat. No. 5 620 886 entitled ISOLATED NUCLEIC ACID SEQUENCE CODING FOR A TUMOR REJECTION ANTIGEN PRECURSOR PROCESSED TO AT LEAST ONE TUMOR REJECTION ANTIGEN PRESENTED BY HLA A2 all of which are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety. The immunodominant HLA A2 restricted epitope from this TuAA is Melan A. It has been shown to be produced by the housekeeping proteasome Morel S. et al. 12 107 117 2000 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Various analogs incorporating standard amino acids including an improved analog substituting L at P2 are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 025 470 entitled ISOLATED NONA AND DECAPEPTIDES WHICH BIND TO HLA MOLECULES AND THE USE THEREOF which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. The use of analogs incorporating non standard amino acids with a primary goal of improving biochemical stability is reported by Blanchet J. S. et al. 167 5852 5861 2001 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

As noted above the natural immune response to SSX 2 in cancer patients including the response to SSX 2 may not be effective in controlling cancer. Additionally wild type SSX 2is only a moderately immunogenic peptide that can further limit its clinical potential. Stronger SSX 2 specific immune responses induced by the use of superagonist analogs results in clinical benefits for patients with SSX 2 positive tumor.

Thus in one embodiment the analogs can be used in compositions to stimulate the immune response of a subject to mount an immune response against a target cell displaying the target antigen. The embodiment is contemplated to have utility in the treatment and prevention of neoplastic and viral disease.

Since the wild type SSX 2is only a moderately immunogenic peptide that may prevent it from eliminating tumors effectively in vivo a method was used to de novo design SSX 2variants that were more potent or had a variety of improved properties. By using a more immunogenic SSX 2 analog peptide it was possible to stimulate a stronger immune response and or to amplify the naturally occurring immune response to achieve a better chance of clinical response. Thus the binding properties affinity and HLA A 0201 peptide complexes stability immunogenicity antigenicity and cross reactivity to the wild type epitope were analyzed for each of the analogs to identify an improved property. In some embodiments by improved property it is meant generally that the analog can be better used for some purpose than the wild type. Thus the analog need not exhibit improved binding stability or activity to be improved and may even show a reduced ability to mediate certain parts of the process but still be improved for use in another way. For example analogs that retain some activity but not all activity may be better in human systems that are tolerized to the wild type antigen.

Previously modifications of natural tumor associated peptide epitopes by incorporating favorable anchor residues have generated analogs with improved binding profiles with HLA molecules and enhanced immunogenicity. One of the most successful examples is the A27L peptide analog of Melan A 26 35 epitope. Valmori et al. Enhanced generation of specific tumor reactive CTL in vitro by selected Melan A MART 1 immunodominant peptide analogs 1998 160 4 1750 8 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. The original epitope failed to form a stable complex with HLA A2 molecules since it lacks optimum anchor amino acid residue at position 2. The modified A27L Melan A 26 35 peptide analog has demonstrated unequivocally increased binding profiles with HLA A2 molecules and greater immunogenicity than its wild type counterpart. Immunizing patients with this analog can generate strong T cell immune responses that were able to recognize the wild type epitope presented at the cell surfaces. Similar modifications have been obtained successfully with many other tumor associated epitopes such as GP100 209 217 Parkhurst et al. Improved induction of melanoma reactive CTL with peptides from the melanoma antigen gp100 modified at HLA A 0201 binding residues 1996 157 6 2539 48 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety Her 2 369 377 Vertuani et al. Improved immunogenicity of an immunodominant epitope of the HER 2 neu protooncogene by alterations of MHC contact residues 2004 172 6 3501 8 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety .

Up to this point no SSX 2analogs have been designed and studied even though they hold great promise for development of SSX 2 based vaccines to treat a variety of cancers particularly SSX 2 positive cancers and or tumors. Thus methods are disclosed herein that can be used for the identification and production of analogs to a Synovial sarcoma X breakpoint 2 SSX 2 wild type sequence. Using the methods a panel of 95 novel SSX 2analogs based on the wild type sequence from amino acids 241 249 were identified with a variety of improved properties. The improved properties include but are not limited to binding to class I MHC and T cell receptor TCR molecules and biological responses such as IFN secretion cytotoxicity and tumor cell lysis. Peptides with improved potency that retained cross reactivity with the wild type epitope were identified. Among these analogs some have been demonstrated to be the superagonist variants of the wild type SSX 2peptide some of which analogs have been shown to have much higher affinity with HLA A 0201 molecule and the peptide HLA complex possessed extended stability. When the mice were immunized with these analogs they were able to induce enhanced CTL immune responses in HHD transgenic mice. The resulting CTLs could effectively lyse A2 and SSX 2 tumor cell lines both in vivo and in vitro which indicated that the CTLs generated using the analogs were able to recognize the wild type SSX 241 49 epitope that naturally presented at the cell surfaces. In comparison with the wild type SSX 241 49 epitope the analogs are better candidates for the development of cancer vaccines.

Embodiments include families of one or more peptides of 9 or 10 amino acids in length related by sequence to amino acids 41 49 of the human cancer testis CT antigen SSX 2 SSX 2 . The individual peptide embodiments have one to several defined amino acid substitutions in the wild type sequence. The substituted amino acids are variously other members of the standard set of amino acids commonly genetically encoded derivatives thereof their D stereoisomers or other non standard L amino acids. These analogs are useful for investigating the interaction of the wild type epitope with class I MHC and TCR molecules and other components of the immune response and for designing additional analogs with further optimized immunologic properties. Some embodiments of the analogs have at least similar immunologic properties to the wild type epitope in the HLA transgenic mouse model in which they have been tested. Such peptides can be useful in humans as SSX 2 is a self antigen to which a degree of tolerance may be expected and the amino acid differences of the analogs can help to stimulate populations of T cells that have avoided negative selection but are cross reactive with the wild type epitope. Various peptide embodiments can have one or more improved immunologic properties in that they possess greater affinity for MHC or greater stability of binding to MHC elicit greater cytokine production or require lower peptide concentrations to elicit similar cytokine production from T cells that recognize the wild type epitope are more immunogenic can induce or amplify a cross reactive cytolytic response to the wild type epitope or can break tolerance.

In one embodiment the analogs can have at least one substitution at a residue selected from the group consisting of P1 P2 P4 P6 P8 P9 and P10. In a further embodiment the analogs can have at least two substitutions at residues selected from the group consisting of P1 P2 P4 P6 P8 P9 and P10. In a further embodiment the analogs can have at least three substitutions at residues selected from the group consisting of P1 P2 P4 P6 P8 P9 and P10. In a further embodiment the analogs can have substitutions at positions P2 and P9. In a further embodiment the peptides can have substitutions at residues P1 P2 and P9. In a further embodiment the peptide analogs can have substitutions at residues P1 P2 and P4. In a further embodiment the peptide analogs can have substitutions at residues P1 P2 and P6. In a further embodiment the peptide analogs can have substitutions at residues P1 P2 and P8. In one embodiment two substitutions can produce improved properties. In a further embodiment one substitution can produce improved properties. In a further embodiment three substitutions can produce improved properties. In a further embodiment the one or more substitutions can produce improved properties but are still recognized by a TCR that recognizes the wild type sequence still cross react with the wild type sequence .

One embodiment relates to epitope arrays and other polypeptides comprising the epitope analog sequences that can be processed to liberate the analog. Further embodiments relate to nucleic acids particularly DNA plasmids encoding such polypeptides or simply an analog and their expression therefrom. The analogs the polypeptides comprising them and the encoding nucleic acids can all be components of immunogenic compositions particularly compositions suitable for intralymphatic delivery that constitute further embodiments.

Embodiments relate to the SSX 2peptide which contain substitutions of the sequence KASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 1 See . In a further embodiment the analog can be generally an analog of the SSX 2decamer peptide with the sequence KASEKIFYVY SEQ ID NO. 79 . The residues or amino acids that make up the peptide are referred to herein as P1 P9 or P1 P10 to designate the position within the peptide as numbered from the N to the C terminus P1 corresponding to the N terminal Lysine and P9 corresponding to the C terminal Valine in the nonamer. Alternatively the residues may be referred to by the primary activity of the molecule that they are involved in. For example residue P2 is described as the N terminal primary anchor molecule while P9 or P10 in the decamer is described as the primary C terminal anchor. Residues P4 P6 and P8 are primarily involved in TCR interactions. Substitutions can use any amino acids including standard and non standard amino acids known to one of skill in the art. A number of exemplary amino acids are disclosed herein however the substitutions disclosed herein are not meant to be a list that includes all imagined substitutions but are exemplary of the substitutions that are possible. One of skill in the art may find a number of other non standard amino acids in catalogs and references that may be purchased or chemically produced for use with the analogs herein.

A number of possible analogs were produced by modification of peptide anchor residues to achieve better HLA binding profiles and higher immune responses including at the N terminal primary anchor P2 position at the N terminal secondary anchor P1 position at the N terminal primary and secondary anchor P1 and P2 positions and at the N terminal primary secondary anchor P1 and P2 positions and C terminal primary anchor P9 position . Further peptides with modifications at the anchor residues and TCR contact residues were produced to circumvent T cell tolerance for self antigens these modifications included modifications at the N terminal primary secondary anchor P1 and P2 positions and secondary TCR recognition sites P4 P6 and or P8 positions modifications at the N terminal primary secondary anchors P1 and P2 position and modifications at the C terminal primary anchor P9 and at secondary TCR recognition sites P4 P6 and or P8 positions . Further decamer analogs were produced.

The choice of which residues would best produce analogs with improved properties involved analysis of studies of MHC peptide interactions studies of TCR peptide interactions and previous analogs that were known in the art. Some residues are primarily involved in a specific interaction and some are secondarily or even tertiarily involved. Thus the knowledge of how the residues are involved in the binding to these molecules was involved in the analysis. Further some of the wild type residues are preferred meaning that they work well for the intended interaction while others are non preferred meaning that they work poorly for the interaction. Thus in one embodiment the non preferred residues can be substituted. For example the valine at the C terminus is generally a preferred anchor residue because it produces a strong interaction with the HLA molecule and thus it was less preferred to substitute this residue. However modifications of wild type tumor associated peptide epitopes by incorporating favorable anchor residues have generated analogs with improved binding profiles with HLA molecules and enhanced immunogenicity. One of the most successful examples is the A27L peptide analog of Melan A 26 35 epitope Valmori D et al. J. Immunol. 160 4 1750 8 1998 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety . The original epitope failed to form a stable complex with HLA A2 molecules since it lacked an optimal anchor residue at position 2. In contrast the modified Melan AA27L peptide analog demonstrated unequivocally increased binding profiles with HLA A2 molecules and greater immunogenicity than its wild type counterpart. Immunizing patients with this analog generated strong T cell immune responses that were able to recognize the wild type epitope presented at the cell surfaces. Similar modifications were obtained successfully with many other tumor associated epitopes such as GP100 209 217 Parkhurst M R et al. J. Immunol. 157 6 2539 48 1996 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety Her 2 369 377 Vertuani S et al. J. Immunol. 172 6 3501 8 2004 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety .

The choice of how many residues to substitute involves a desire to substitute better residues while still retaining enough of the qualities of the epitope that it will still be recognized by T cells which recognize the wild type epitope. Thus in one embodiment one or two substitutions can be made to the wild type peptide. In a further embodiment more than two substitutions can be made to the wild type peptide while still retaining cross reactivity with the wild type peptide.

Thus generally the part of the peptide that is involved in TCR recognition is desirably substituted to produce improved immunogenicity while still cross reacting with the wild type epitope. For example a peptide that shows increased immunogenicity is preferred. Because the P2 or second amino acid at the N terminal end is believed to be primarily involved in the process of producing improved immunogenicity primarily through improved binding properties it is a preferred substitution site and a number of modifications were made in the exemplary analogs to identify desired substitutions. Similar considerations apply to the carboxy terminal position P which also can be important for MHC binding.

Thus in one embodiment the analog can include a substitution at the P2 residue that substitutes a more hydrophobic residue for the wild type alanine. In a further embodiment the hydrophobic residue also can possess a more bulky side chain. In a further embodiment the residue at P1 can be substituted with a more hydrophobic residue. In a further embodiment residues P1 and P2 both can be substituted with more hydrophobic residues. In further embodiments at least one residue at P1 P2 and P9 can be substituted. In a further embodiment at least two residues at P1 P2 and P9 can be substituted. In a further embodiment at least two residues at P1 P2 P9 P4 and P6 can be substituted including one or more residues involved in TCR binding.

Further substitutions of those residues only secondarily involved in binding to TCR or the MHC molecule can be advantageous. For example substitution of secondary TCR binding amino acids can generate analogs that still bind and produce a response and do not interfere with the binding to the MHC molecule but preferably overcome the tolerance issues of self antigens. This is useful because a patient who has cancer may be partially tolerized to the antigen. Thus in order to overcome that tolerance an analog that retains some activity can be preferable to an analog with more improved immunogenicity because it will be less likely to be recognized as self by the immune system.

The N terminal primary anchor is the 2N terminal amino acid of the peptide and is the N terminal proximal primary anchor. It is primarily involved in the interaction with the MHC molecule and substitutions can result in improved binding and stability. However it may be secondarily involved in TCR interactions also. Thus substitutions at this site can result in a peptide with improved interaction with MHC molecules as well as improved interaction with the TCR.

The alanine found at this position in the wild type sequence is generally believed to be non preferred for the interaction with the MHC molecule. Thus preferred embodiments of the analogs have a substitution at this position. In one embodiment the original Ala 42 found in the wild type sequence can be substituted with a more hydrophobic amino acid. Any more hydrophobic amino acid may be used including any that is available or known to one of skill in the art including standard amino acids and non standard amino acids. In a further embodiment the original Ala 42 is substituted with a more hydrophobic amino acid also possessing a bulky side chain. Examples of more hydrophobic amino acids includes but are not limited to Leu Val Ile Met aminobutyric acid Norleucine and Norvaline.

The N terminal secondary anchor is the first amino acid at the N terminus. This residue is Lys 41 and is defined as a secondary anchor residue in interacting with the HLA A 0201 molecule. However it is also engaged in the interaction with the T cell receptors to a certain degree. Therefore modifications of this position can generate some heteroclitic analogs that are more immunogenic and more suitable for the development of tumor vaccines. Although the lysine at this position is generally considered to be favored substitutions can result in highly improved properties.

Thus in one embodiment the original Lys 41 found in the wild type sequence can be substituted with a more hydrophobic amino acid. Any more hydrophobic amino acid can be used including any that is available or known to one of skill in the art including standard amino acids and non standard amino acids. In a further embodiment the Lys 41 can be substituted with an aromatic amino acid. Examples of more hydrophobic amino acids include but are not limited to Phe Tyr Trp and D Lys.

In one embodiment both primary and secondary anchor residues were substituted to result in improved binding affinity to the HLA molecule. In a further embodiment the double substitution produced improved stability of binding to the HLA molecule. In further embodiments the binding and or stability was not improved and may have even been reduced but other properties of the molecule were improved such as activity or recognition by a tolerized individual.

The C terminal Val of the wild type peptide is generally a preferred anchor residue and primarily involved in the interaction with the MHC molecule. However substitutions were carried out to identify which amino acids improve the analogs having primary and secondary N terminal modifications. These C terminal substitutions can be used in the absence of one or more N terminal modifications also.

These modifications were shown to improve binding affinity and stability and in some cases resulted in analogs with decreased cross reactivity. Thus in some embodiments the substitution to the C terminus resulted in a peptide with improved binding and or stability without decreased cross reactivity. However in other embodiments the substitution to the C terminus resulted in a peptide with improved binding and or stability with equal or decreased cross reactivity. Each of the molecules can be of use in certain cases or in certain patients. In one embodiment the valine at the C terminus is substituted with a large aliphatic amino acid.

The TCR sites are generally recognized as residues P4 P6 and P8 and are the primary residues involved in the binding to the TCR. However other residues may also be involved in the interaction to a lesser extent. In one embodiment one or more of the sites primarily involved in TCR interaction can be substituted to increase the interaction. Preferably these substitutions can generate heteroclitic analogs that do not interfere with binding to the MHC molecule but overcome the tolerance issues of the wild type peptides. In a further embodiment at least one TCR substitution can be included with at least one substitution at position P1 P2 and or P9. In a further embodiment the substitution at any one or more of the P4 P6 and P8 positions can be a polar amino acid. In a further embodiment the substitution can be an aromatic amino acid at position P8. In a further embodiment the substitution can be an amino acid with a large aliphatic side chain at position P6. In a further embodiment the substitution can be an amino acid which has a larger side chain to preserve the interaction.

In some embodiments the C terminal residue can be modified to contain an amide in the place of the free carboxylic acid. Thus for example if the peptide is a 9 mer nonamer the P9 residue can be modified. If the peptide is a 10 mer decamer the P10 residue can be modified. Preferably this results in a peptide or analog that has increased stability in biological media including but not limited to blood lymph and CNS. Preferably the peptides can retain the other necessary activities to result in an analog usable for vaccination or as an immunogen.

The length of typical MHC binding peptides can vary from about 8 to about 11 amino acids in length. However most of the previously used HLA A 0201 are 9 mers nonamers or 10 mers decamers . Thus in one embodiment the analog can be an analog of the wild type sequence SSX 2. However because the wild type 10 mer does not have the correct binding motif and showed no immunological activity a 10 mer was created by substituting amino acids at the P10 position and identifying the effect of various wild type and analogs see .

With reference to any residues can also be substituted with conservative amino acids. Conservative substitutions can be paired with any of the above substitutions that can produce an effect. Alternatively conservative substitutions can be specifically at residues that are not believed to be involved in any of the activities at a primary secondary or even tertiary level. Such residues include P3 P5 and P7. For example the Serine at position P3 can be substituted with an alanine or threonine to produce an analog. Typically such conservative substitutions do not significantly affect the activity of the analog however in some embodiments they can increase certain activities or decrease certain activities.

Many features regarding a variety of embodiments and aspects of analog design are disclosed above either generally or as applied to the SSX 2 epitope. It is to be understood that such disclosure is also applicable to this and subsequent epitopes. Explicit restatement of such disclosure will be minimized for the sake of brevity.

Embodiments relate to analogs of the MHC class I restricted T cell epitope NY ESO 1 SLLMWITQC SEQ ID NO. 98 polypeptides comprising these analogs that can be processed by pAPC to present the epitope analogs and nucleic acids that express the analogs. The analogs can have similar or improved immunological properties compared to the wild type epitope.

One embodiment relates to methods to derivatize and improve analogs of NY ESO 1 along with specific sequences that encompass substitutions. The analogs can contain at least one substitution but can have multiple substitutions comprising standard or non standard amino acids singly or in various combinations. The analogs can result in peptides with retained or improved properties.

The epitope NY ESO 1has been shown to be presented by NY ESO 1 expressing cell lines by measuring the epitope specific T cell activity against such cells Jaeger E. et al. J. Exp. Med. 187 265 270 1998 U.S. Pat. No. 6 274 145 entitled ISOLATED NUCLEIC ACID MOLECULE ENCODING CANCER ASSOCIATED ANTIGEN THE ANTIGEN ITSELF AND USES THEREOF which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. Methodologies to improve the physico chemical properties of the peptide NY ESO 1have been described U.S. Pat. No. 6 417 165 entitled NY ESO 1 PEPTIDE DERIVATIVES AND USES THEREOF which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety and can consist of replacement of the terminal cysteine with other amino acids that preserve or enhance the interaction with MHC and are devoid of the deleterious property of disulfide C C bond formation interfering with the activity. However sole manipulation of the C terminal cysteine residue ignores the advantages of optimizing multiple residues throughout the peptide for major histocompatibility MHC and or T cell Receptor TCR binding. Thus beyond the practicality of mutating the Cys residue there is considerable opportunity in mutating additional amino acids throughout the peptide. For example substitutions can be used to further optimize the binding to MHC and or TCR in a fashion that enables more effective application in clinics.

Embodiments relate to families of one or more peptides of 9 or 10 amino acids in length related by sequence to amino acids 157 165 of the human cancer testis CT antigen NY ESO 1 NY ESO 1 .

The analog is generally an analog of the NY ESO 1 with the sequence SLLMWITQC SEQ ID NO. 98 . Analysis of whether wild type amino acids are preferred or non preferred used previous analyses of other peptide MHC or TCR interactions. For example the Cysteine at the C terminus is generally a non preferred anchor residue because it does not produce a strong interaction with the HLA molecule and thus it was highly preferred to substitute this residue. However although the Serine at position P1 is generally preferred it was found that substituting an aromatic could produce a peptide with improved properties. Further the Leucine at position P2 is generally acceptable but substituting a hydrophobic and or bulky amino acid resulted in a peptide with improved properties. The residues which are primarily involved in the interaction with the TCR P4 P6 and P8 showed a preference generally for some polarity and in the case of P8 an aromatic generally produced peptides with favorable properties.

One preferred embodiment relates to an analog that has a substitution at the P2 position. Preferably the substitution can be a hydrophobic residue. More preferably the substitution can be a bulky hydrophobic residue. In a further embodiment the residue at P1 can be substituted with a more hydrophobic residue. In a further embodiment residues P1 and P2 can be both substituted with more hydrophobic residues. In further embodiments at least one residue at P1 P2 and P9 can be substituted. In a further embodiment at least two residues at P1 P2 and P9 can be substituted. In a further embodiment at least two residues at P1 P2 P9 P4 and P6 can be substituted including one or more residues involved in TCR binding. In a further embodiment the residue at P8 can be substituted with an aromatic. Examples of the following substitutions are shown in .

The N terminal primary anchor is the 2N terminal amino acid of the peptide thus it is the N terminal proximal primary anchor. Although the original Leucine 158 is not considered non preferred for binding to the MHC molecule substitutions can produce a peptide with improved binding. Thus in one embodiment the original Leu 158 found in the wild type sequence can be substituted with a similarly or more hydrophobic amino acid. Any hydrophobic amino acid may be used including one that is available to or that is known to one of skill in the art including standard amino acids and non standard amino acids. In a further embodiment the original Leu 158 can be substituted with a more hydrophobic amino acid also possessing a bulky side chain. Examples of more hydrophobic amino acids include but are not limited to Leu Val Ile Met aminobutyric acid Norleucine and Norvaline. Further a naphthal side chain can also be substituted. Preferably the substitution results in improved binding and stability with the HLA molecule. However this residue may be secondarily or tertiarily involved in TCR interactions and substitutions may also result in improved recognition by the TCR.

The N terminal secondary anchor is the first amino acid at the N terminus or P1. This residue is involved in a number of interactions. The residue of Ser 157 was defined as a secondary anchor residue in interacting with HLA A 0201 molecule it also engaged in the interaction with the T cell receptors to a certain degree. Therefore modifications of this position generate some heteroclitic analogs that are more immunogenic and more suitable for the development of tumor vaccines. Thus substitutions can result in a variety of improved qualities.

Although the Serine is not considered non preferred a number of substitutions can result in improved qualities of the peptide. Thus in one embodiment the original Ser 157 found in the wild type sequence can be substituted with a more hydrophobic amino acid. Any more hydrophobic amino acid can be used including one that is available to or that is known to one of skill in the art including standard amino acids and non standard amino acids. Examples of more hydrophobic amino acids include but are not limited to Phe Tyr Trp and D Lys.

In one embodiment both primary and secondary anchor residues were substituted to result in improved binding affinity to the HLA molecule. In a further embodiment the double substitution produced improved stability of binding to the HLA molecule. In further embodiments the binding and or stability was not improved and may have even been reduced but other properties of the molecule were improved such as activity or recognition by a tolerized individual.

The C terminal cysteine of the wild type peptide is generally a non preferred anchor residue. Because this residue is generally primarily involved in the interaction with the MHC molecule it can be preferred to substitute residues that result in a stronger interaction with the MHC molecule. Thus substitutions were shown to improve binding affinity and stability and in some cases resulted in analogs with decreased cross reactivity. In some embodiments the substitution to the C terminus can result in a peptide with improved binding and or stability without decreased cross reactivity. However in other embodiments the substitution to the C terminus can result in a peptide with improved binding and or stability with equal or decreased cross reactivity. Because substitution of this residue have been previously shown to provide improved peptides it can be preferable produce peptides that were more improved in the interaction with the MHC molecule as well as other interactions such as the recognition by the TCR. Thus in some embodiments the C terminal substitution can be paired with at least one other substitution. Examples of amino acid substitutions to the C terminus include but are not limited to valine lysine alanine and isoleucine.

The primary residues involved in the interaction with the TCR are generally recognized as residues P4 P6 and P8. However other residues may also be involved in the interaction to a lesser extent. In one embodiment one or more of the sites primarily involved in TCR interaction can be substituted to result in an improved interaction. Preferably these substitutions generate heteroclitic analogs that do not interfere with binding to the MHC molecule but overcome the tolerance issues of the wild type peptides. In one embodiment at least one TCR substitution can be included with at least one substitution at position P1 P2 and or P9. In one embodiment amino acids with some polarity can be substituted at P4 P6 and P8. In a further embodiment amino acids which are aromatic can be substituted at the P8 position.

In some embodiments the C terminal residue can be modified to contain an amide in the place of the free carboxylic acid. Thus for example if the peptide is a 9 mer nonamer the P9 residue can be modified. If the peptide is a 10 mer decamer the P10 residue can be modified. Preferably this results in a peptide or analog that has increased stability in biological media including but not limited to blood lymph and CNS. Preferably the peptides retain the other activities to result in an analog usable for vaccination or as an immunogen.

The length of typical MHC binding peptides varies from about 8 to about 11 amino acids in length. However most of the previously used HLA A 0201 are 9 mers nonamers or 10 mers decamers . Thus in one embodiment the analog can be a 10 mer of the wild type sequence NY ESO 1. However because the wild type 10 mer does not have the correct binding motif and showed no immunological activity a 10 mer was created by substituting amino acids at the P10 position and identifying the effect of various wild type and analogs see . In one embodiment the residues that were added or substituted for the wild type at the C terminus can be selected from the group consisting of norvaline leucine isoleucine valine and alanine.

With reference to any residues can also be substituted with conservative amino acids. Conservative substitutions can be paired with any of the above substitutions that can produce an effect. Alternatively conservative substitutions can be specifically at residues that are not believed to be involved in any of the activities at a primary secondary or even tertiary level. Such residues can include P3 P5 and or P7. Conservative substitutions are known to those of skill in the art but for example the Leucine at position P3 can be substituted with an alanine or threonine to produce an analog. Typically such conservative substitutions do not significantly affect the activity of the analog. However in some embodiments they may increase certain activities or decrease certain activities. Because of the known interactions it is unlikely that such conservative substitutions will have a significant effect on any of the activities.

Many features regarding the variety of embodiments and aspects of analog design are disclosed above either generally or as applied to particular epitopes. It is to be understood that such disclosure is also applicable to this and subsequent epitopes. Explicit restatement of such disclosure will be minimized for the sake of brevity.

Some embodiments relate to analogs of the MHC class I restricted T cell epitope PSMA GLPSIPVHPI SEQ ID NO. 114 polypeptides comprising these analogs that can be processed by pAPC to present the epitope analogs and nucleic acids that express the analogs. The analogs can have similar or improved immunological properties compared to the wild type epitope. Evidence validating the presentation of this epitope by human cancer cells is presented in Example 32 below.

One embodiment relates to methods to derivatize and improve analogs of PSMA along with specific sequences that encompass substitutions. The analogs can contain at least one substitution but can have multiple substitutions comprising standard or non standard amino acids singly or in various combinations. The analogs may result in peptides with retained or improved properties.

Embodiments relate to families of one or more peptides of 9 or 10 amino acids in length related by sequence to amino acids 288 297 of the human PSMA.

In some embodiments the PSMAanalog can contain substitutions of the sequence GLPSIPVHPI SEQ ID NO. 114 . Reference to binding motif data such as presented in table 7 in example 2 below indicates that the P2 anchor residue can make the largest individual contribution to affinity of any position in an A2.1 restricted epitope. In this case the amino acid at the P2 position is the optimally preferred leucine. The P anchor residue isoleucine is favorable. In vitro binding studies using the T2 cell assay system not shown have indicated that the native peptide has generally superior binding characteristics particularly as compared to the SSX 2 and NY ESO 1 epitopes. The epitope exhibited significant binding at relatively low concentrations although this was paired with a relatively shallow rise toward saturation. The wild type epitope can be improved. Analyses such as that represented by tables 7 and 8 are averages and the behavior of a given residue in a particular sequence may diverge from the average. Consistent with the favorable results obtained with Nle and Nva for the SSX 2 and NY ESO 1 epitopes discussed above Nle and Nva also can be successfully used for the instant PSMA epitope. Finally even similar binding characteristics if paired with alterations that help circumvent whatever tolerance to the epitope may exist can increase the effective immunogenicity of the peptide. In the transgenic mouse model the native peptide is poorly immunogenic see Example 35 for instance which may reflect tolerance to the epitope the region of PSMA from which this epitope is derived is identical between mouse and human PSMA.

As noted above although the native residue at the P2 position of this epitope is generally the optimal residue among genetically encoded amino acids the effect of substituting other preferred or bulky hydrophobic residues were examined for potential improvement of binding tolerance breaking and cross reactive immunity. Exemplary substitutions can include Met Ile Gln Val Nva Nle and aminobutyric acid Abu .

The N terminal secondary anchor is the first amino acid at the N terminus. The native Gly is only marginally preferred at this position. Various observations see tables 7 and 8 for example show that amino acids with potential to improve the epitope include Ala Ser Abu and sarkosine Sar that is N methylglycine .

The native Ile at this position is generally a preferred but not optimal residue. Substitution at this position can improve binding. Exemplary substitutions can include Val Leu Nva and Nle.

The penultimate position P 1 can serve both as a secondary anchor and a TCR interacting position. Substitution of Ala Leu Ser and Thr can be have their primary effect on TCR interaction though they can also contribute to improved binding. P3 is another position that can effect both binding and immunogenicity. Substitution of Trp at this position can improve both.

Further embodiments relate to combinations of substitutions at multiple positions in order to combine synergize and counteract the various effects obtained with the single substitutions.

Many features regarding the variety of embodiments and aspects of analog design are disclosed above either generally or as applied to particular epitopes. It is to be understood that such disclosure is also applicable to this and subsequent epitopes. Explicit restatement of such disclosure will be minimized for the sake of brevity.

Embodiments include analogs of the MHC class I restricted T cell epitope PRAME SLLQHLIGL SEQ ID NO. 115 polypeptides comprising these analogs that can be processed by pAPC to present the epitope analogs and nucleic acids that express the analogs. The analogs can have similar or improved immunological properties compared to the wild type epitope. Evidence validating the presentation of this epitope by human cancer cells is presented in Example 39 below.

One embodiment relates to methods to derivatize and improve analogs of PRAME along with specific sequences that encompass substitutions. The analogs can contain at least one substitution but can have multiple substitutions comprising standard or non standard amino acids singly or in various combinations. The analogs can result in peptides with retained or improved properties.

Some embodiments relate to families of one or more peptides of 9 or 10 amino acids in length related by sequence to amino acids 425 433 of the human PRAME sequence.

Some embodiments relate to analogs of the PRAMEwhich can contain substitutions of the sequence SLLQHLIGL SEQ ID NO. 115 . Reference to binding motif data such as presented in table 7 in Example 2 below indicates that the P2 anchor residue can make the largest individual contribution to affinity of any position in an A2.1 restricted epitope. In this case the amino acid at the P2 position is the optimally preferred leucine. The P anchor residue leucine is favorable though not as strongly preferred. Analyses such as that represented by tables 7 and 8 are averages and the behavior of a given residue in a particular sequence can diverge from the average nor is the wild type P residue necessarily the most preferred for that position. Consistent with the favorable results obtained with Nle and Nva for the other epitopes similar improvements can be obtained substituting Nle and Nva with this sequence. Finally even similar binding characteristics if paired with alterations that help circumvent whatever tolerance to the epitope may exist can increase the effective immunogenicity of the peptide.

The rationale for various substitutions has been set forth above. The particular substitutions investigated for the PRAMEepitope follow the same logic and are disclosed in the examples 40 42 and . Substitutions were made at the primary anchor positions P2 and P P9 the secondary anchor positions P1 and P 1 P8 . Substitutions were also made in the TCR interacting positions in addition to secondary anchor positions P3 and P6. Selected substitutions have impact on binding and or stability of MHC class I peptide complexes key features in determining the immunological properties of peptides. In addition due to T cell repertoire considerations and to circumvent mechanisms responsible for the limited immunity to native epitopes substitutions that retain the capability of analogs to interact with T cell receptors recognizing native peptides can be of practical value.

The following examples provide analogs and methods of identifying analogs. The analogs can be used for example as immunogens vaccines and or treatment of a variety of cancers. The analogs were produced as in Example 1. SSX 2analogs were identified as shown in Example 2 those produced listed in Example 3 and tested for improved properties as in Examples 4 21. The testing of NY ESO 1analogs were tested for improved properties as in Examples 22 30.

Peptides were synthesized on either a Symphony multiple peptide synthesizer PTI technologies MA or an ABI 433A peptide synthesizer Applied Biosystems Foster City Calif. at 0.05 0.1 mmole scale using standard Fmoc solid phase chemistry. C terminal free acid peptides were synthesized using pre load PEG PS resins on Symphony or Wang resin on ABI . C terminal amidated peptides were synthesized on Fmoc PAL PEG PS resin. All resins were purchased from Applied Biosystems Foster City Calif. . The Fmoc amino acids used in peptide syntheses were purchased from Novabiochem San Diego Calif. and AnaSpec San Jose Calif. . Post synthesis cleavage was carried on by the standard protocol.

Peptide purification was carried out on either semi preparative HPLC columns or SPE cartridges Phenomenex Torrance Calif. . The purity of all peptides was 90 . The identity of each peptide was verified by Maldi TOF MS Voyager DE Applied Biosystems and analytical HPLCs Varian or Shimazu using a Synergi C12 column Phenomenex Torrance Calif. .

Structural modification of a moderately antigenic peptide can considerably improve peptide MHC binding CTL recognition and or immunogenicity. General guidelines regarding how to modify a wild type epitope in order to achieve a peptide analog with enhanced potency are known in the art. An appreciated strategy is to optimize the residues at the so called anchor positions for binding to the particular MHC molecule at issue. In the case of HLA A2a marked preference for hydrophobic residues at the P2 and P positions has been observed particularly L and M at P2 and V at P . P denotes the C terminal residue of the epitope. For HLA A2 that is P9 or P10 depending on the length of the peptide. Replacing the P1 position with aromatic residues such as F Y and W can also be advantageous.

The analogs produced in Example 3 were tested for activity such as binding and biological effect as follows in Examples 4 21 

The affinity of peptide analogs and the wild type epitope to HLA A 0201 was evaluated using a T2 cell based assay Regner M et al. 1996 13 1 30 5 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety .

For the binding assay in brief the T2 cells that lack expression of TAP and thus do not assemble stable MHC class I on the cell surface were pulsed with different concentrations of peptides controls or analogs overnight at 37 C. washed extensively stained with fluorescently tagged antibody recognizing MHC class I A2 allele and run through a FacsScan analyzer. The difference between the MFI mean fluorescence intensity corresponding to a given concentration of analog and the negative control non MHC binder is a function of how many stabilized complexes between MHC and peptide are displayed on the surface of T2 cells. Thus at limiting concentrations of peptide this is a measurement of Kmostly and at saturation levels of peptide that is a measurement of both Kand K. The binding was quantified by two factors that are mathematically related half maximal binding the peptide concentration giving 50 of the signal corresponding to saturation and relative affinity 1 RA . Relative affinity RA is binding normalized to a reference wild type peptide for example the ratio between half max binding of control relative to peptide analog. The higher the 1 RA index and the lower the half maximal binding the higher the Kof the interaction between the analog and the MHC. Fifty three analogs were identified with these binding parameters improved relative to the wild type peptide. These improved binders carry one two three or multiple substitutions including standard and or non standard amino acids involving positions that are known to participate in the interaction with MHC and or TCR. However the overall effect on MHC binding was dependent on the modification. Such peptide analogs can be useful in therapeutic compositions or as a platform to further derive therapeutic compositions.

Peptide stability K on MHC generally cannot be solely inferred from binding K . In addition along with binding the stability of peptides on MHC class I is notoriously important in regard to the immunological properties of such peptides since the activation of T cells depends on the duration of signal 1 MHC peptide complex interaction with T cell receptor . For the stability assay in brief the T2 cells that lack expression of TAP and thus do not assemble stable MHC class I on the cell surface were pulsed with a concentration of peptide controls or analogs known to achieve maximal loading of MHC class I saturation overnight at 37 C. washed extensively and chased for different intervals in the presence of emetine which blocks endogenous protein synthesis. After extensive washing the cells were stained with fluorescently tagged antibody recognizing MHC class I A2 allele and run through a FacsScan analyzer. The difference between the MFI mean fluorescence intensity corresponding to a given concentration of analog and the negative control non MHC binder is a function of how many stabilized complexes between MHC and peptide are displayed on the surface of T2 cells. The decay of the signal over time was mathematically expressed as stability index 50 relative to the binding at 0 hours at the beginning of the chase interval .

Such improved analogs can carry one two three or multiple substitutions including standard and or non standard amino acids involving positions that are known to participate in the interaction with MHC and or TCR with an overall effect on MHC stability that is dependent on the modification. Such peptide analogs can be useful in therapeutic compositions or as a platform to further derive therapeutic compositions. Forty three of the analogs have increased stability relative to the natural peptide.

The analogs that showed both improved binding and stability are useful in improved compositions or as a platform to generate improved compositions of therapeutic benefit.

The immunologic properties of peptides can be described as a function of binding to MHC molecules Kand K and TCR affinity of interaction between TCR and MHC peptide complexes . Modifications of primary MHC anchor residues generally have a significant degree of predictability in regard to overall impact on binding to MHC molecules.

Modifications of secondary MHC anchor residues may impact the affinity of interaction of the MHC peptide complex to TCR along with the Kand Krelative to peptide MHC interaction.

A methodology was devised that allowed rapid and rational screening of peptide analogs in a fashion coherent with proposed methods of use and modeling the overall immunologic properties Kand Krelative to MHC interaction and TCR binding properties in an integrated fashion . This method can include generating T cell lines against a natural non mutated epitope SSX 2 using an immunization strategy potent enough to generate a useful response in transgenic mice carrying human MHC such as the A2 allele . Peptide analogs were interrogated ex vivo in the presence of competent APCs and the functional impact of T cells specific for natural non mutated epitope measured. The evaluation was done at various concentrations of analog since the expected effect was biphasic in the case of cross reactive peptides activating at limited concentrations and inhibiting at higher concentrations due to antigen induced cell death AICD . Measurement of the following three parameters can define basic and useful characteristics of peptide analogs 

For example analogs that result in reduced values associated with parameters 1 and 3 but increased 2 can be useful. Use of natural epitope and unrelated non cross reactive peptides as references is valuable in identifying classes of analogs of potential value. Analogs that display properties quantitatively comparable to or even modestly attenuated from those of natural epitopes are still deemed useful in light of the fact that while they retain cross reactivity they may display immunologic properties that are distinct from those of the natural peptide for example lower propensity to induce AICD or ability to break tolerance or restore responsiveness in vivo.

Some advantages of this screening strategy include the practicality and rapidity use of more relevant polyclonal T cell lines instead of potentially biased T cell clones as a read out and the composite value integrating parameters such as K Kand TCR affinity that may translate into cross reactivity and functional avidity of peptide MHC complexes relative to TCR. These parameters can be predictive of the in vivo immunologic properties and thus can delineate useful panels of peptide analogs to undergo further evaluation optimization and practical applications. Analogs that bind to MHC and retain cross reactivity against TCR specific for the nominal wild type peptide are predicted to trigger a measurable effect in this assay. The overall methodology is presented in .

The method used for the generation of T cell lines was the following HHD transgenic mice carrying an A2 human allele Pascolo et al. J. Exp Med. 185 12 2043 51 1997 which is hereby incorporated herein by reference in its entirety were immunized with 50 ug of SSX 2 natural epitope 41 49 admixed with 25 ug of pIpC at day 0 4 14 and 18 by bilateral administration into the inguinal lymph nodes. At 7 days after the last boost the mice were sacrificed and a suspension of splenocytes prepared at 5 10million cells ml in complete HL 1 medium. Cells were incubated with different concentrations of peptide for 48 hours in flat bottomed 96 well plates 200 ul well and for an additional 24 hours with rIL 2 at 10 U ml added to the wells. The supernatant was harvested and the concentration of IFN gamma assessed by standard methods such as ELISA.

The strategy from above Example 6 was applied to scan through a library of analogs bearing single substitutions relative to the natural SSX 2epitope KASEKIFYV SEQ ID NO. 1 in its wild type version . Strong inverse correlation was found between the minimal required amount of analog to elicit IFN gamma production ex vivo and the maximal amount of cytokine production at any concentration of analog.

Substitution of Awith L V or M improved on the immunologic properties of the peptide assessed in this assay. L and V mutants were active. M was more active than the natural epitope. The I mutant retained cross reactivity to the TCR recognizing the wild type epitope.

Replacement of the A at position 42 with non standard amino acids Abu Nle or Nva improved on the immunologic properties of the peptide relative to the wild type epitope both in terms of the minimal amount of analog required to trigger cytokine production and the peak amount of cytokine produced. Mutants encompassing D Ala D Val Nal 2 or Aib display retained cross reactivity and reduced immune activity in this assay relative to the natural peptide but can still be useful for further derivitization to adjust or enhance their properties. An Nal 1 at position 42 abrogated the activity.

Changes of the first residue Kshowed that while replacement with F or Phg improved on the activity W D Lys and Cha obliterated the immunologic properties in this assay. Replacement of K with Y Phe 4F Phe 4 NO O methyl Tyr or beta 3 benzothienyl Ala retained activity.

Modification of position V C terminal residue by replacement with I retained the activity at a lower level compared to the original epitope. Modification of the last residue by addition of an NH2 moiety obliterated the activity of the peptide that was subsequently rescued by modifying the A at position 42 with L or V. This illustrates directly that analogs with activity that is lower than that of the wild type peptide are still useful for further derivatization.

The strategy from above Example 6 has been applied to scan through a library of analogs bearing two substitutions relative to the wild type SSX 2epitope in its wild type version .

Coordinated modifications at position 1 and 2 have a variable effect on the activity of analogs. For example substitution of K41 with Y F or W corroborated with substitution of A42 with V M or I and resulted in preserved or enhanced activity of the analogs relative to the wild type peptide. Such doubly mutated peptides offer an increased opportunity to impact the interaction with TCR in a fashion that results in tolerance breaking thus being useful for practical application since the P1 residue participates to a certain extent in binding to TCR. Combinations between the following Y position 41 with V at position 42 W position 41 with I or I at position 42 and F position 41 with L V I at position 42 resulted in analogs that were more active relative to the wild type peptide. Combinations between Y at position 41 and I at position 42 or W at position 41 and V or M at 42 conferred an activity similar to that of wild type peptide. Replacement of K with D lysine at position 41 reduced resulted in analogs with retained activity in this assay. Such peptides can be very useful since the metabolic degradation of such peptides encompassing non standard amino acids is decreased in vivo.

Combinations between V or L at position 42 and I at position 49 resulted in increased activity over the natural peptide.

The strategy from above Example 6 has been applied to scan through a library of analogs bearing three or more substitutions relative to the natural SSX 2epitope in its wild type version .

F and V at positions 41 and 42 respectively combined with I or A at position 49 resulted in improved or similar activity relative to the wild type epitope. In contrast L or M at position 49 resulted in heavily diminished activity.

Triple mutants comprising the non standard amino acids Nva Abu or MeVal at the last position resulted in retention or improvement of immune activity. Such peptides are extremely useful due to increased in vivo stability and resistance to enzymatic degradation.

Modification of amino acid residues within the putative TCR binding region can result in peptides of considerable value that retain binding to MHC along with cross reactivity and thus be useful for restoration of immune responsiveness or tolerance breaking since their conformation in the MHC groove is slightly different from that of natural peptides. Additional substitutions at position 44 Q Nva or Nle position 46 L V Nle or Nva or 48 F or Phe 4F resulted in active analogs whereas D N S or T at position 44 M at 46 or T S Phg at position 48 or L at position 46 with T at 48 resulted in analogs devoid of activity. Finally two analogs with 5 substitutions showed no activity .

The strategy from above Example 6 has been applied to scan through a library of analogs of a decamer encompassing the nominal SSX 2peptide .

The decamer SSX 2 41 50 was significantly less active in stimulating the T cell line specific for the 41 49 nonamer relative to the latter. Modification of the Y residue at position 50 to I or L but to a lesser or no extent to V Nle or Nva resulted in restoration of activity in this assay. Further optimization of the activity of decameric analogs can be obtained by modification of the A at position 2 with L or V. The A42L substitution rescued the activity of the Y50Nva decamer. Peptide analogs of similar or reduced activity in vitro but retained cross reactivity compared with the natural peptide are still useful for induction or boost of immune responses due to i more limited AICD ii potentially higher in vivo activity due to increased stability on class I MHC and or slightly modified interaction with TCR which is can be important for tolerance breaking.

Three groups of mice n 4 were immunized with a plasmid expressing SSX 2natural epitope by direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes with 25 ug in 25 ul of PBS each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two additional peptide boosts similar amount at day 28 and 31. The schedule of immunization is shown in . One week after the boost splenocytes were stimulated ex vivo with SSX 2natural peptide and tested against Cr labeled target cells T2 cells at various E T ratios . The results showed that the analog A42V triggered a higher response against target cells expressing the natural peptide compared to the analog A42L or the wild type peptide itself as boost agents. This correlated with the binding and stability parameters determined by ex vivo experimentation.

Eight groups of mice n 4 were immunized with plasmid expressing SSX 2natural epitope by direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes with 25 ug in 25 ul of PBS each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two additional peptide boosts similar amount at day 28 and 31 using a negative control peptide Melan A 26 35 EAA natural peptide or analogs as shown in .

To evaluate the in vivo response against natural peptide splenocytes were isolated from littermate control HHD mice and incubated with 20 g mL or 1 ug ml of natural peptide for 2 hours. These cells were then stained with CFSEfluorescence 4.0 M or 1 M for 15 minutes and intravenously co injected into immunized mice with an equal number of control splenocytes stained with CFSEfluorescence 0.4 M . Eighteen hours later the specific elimination of target cells was measured by removing spleen and PBMC from challenged animals and measuring CFSE fluorescence by flow cytometry. The relative depletion of the populations corresponding to peptide loaded splenocytes was calculated relative to the control unloaded population and expressed as specific lysis. spleen and blood show the in vivo cytotoxicity elicited by the regimens described in . Three of the tested peptides A42V K41F and K41Y showed increased activity relative to the natural peptide both in spleen and blood against target cells coated with 20 as well as 1 ug ml of natural peptide. Interestingly there was only limited correlation between binding stability of analogs in regard to the interaction with MHC and the capability to generate in vivo immunity against natural peptide .

Eight groups of mice n 4 were immunized with plasmid expressing SSX 2natural epitope by direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes with 25 ug in 25 ul of PBS each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two additional peptide boosts similar amount at day 28 and 31 using a negative control peptide Melan A 26 35 EAA natural peptide or analogs as shown in .

One week after the boost splenocytes were stimulated ex vivo with SSX 2wild type peptide and tested against Cr labeled human tumor cells 624.38 melanoma cells at various E T ratios . Analog A42V and K41F A42V V49I elicited immune responses that mediated increased cytotoxicity against human tumor cells expressing the natural SSX 2epitope.

When the substituted analogs shown in Table 3 were tested the analogs showed improved binding and stability profiles in comparison with the wild type peptide epitope. However the magnitude of improvement for each analog varied and the substitution of A42V showed the highest improvement in terms of binding affinity with HLA A 0201 molecule. Further the stability of the A42V HLA A 0201 complex was better than the complex formed between wild type peptide and HLA A 0201 the T extended from 11.5 hrs to 20 hrs. The peptides with 42 A to L V and M substitutions were able to induce the IFN secretion of wild type peptide specific CTL at remarkable lower concentrations. The 42A to I substitution generated an analog with improved binding and stability profile. The residue at the P2 position can also be engaged in the interaction with TCR to a certain degree. This observation was also supported by the results with the 42 A to Aib analog which possessed a similar binding affinity with HLA A 0201 relative to the wild type epitope.

The N terminal secondary anchor is the first amino acid at the N terminus. Thus in one embodiment the original Lys 43 found in the wild type sequence is substituted with a more hydrophobic and bulky amino acid. Any more hydrophobic and bulky amino acid also can be used including any available to or that is known to one of skill in the art including standard amino acids and non standard amino acids. Examples of more hydrophobic amino acids include but are not limited to Phe Tyr Trp and D Lys.

The residue of Lys 41 was defined as a secondary anchor residue in interacting with HLA A 0201 molecule and it also engaged in the interaction with the T cell receptors to a certain degree. Therefore modifications of this position can generate some heteroclitic analogs that are more immunogenic and more suitable for the development of tumor vaccines.

From Table 3 one could see that by replacing Lys 41 to Tyr Phe or Phe derivatives Phenylglycine Para fluorophenylalanine Para nitrophenylalanine the resulting analogs have higher affinity with the HLA A 0201 molecule and form more stable complexes. On the other hand the Lys to Trp or Trp derivatives analogs have shown significantly decreased affinity with the HLA A 0201 molecule although based on the predicted algorithms the Trp analog should have a similar affinity to that of the Tyr and Phe analogs. The experimental data have demonstrated the limitation of the predicted algorithms. For examples Lys 41 to Phg substitution has resulted in an analog with improved affinity and extended stability with the HLA A 0201 molecule however its cross reactivity with wild type peptide specific CTL was fairly poor. On the other hand the para nitrophenylalanine analog was shown to induce the IFN secretion of the wild type peptide specific CTL at a much lower concentration although its affinity with the HLA A 0201 molecule was about the same as that of wild type peptide.

When both primary and secondary anchor residues at the N terminal were modified a general trend was that resulting analogs demonstrated improved affinity and extended stability with the HLA A 0201 molecule Table 3 with only a few exceptions K41Y A42V K41Y A42M and K41 D Lys A42V . Additionally they had very good cross reactivity with the wild type peptide specific CTL. Combining the K41W substitution with A42V or A42L improved the binding stability profile these analogs and also had desirable cross reactivity activity with the wild type peptide. The combination modifications of N terminal primary anchor and secondary anchor changed the peptide structure and conformation to a greater degree.

The C terminal Val of the wild type peptide was a preferred anchor residue. However improved potency was observed when it was mutated to Ile having one additional CH2 group similar improvement was also observed with a Val to Abu substitution. Although the other analogs showed improved binding affinity and stability with the MHC molecule their cross reactivity results were poor. The results of these analogs indicated that the peptide C terminal anchor residue also plays a critical role in the recognition of T cells. Table 4 .

Substitutions of secondary TCR binding amino acid residues preferably generate heteroclitic analogs that did not interfere with the binding to the MHC molecule but overcame the tolerance issues of self antigens. By combining the substitutions of N terminal primary secondary anchor residues K41F and A42V and the TCR sites analogs were generated with improved binding affinity and stability Table 6 . Some of these analogs induced the IFN production of the wild type peptide specific CTL at lower concentrations such as K41F A42V E44 Nva Nle mutants and K41F A42V 146L Nva Nle mutants.

Replacing the peptide s free carboxylic acid C terminus with an amide improved the peptide s stability in biological media by conferring stability to proteolysis and conferred dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase resistance to the peptide. However some of the resultant analogs lost a significant amount of their affinity with MHC molecules as well as immunogenicity and antigenicity. Interestingly although the three analogs Table 7 disclosed in this application lost their binding capability with MHC molecule SSX 2 NH2 A42V retained its reactivity with wild type peptide specific CTLs as indicated by its capability of inducing the secretion of IFN at a similar concentration to that of the wild type peptide. SSX 2 NH2 A42L was however able to stimulate the IFN production at a lower concentration.

The length of typical MHC binding peptides varies from 8 mer to 11 mer and most HLA A 0201 binding peptides are 9 mers or 10 mers. In previous observations a 9 mer and 10 mer from a natural sequence were both found to possess a binding motif for the same MHC and had the same N terminus. From the standpoint of proteasomal processing they are distinct epitopes but were nonetheless antigenically cross reactive. In the case of the wild type epitope SSX 2 the epitope is a 9 mer peptide and the 10 mer peptide SSX 2 lacks the appropriate MHC binding motif and showed no immunological activity. Thus the wild type epitope was therefore lengthened to a 10 mer with amino acids that could create the appropriate binding motif. As shown in Table 8 while many 10 mer analogs have a lower binding affinity with the HLA A 0201 molecule analogs SSX 2 A42L Y50L V Nle Nva showed improved binding affinity with the HLA A 0201 molecule. Two 10 mer analogs in particular A42L and Y50 Nle Nva were able to induce IFN production from T cells immunized against the wild type peptide at lower concentrations than the wild type peptide.

One aspect in which the analogs can represent an improvement over the wild type epitope is in increased immunogenicity in a human system and tolerance breaking. Differences in the TCR repertoire whether due to germ line differences or differences in negative selection have the potential to give anomalous results. To address such issues the analogs are used in an in vitro immunization of HLA A2 blood to generate CTL. Techniques for in vitro immunization even using naive donors are known in the field for example Stauss et al. 89 7871 7875 1992 Salgaller et al. 55 4972 4979 1995 Tsai et al. 158 1796 1802 1997 and Chung et al. 22 279 287 1999 each of which is hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety.

Specifically PBMCs from normal donors were purified by centrifugation in Ficoll Hypaque from buffy coats. All cultures were carried out using autologous plasma AP to avoid exposure to potential xenogeneic pathogens and recognition of FBS peptides. To favor the in vitro generation of peptide specific CTL autologous dendritic cells DCs were employed as APCs. DCs were generated and the CTLs were induced with DCs and peptides from PBMCs as described in Keogh et al. 2001 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. Briefly monocyte enriched cell fractions were cultured for 5 days with GM CSF and IL 4 and were cultured for 2 additional days in culture media with 2 g ml CD40 ligand to induce maturation. 2 10CD8 enriched T lymphocytes well and 2 10peptide pulsed DCs well were co cultured in 24 well plates in 2 ml RPMI supplemented with 10 AP 10 ng ml IL 7 and 20 IU ml IL 2. Cultures were restimulated on days 7 and 14 with autologous irradiated peptide pulsed DCs. Immunogenicity was assayed using the in vitro cytotoxicity and cytokine production assays described herein.

The analogs listed in were tested for activity such as binding and biological effect as follows in Examples 22 30 

The strategy from above Example 6 was applied to scan through a library of analogs bearing single substitutions relative to the wild type NY ESO 1epitope in its native or wild type version . Strong inverse correlation was found between the minimal required amount of analog to elicit IFN gamma production ex vivo and the maximal amount of cytokine production at any concentration of analog.

Substitution of S157 with F or K resulted in analogs that partially retained MHC binding and cross reactivity with the T cells specific for the nominal epitope. Substitution of L158 with I improved the immunologic features of the peptide as assessed by this methodology whereas L158V resulted in partial retention of activity. Modification of C165 with any of the amino acids V L A or I resulted in improved immune properties.

Peptides that have substitutions in the N terminal position or elsewhere and present with retained but not increased activity in this assay relative to the wild type peptide can be useful in humans. In addition they are material for further derivatization to improve on their properties as described below.

The strategy from above Example 6 was applied to scan through a library of analogs bearing two substitutions relative to the wild type NY ESO 1epitope. Simultaneous semi conservative modifications at position 2 and 9 were shown to have profound effects on the immune properties of analogs depending on the precise identity of the analogs. Combining L158I with C165V or C165L further increased their activity relative to the wild type peptide. Similarly L158V improved on the activity of the C165V or C165L analogs further increasing such activity relative to wild type peptide. L158V partially retained the activity of C165A or C165I analogs showing an interesting effect of double mutation of primary anchor residues. Similarly L158I partially retained the activity of the C165A analog.

Simultaneous modifications at positions 1 and 9 had profound effects on the immune properties of analogs depending on the precise identity of the analogs. S157Y combined with C165Nva norvaline or Nle norleucine at position 9 resulted in substantially improved activity over S157Y alone or the wild type peptide. The C165V mutant also rescued the activity of the S157Y mutant. V NH2 or L NH2 at position 9 partially rescued the activity of the S157Y analog however A NH2 failed to do so. Combinations between S157F and V L I and to a lesser extent A at the 9position retained strong activity of the analog and may be more useful than single mutants at position 9 due to the participation of the first residue in the interaction with TCR. Combinations between S157K and V L I and to a lesser extent A at the 9position retained strong activity of the analog and may be more useful than single mutants at position 9 due to the participation of the first residue in the interaction with TCR and the overall beneficial effect on the peptide solubility of K at position 1.

The strategy from above Example 6 was applied to scan through a library of analogs bearing multiple substitutions relative to the wild type NY ESO 1 epitope.

L158Nva or L158Nle considerably improved on the activity of the S157Y C165V mutant. Combinations between V or I at position 158 and V L A or I at 165 can partially restore the potency of analogs relative to the wild type peptide. 5157Y L158I C165V displayed increased activity relative to the wild type peptide and S157V with C165V or C165I and S157I with C165L or I retained MHC binding and cross reactivity with T cells specific for the wild type peptide.

Triple substitutions comprising Y and V at positions 157 and 165 respectively in addition to L or N at 160 A L V or N at 162 or E D or T at 164 retained the activity of the peptide in this cross reactivity assay making these analogs useful compounds for breaking T cell tolerance in vivo since positions 160 162 and 164 participate in the interaction with TCR.

Triple substitutions comprising 157F and 158V plus V L I at the position 165 showed activity in the assay described in Example 2. In addition triple mutants encompassing S157F and L158I plus V or A at position 165 retained activity. Together these data underline the complex interactive and non linear nature of multiple substitutions.

Finally triple mutants comprising S157W and to a higher extent S157T together with 158V and 165V showed retained or increased activity respectively relative to the wild type peptide.

The strategy from above Example 6 was applied to scan through a library of analogs of a decamer encompassing the nominal NY ESO 1peptide. While the decamer itself lacked significant in vitro activity various substitutions at this position partially rescued activity such as L at 166 or L I Nle at 166 combined with Y at 157 and V at 165.

Peptide analogs with similar or reduced activity in vitro but with retained cross reactivity compared to the wild type peptide are still useful for induction or boost of immune responses due to i more limited AICD antigen induced cell death ii higher in vivo activity due to increased stability on class I MHC and or slightly modified interaction with TCR. Thus these analogs are useful for breaking tolerance.

The affinity of peptide analogs and the wild type epitope to HLA A 0201 was evaluated by T2 cell based assay ref. Regner M et al. Exp Clin Immunogenet. 1996 13 1 30 5 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. For the binding assay in brief T2 cells that lacked expression of TAP and thus do not assemble stable MHC class I on the cell surface were pulsed with different concentrations of peptides controls or analogs overnight at 37 C. washed extensively stained with fluorescently tagged antibody recognizing MHC class I A2 allele and run through a FacsScan analyzer. Peptides that bind A2 stabilize its presence at the cell surface. The difference between the MFI mean fluorescence intensity corresponding to a given concentration of analog and the negative control a non MHC binding peptide is a function of how many stabilized complexes between MHC and peptide are displayed on the surface of T2 cells. Thus at limiting concentrations of peptide this is a measurement of Kmostly and at saturation levels of peptide that is a measurement of both Kand K. In the binding is quantified by two factors that are mathematically related Half maximal binding the peptide concentration giving 50 of the signal corresponding to saturation and relative affinity 1 RA that is binding normalized to a reference wild type peptide i.e. the ratio between half maximal binding of control relative to peptide analog. The higher the 1 RA index and the lower the half maximal binding the higher the Kof the interaction between an analog and the MHC molecules. In there are 39 analogs described with such binding parameters improved relative to the wild type peptide. Such improved binders carry one two three or more substitutions of standard and or non standard amino acids at positions that are known to participate in the interaction with MHC and or TCR with an overall effect on MHC binding that is dependent on precise conjugated modification. Such peptide analogs are useful in therapeutic compositions or as a platform to further derive therapeutic compositions.

Eight groups of mice n 4 were immunized with a plasmid expressing the wild type NY ESO 1epitope by direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes with 25 ug in 25 ul of PBS into each lymph node at days 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two peptide boosts similar amount at day 28 and 31 using a negative control peptide HBVc wild type peptide or analog as shown in .

To evaluate the in vivo responses obtained against the wild type epitope splenocytes were isolated from littermate control HHD mice and incubated with 20 g mL or 1 g ml of wild type peptide for 2 hours. These cells were then stained with CFSEand CFSEfluorescence 4.0 M or 1 M respectively for 15 minutes and intravenously co injected into immunized mice with an equal number of control splenocytes stained with CFSEfluorescence 0.4 M . Eighteen hours later the specific elimination of target cells was measured by removing the spleens and PBMC from challenged animals and measuring CFSE fluorescence by flow cytometry. The relative depletion of the populations corresponding to peptide loaded splenocytes was calculated relative to the control unloaded population and expressed as specific lysis. shows the lack of in vivo cytotoxicity in mice receiving the negative control peptide. shows the variable cytotoxicity in mice immunized with plasmid and amplified with wild type peptide. shows the substantial constant cytotoxicity in mice immunized with plasmid and amplified with the analog L158Nva C165V.

In the context of the immunization protocol described above Example 8 and using the methodology described in the Example 9 in vivo cytotoxicity against target cells coated with limited 1 M or supraoptimal amounts of wild type peptide 20 M was evaluated subsequent to the entrain and amplify protocol using plasmid and peptide analog respectively for the two stages. Results expressed as average specific lysis SE showed that the analog L158V C165Nva induced the highest activity and that the analogs L158V C165V L158V C165Nva and S157K L158V C165V showed an effect in the same range with wild type peptide or the C165V mutant. Since multiple substitutions may alter the TCR binding site such analogs can be more useful than the wild type peptide in breaking tolerance against a self epitope. In addition the S157K triple mutant can ameliorate the poor solubility of the wild type peptide or other analogs with direct practical implications.

In the context of the immunization protocol described above Example 27 and following the challenge described in Example 28 splenocytes were isolated pooled and stimulated in vitro with 10 M of wild type peptide NY ESO 1for 3 and 6 days respectively. Supernatants were harvested and the concentration of IFN measured by ELISA. Analog L158Nva C165V induced T cells that produced large levels of IFN gamma more rapidly upon ex vivo stimulation . Other analogs such as S157F L158V C165V L158V C165Nva and L158V C165V induced T cells that produced increased amounts of IFN gamma upon ex vivo re stimulation with wild type peptide . In contrast C165V failed to induce increased capability of T cells to produce IFN relative to the wild type peptide following the protocols described in Examples 27 28.

Avidin coated microtiter plates containing class I monomer loaded with a so called placeholder peptide were used to evaluate peptide binding affinity and off rate. The monomer coated plates were supplied as part of the iTopia Epitope Discovery System Kit Beckman Ciulter Inc. San Diego Calif. USA . Assay buffers anti MHC FITC mAb and beta2 microglobulin and control peptides were also supplied with the kits.

Native peptide and analogs were first evaluated for their ability to bind each MHC molecule by binding assay. This assay measures the ability of individual peptides to bind HLA molecules under standardized optimal binding conditions. Monomer coated plates were first stripped releasing the placeholder peptide and leaving only the MHC heavy chain bound to the plate. Test peptides were then introduced under optimal folding conditions along with the anti MHC FITC mAb. Plates were incubated for 18 hrs at 21 C. The anti MHC FITC mAb binds preferentially to a refolded MHC complex. Therefore the fluorescence intensity resulted from each peptide was related to the peptide s ability to form complex with MHC molecule. Each peptide s binding was evaluated relative to the positive control peptide provided in the kit and the results were expressed binding . The analogs identified as better binders in relative to the native peptide were subsequently analyzed in the affinity and off rate assays.

For the affinity assay after the initial stripping of the placeholder peptide increasing concentrations range 10to 10M of each test peptides for a given allele were added to a series of wells and incubated under the conditions described previously. Plates were read on the fluorometer. Sigmoidal dose response curves were generated using Prism software. The amount of peptide required to achieve 50 of the maximum was recorded as EDvalue.

For the off rate assay the plates were washed after 18 hrs incubation at 21 C. to remove the excess amount peptide. The plates were then incubated on the allele specific monomer plates at 37 C. The plates were measured at multiple time points 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 4 6 and 8 hrs for relative fluorescence intensity. The time required for 50 of the peptide to dissociate from the MHC monomer is defined as the T value hrs .

The iScore is a multi parameter calculation provided within the iTopia software. Its value was calculated based on the binding affinity and stability data.

HHD transgenic mice n 4 were immunized with PSMApeptide 25 g in 25 l of PBS plus 12.5 g of pI C to each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. One week after the boost splenocytes were stimulated ex vivo with the native PSMApeptide and tested against Cr labeled human tumor cells PSMA A2 LnCap cells or as negative control LnCap cells coated with MHC class I blocking antibody at various E T ratios. The results expressed as specific lysis mean SEM showed that PSMA specific T cells were able to lyse human tumor cells in a fashion dependent on MHC class I availability confirming display of the PSMA epitope on MHC class I of tumor cells in a fashion allowing immune mediated attack .

The analogs listed in were tested for various properties such as improved affinity and stability of binding cross reactivity with the native epitope and immunogenicity as follows in Examples 33 38.

Using the procedures described in Example 31 the binding characteristics of PSMAand analogs were assessed in comparison to each other see . The positive control for binding was melan AA27L. Cross reactivity with the native epitope was assessed by using the analog peptides to stimulate IFG gamma secretion from a T cell lines specific for the native epitope essentially as described in example 6. The data shown in was generated by stimulating with 10 g ml of analog approximately 10 M . This concentration generally resulted in maximal or near maximal IFN gamma production for the analogs and thus was chosen to represent cross reactivity.

The observed affinities of the analogs are reported in as ED50s. Met Ile Gln Val Nva Nle and Abu were substituted at the P2 position. These generally resulted in similar affinity. The Nle and Met substitutions also maintained similar stability of binding measured as half time of dissociation in hours. The Val Nva and Abu analogs elicited a similar level of IFN gamma production.

Val Leu Nva and Nle were substituted for the Ile at the P primary anchor position. All four had similar binding affinity. The Val and Nva substitutions improved the stability of binding and increased the amount of IFN gamma produced indicating cross reactivity and that the analogs can have improved immunogenicity.

The Ser Sar and Abu substitutions at P1 maintained similar binding characteristics but had marginally similar cross reactivity. The Ala Leu Ser and Thr substitutions at the P 1 position also maintained similar binding characteristics. Finally the Trp substitution at P3 exhibited affinity and stability of binding that were both increased about twofold and IFN gamma production that was within twofold of the native peptide all generally similar values.

The pattern seen above that substitutions in this epitope did not greatly impair binding affinity continued with the double substitutions examined which uniformly displayed similar or improved binding affinity compared to the native peptide. Among the analogs with substitutions at both primary anchor positions those with Nva of Nle at P2 and Val at P and Val at P2 and Nva at P displayed improved binding stability and the former two increased IFN gamma production data not available for the 3analog . The Val and Nva substitutions at P were also paired with Ala and Abu substitutions at P1. These analogs all had robust binding stability and IFN gamma production that was improved compared to the single P substitutions thus further improving the P1 substitutions. The P Nva substitution was also able to restore similar cross reactivity to the P3 Trp substitution.

Triple substitutions as P1 P2 and P3 P1 P2 and P P2 P3 and P and P1 P3 and P were made . In all cases the P1 substitution was Ala the P3 substitution was Trp and the P substitution Val or Nva. As above affinity at least similar to the native peptide was maintained. For the P1 P2 P3 class Nva and Nle at P2 improved the stability of binding. This P2 Nva analog elicited a similar amount of IFN gamma while the Nle analog showed a substantial increase.

For the P1 P2 P class Nva and Val at P2 and P in either combination improved binding stability. This P2 Nva P Val analog also showed a substantial increase in IFN gamma production. No data on the other . Val at both P2 and P in this triple substitution showed binding stability and IFN gamma production that was nearly halved from that of the native peptide.

For the P2 P3 P group only the Nva W V analog showed improved binding or IFN gamma production. For the two P1 P3 P analogs examined P of Val or Nva improved binding stability but poor cross reactivity.

Groups of HHD transgenic mice n 8 were immunized with peptide natural epitope PSMA or analogs bearing substitutions at primary or secondary anchor residues by direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes with 25 g in 25 l of PBS 12.5 g of pI C to each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17.

Mice were sacrificed at 10 days after the last boost splenocytes prepared and assessed for IFN production by ELISPOT analysis. Various numbers of splenocytes well were stimulated with 10 g ml of native peptide in ELISPOT plates coated with anti IFN antibody. At 48 hours after incubation the assay was developed and the frequency of cytokine producing T cells that recognized native PSMApeptide was automatically counted. The data were represented in as the number of spot forming colonies well mean of triplicates SD . The data show increased priming of immune responses against the native epitope achieved by the I297V and P290W analogs with the other analogs showing slightly higher but significant activity than the native peptide I297Nva or G288Abu or L289Nle I297Nva . To the extent that the poor immunogenicity of the native epitope reflects tolerance the improved activity of these analogs represents tolerance breaking.

Two groups of HHD transgenic mice n 8 were immunized with plasmid expressing PSMA by direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes with 25 g in 25 l of PBS to each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two peptide boosts 25 g at day 28 and 31 with either the natural peptide or the I297V analog.

Mice were sacrificed at 10 days after the last boost splenocytes prepared and assessed for IFN production by ELISPOT analysis. Various numbers of splenocytes well were stimulated with 10 ug ml of native peptide in ELISPOT plates coated with anti IFN antibody. At 48 hours after incubation the assay was developed and the frequency of cytokine producing T cells that recognized the PSMApeptide was automatically counted. The data were represented in as frequency of specific T cells normalized to 0.5 million responder cells mean of triplicates SD . The data show that irrespective of the number of splenocytes well the frequency of native epitope specific T cells was considerably higher in the mouse group immunized with the I297V analog.

HHD transgenic mice n 4 were immunized with plasmid expressing the PSMAepitope by direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes with 25 g in 25 l of PBS to each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two peptide boosts same amount at day 28 and 31 with the analog I297V. One week after the boost splenocytes were stimulated ex vivo with the native PSMApeptide and tested overnight against Cr labeled human tumor cells Lncap A2 PSMA or 624.38 A2 PSMA or control 624.28 cells A2 PSMA at various E T ratios. The resulting immunity was effective in mediating cytotoxicity against Lncap .

HHD transgenic mice n 4 were immunized with PRAMEpeptide 25 g in 25 l of PBS plus 12.5 g of pI C to each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. One week after the boost splenocytes were stimulated ex vivo with the native PRAMEpeptide and tested against Cr labeled human tumor cells PRAME A2 624.38 melanoma cells or negative control 624.38 cells deficient in A2 expression at various E T ratios. The results expressed as specific lysis mean SEM showed that PRAME specific T cells were able to lyse human tumor cells confirming display of the PRAMEepitope on MHC class I of tumor cells in a fashion allowing immune mediated attack .

The analogs listed in were tested for various properties such as improved affinity and stability of binding cross reactivity with the native epitope and immunogenicity as follows in Examples 40 48. Using the procedures described in Example 31 the HLA A 0201 binding characteristics of PRAMEand 69 analogs were assessed in comparison to each other. The positive control for binding was melan AA27L. The observed affinities of the analogs are reported as binding compared to the positive control and ED50s. Stability of binding as half time of dissociation. Cross reactivity with the native epitope was assessed by using the analog peptides to stimulate IFG gamma secretion from a T cell lines specific for the native epitope essentially as described in Example 6. The data shown in were generated by stimulating with analog peptide at approximately 0.3 M. The results were collected from three separate experiments and were normalized to the amount of IFN elicited by the native peptide in each. In some cases the reported values are the average of two determinations. An asterisk indicates that IFN production was not distinguishable from background.

Single substitutions of Val Met Ile Nle Nva and Abu were made for the Leu at the P2 primary anchor position. All of these analogs exhibited binding within 20 of the native peptide. The ED50 was determined for the Met and Nva analogs. The former had an affinity somewhat improved but comparable to the native peptide while the latter s affinity was reduced about 3 fold but was still comparable to the PSMAepitope. All of the P2 substitutions maintained binding stability at least similar to the native peptide. The Met Nle and Nva analogs elicited IFN production within twofold of the native peptide and the Val analog somewhat less.

Single substitution of Lys Phe Tyr Thr Orn ornithine and Hse homoserine were made for the Ser at the P1 position. All of these analogs exhibited binding within 20 of the native peptide except for the Phe analog which exceeded that range on the high side. The ED50 for the Lys analog has not been determined but the other five analogs had affinities within threefold of the native peptide. Stability of binding was generally similar to the native peptide with the Phe P1 analog showing greatest binding stability in this group with a half time of dissociation of 17.7 hours compared to 12.2 hours for the native peptide. With the exception of the Lys P1 analog which elicited 40 of the IFN of the native peptide all of these analogs were considered cross reactive as they elicited IFN production within twofold of the native peptide.

Single substitutions of Val Ile Ala Nle Nva Abu were made to the P anchor position as well as modifying the carboxy terminus by the addition of an amide group. Measured binding affinities were at least similar to native peptide. Stability of binding was also generally similar with outliers of the Nva analog at the high end t of 17.2 hours and the C terminal amide at the low end with a significantly reduced t of only 3 hours. The Val Ile Ala and Abu P analogs exhibit less preferred cross reactivity but the others elicited IFN production within twofold of the native peptide.

Single substitutions at positions primarily affecting TCR interactions were also made Nle Nva and Abu at P3 and P6 and Ala Ser and Sar at P8. The P6 Nva analog produced IFN within twofold of that of the native peptide though the P6 Abu analog was close at 44 .

Double substitution analogs were created at P1 and P2 P2 and P and P1 and P using various combinations of the single substitutions above . None of the P1 P2 double substitutions examined had radical changes to binding affinity or stability but none of the exhibited significant cross reactivity in the IFN assay. A similar pattern is seen with the P2 P double substitution analogs however the L426Nva L433Nle analog shows a significant level of cross reactivity with the native peptide in the IFN assay along with its similar somewhat improved binding characteristics. Finally for the P1 P double substitutions the examined analogs also conformed to the general pattern of having at least similar binding characteristics but eliciting negligible IFN in the cross reactivity assay. The exception in this grouping were the S425T L433Nle analog which exhibited somewhat improved binding stability and significant cross reactivity and the S425F L433Nle analog which had a more that fourfold reduced ED a nearly doubled halftime of dissociation and elicited more IFN than the native peptide.

Four triple substitution analogs were investigated having Phe or Thr at P1 Nva or Met at P2 and Nle at P . The S425T L426M L433Nle analog had similar affinity whereas the affinity was improved for the other three analogs. Both analogs with P2 Nva substitutions displayed increased stability of binding and significant levels of cross reactivity. See .

Two groups of HHD transgenic mice n 8 were immunized with a plasmid pCTLR2 described in example 49 below expressing PRAMEby direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes of 25 g in 25 l of PBS to each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two peptide boosts 2.5 g at day 28 and 31 of native peptide or the PRAME epitope analog L426Nva L433Nle.

Mice were sacrificed at 10 days after the last boost splenocytes prepared and assessed for IFN production after in vitro stimulation at 0.5 10cells well with 10 ug ml of native peptide. At 48 hours after incubation the supernatant was harvested and the concentration of IFN produced in response to the PRAMEpeptide was measured by ELISA. The data were represented in and show a significant enhancement of IFN production in mice boosted with the PRAMEL426Nva L433Nle analog.

To evaluate the in vivo responses obtained against the native epitope splenocytes were isolated from littermate control HHD mice and incubated with 20 g mL or 1 g ml of native peptide for 2 hours. These cells were then stained with CFSEand CFSEfluorescence 4.0 M or 1 M respectively for 15 minutes and intravenously co injected into immunized mice with an equal number of control splenocytes stained with CFSEfluorescence 0.4 M . Eighteen hours later the specific elimination of target cells was measured by removing the spleens and PBMC from challenged animals and measuring CFSE fluorescence by flow cytometry. The relative depletion of the populations corresponding to peptide loaded splenocytes was calculated relative to the control unloaded population and expressed as specific lysis. The results in showed preserved induction of cytotoxicity when the analog replaced the natural peptide as a booster agent. The trend indicates that the analog can improve on induction of cytotoxic immunity.

Seven groups of HHD transgenic mice n 4 were immunized with a plasmid pCTLR2 expressing PRAMEby direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes of 25 g in 25 l of PBS to each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two peptide boosts 2.5 g at day 28 and 31 of native peptide negative control EAAGIGILTV SEQ ID NO. 145 peptide or PRAMEepitope analogs bearing mutations at the primary and or secondary anchor residues S425F L426Nva L433Nle S425T L433Nle and S425T L426Nva L433Nle.

To evaluate the in vivo response against native peptide splenocytes were isolated from littermate control HHD mice and incubated with 0.2 ug ml or 20 ug ml of native peptide for 2 hours. These cells were then stained with CFSE fluorescence 1 and 2.5 M respectively for 15 minutes and intravenously co injected into immunized mice with an equal number of control splenocytes stained with CFSEfluorescence 0.4 M . Eighteen hours later the specific elimination of target cells was measured by removing the spleen from challenged animals and measuring CFSE fluorescence in the resulting cell suspensions by flow cytometry. The relative depletion of the populations corresponding to peptide loaded splenocytes was calculated relative to the control unloaded population and expressed as specific lysis. In addition the frequency of PRAME specific T cells was evaluated by tetramer CD8 co staining The boost with analogs encompassing mutations at primary or secondary anchor residues showed comparable immune activity as compared to the native peptide based on in vivo cytotoxicity and tetramer staining. The analogs were capable of amplifying the immune response as shown by comparison with the EAA group boosted with an irrelevant peptide. In that regard analogs comprising S425F L33Nle L426Nva L433Nle S425T L433Nle or S425T L426Nva L433Nle were all capable of expanding the immunity against the native epitope as assessed by in vivo cytotoxicity. However only the L433Nle L426Nva L433Nle and S425T L426Nva L433Nle analogs expanded the subset of T cells specific against the native epitope to a level significantly higher that in mice primed with plasmid and boosted with the negative control peptide .

Three groups of HHD transgenic mice n 4 were immunized with a plasmid pCTLR2 expressing PRAMEby direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes of 25 g in 25 l of PBS to each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two peptide boosts 2.5 g at day 28 and 31 of the PRAME epitope analogs L426Nva L433Nle and S425T L426Nva L433Nle or the negative control peptide Melan A EAAGIGILTV SEQ ID NO. 145 .

Mice were sacrificed at 10 days after the last boost splenocytes prepared and assessed for IFN production by ELISA at 48 hours after incubation with 10 g ml of native peptide. The data were represented in as cytokine concentration in pg ml mean of triplicates SD . The data showed ex vivo cytokine production by splenocytes from mice boosted with both analogs and greater response to L426Nva L433Nle than to S425T L426Nva L433Nle.

HHD transgenic mice n 4 were immunized with a plasmid pCTLR2 expressing PRAMEby direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes of 25 g in 25 l of PBS to each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two peptide boosts 2.5 g at day 28 and 31 with the analog L426Nva L433Nle. One week after the boost splenocytes were stimulated ex vivo with the native peptide and tested against Cr labeled human tumor cells PRAME 624.38 melanoma cells pretreated or not with IFN or negative control 624.38 cells deficient in HLA A2 expression at various E T ratios. The analog L426Nva L433Nle elicited immune responses that mediated significant cytotoxicity against human tumor cells expressing A2 624.38 slightly elevated upon their pre treatment with IFN . In contrast no significant activity was measured against A2 624.28 control cells. See .

In vitro immunization was carried out according to the general scheme presented in . Peripheral blood mononuclear cells PBMCs were obtained from healthy donors HLA A 0201 by Ficoll separation. Fresh PBMCs 2.5 10 together with 5 ng ml PRAMEor peptide analog were plated in T cell culture medium. Subsequently 20 IU ml of interleukin 2 was added to each well after 72 and 96 hours and addition peptide 5 ng ml was added at day 7. Cultures were maintained for an additional 10 days before effector cells were harvested and used in tetramer staining IVS PBMCs were labeled with PRAMEtetramer and analyzed on the FACSCalibur BD San Jose Calif. . Quadrants were set based on negative controls stained with irrelevant HBV tetramer and SSX2 tetramer and a minimum of 10 000 gated events were captured. Tetramer positive cells are expressed as a percentage of the lymphocyte population. PRAMEspecific tetramers was significantly enhanced following IVS with peptide analog as compared with native peptide. See . This demonstrates that the analog can be a preferable immunogen.

pCTLR2 is a recombinant DNA plasmid vaccine which encodes one polypeptide with an HLA A2 specific CTL epitope SLLQHLIGL SEQ ID NO. 115 from PRAME amino acid residues 425 433 and an epitope cluster region of PRAME amino acids 422 509. The cDNA sequence for the polypeptide in the plasmid is under the control of promoter enhancer sequence from cytomegalovirus CMVp which allows efficient transcription of messenger for the polypeptide upon uptake by antigen presenting cells. The bovine growth hormone polyadenylation signal BGH polyA at the 3 end of the encoding sequence provides signal for polyadenylation of the messenger to increase its stability as well as translocation out of nucleus into the cytoplasm. To facilitate plasmid transport into the nucleus a nuclear import sequence NIS from Simian virus 40 has been inserted in the plasmid backbone. One copy of CpG immunostimulatory motif is engineered into the plasmid to further boost immune responses. Lastly two prokaryotic genetic elements in the plasmid are responsible for amplification in the kanamycin resistance gene Kan R and the pMB bacterial origin of replication. See .

The first 89 amino acid residues are an epitope cluster region representing PRAME 422 509. Within this epitope cluster region a number of potential HLA A2 specific CTL epitopes have been found using a variety of epitope prediction algorithms. Amino acid residues 90 150 are an epitope liberation SYNCHROTOPE sequence with four copies of PRAME 425 433 CTL epitope boldface embedded. Flanking the defined PRAME CTL epitope are short amino acid sequences that have been shown to play an important role in the processing of the PRAME CTL epitope. In addition the amino acid sequence ISPEKEEQYIA SEQ ID NO. 150 corresponding to PRAME amino acid 276 286 in italics is engineered into the sting of beads region to facilitate the detection of expression of encoded polypeptide.

Using a variety of immunological assays including tetramer ELISPOT ELISA and cytotoxicity strong CTL responses specific for epitope PRAMEhave been detected from HLA A2 transgenic mice immunized with the pCTLR2 plasmid suggesting immunogenic potency for pCTLR2. These data indicated that the plasmid has been taken up by antigen presenting cells the encoded polypeptide has been synthesized and proteolytically processed to produce the nonamer epitope peptide and become HLA A2 bound for presentation.

Stepwise ligation of sets of long complementary oligonucleotides resulted in generation of cDNA encoding amino acid residues in the String of Beads epitope liberation sequence amino acids 90 150 . These cDNA bore appropriate cohesive ends for restriction enzymes that can be used for further ligation with cDNA encoding the PRAME epitope cluster region amino acid 1 89 which were amplified by performing PCR on cDNA encoding PRAME as template. The entire insert was then ligated into vector backbone between Afl II and EcoR I sites. The entire coding sequence was verified by DNA sequencing.

H 2 class I negative HLA A2.1 transgenic HHD mice were housed under pathogen free conditions and used for evaluation of the immunogenicity of HLA A2.1 restricted human tumor associated cytotoxic T lymphocyte CTL epitopes. Female mice 8 12 weeks of age were used for intralymphatic immunization and for isolation of splenocytes for in vivo cytotoxicity studies. The mice were immunized via bilateral inguinal lymph node injection. Mice were anesthetized by inhalation of isofluorane and surgeries were conducted under aseptic conditions. Following preparation for surgery an incision 0.5 cm in length was made in the inguinal fold and the inguinal lymph node was exposed. A maximum volume of 25 l 25 g of plasmid DNA vaccine or peptide was injected directly into the lymph node using a 0.5 mL insulin syringe. The wound was closed with sterile 6 0 nylon skin sutures.

HHD transgenic mice n 4 group were immunized with the plasmid pSEM described more fully in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 292 413 Pub. No. 20030228634 A1 incorporated by reference above in its entirety expressing melan AA27L epitope analog by direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes with 25 ug in 25 ul of PBS each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two additional peptide boosts same amount at day 28 and 31 with the analogs A27L A27Nva or A27L V35Nva. One week after the boost splenocytes were stimulated ex vivo with the native melan Apeptide and tested against Cr labeled human tumor cells 624.38 cells at various E T ratios. The resulting immunity after boosting with the A27L or A27Nva analogs was comparable and more effective than the native peptide EAAGIGILTV . Since the priming plasmid expresses the A27L analog the experiment had a potential bias in favor that peptide so that the substantial cytotoxicity obtained with the A27Nva analog may be an underestimate of it potency if priming made use of that same sequence.

Enumeration of CD8 antigen specific T cells requires cognate recognition of the T cell receptor TCR by a Class I MHC peptide complex. This can be done using Class I MHC tetramers which are composed of a complex of four HLA MHC Class I molecules each bound to the specific peptide and conjugated with a fluorescent protein. Thus tetramer assays allow quantitation of the total T cell population specific for a given peptide complexed in a particular MHC molecule. Furthermore since binding does not depend on functional pathways this population includes all specific CD8 T cells regardless of functional status. The CTL response in immunized animals was measured by co staining mononuclear cells isolated from peripheral blood after density centrifugation Lympholyte Mammal Cedarlane Labs with HLA A 0201 MART1 ELAGIGILTV PE MHC tetramer Beckman Coulter T01008 or a Tyrosinase YMDGTMSQV specific tetramer reagent HLA A 0201 Tyrosinase PE Beckman Coulter and FITC conjugated rat anti mouse CD8a Ly 2 monoclonal antibody BD Biosciences . Data was collected using a BD FACS Calibur flow cytometer and analysed using cellquest software by gating on the lymphocyte population and calculating the percent of tetramer cells within the CD8 CTL population.

Two groups of HHD transgenic mice n 8 were immunized with plasmid expressing Tyrosinase 369 377 by direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes with 25 ug in 25 ul of PBS each lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two additional peptide boosts similar amount at day 28 and 31 of natural peptide or the 377Nva analog. Ten days later the immune response was monitored using a Tyrosinase 369 377 specific tetramer reagent HLA A 0201 Tyrosinase PE Beckman Coulter . Individual mice were bled via the retro orbital sinus vein and PBMC were isolated using density centrifugation Lympholyte Mammal Cedarlane Labs at 2000 rpm for 25 minutes. PBMC were co stained with a mouse specific antibody to CD8 BD Biosciences and the Tyrosinase tetramer reagent and specific percentages were determined by flow cytometery using a FACS caliber flow cytometer BD . The percentages of Tyrosinase specific CD8 cells show that replacement of the native peptide with the analog preserved the expansion of Tyrosinase specific subset. The trend indicates that the analog can improve on the expansion of Tyrosinase specific T cells .

Four groups of HHD transgenic mice n 6 were immunized with plasmid pSEM expressing Tyrosinaseand Melan AA27L epitopes by direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes of 25 ug of plasmid in 25 ul of PBS per lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two peptide boosts similar amount at days 28 and 31 of Melan AA27L into the left inguinal lymph node and Tyrosinaseanalogs bearing substitutions at the primary and or secondary anchor residues into the right lymph node. As controls mice immunized with plasmid only or na ve mice were used.

To evaluate the in vivo response against natural Tyrosinase and Melan A epitopes splenocytes were isolated from littermate control HHD mice and incubated separately with 20 ug ml of natural peptide Melan Aor Tyrosinase for 2 hours in HL 1 serum free medium Cambrex at a concentration of 20 10cells mL. These cells were then stained with CFSE Vybrant CFDA SE cell tracer kit Molecular Probes 1 and 2.5 M respectively for 15 minutes and intravenously co injected into immunized or na ve control HHD mice with an equal number of control non peptide coated splenocytes stained with CFSEfluorescence 0.4 M . Eighteen hours later the specific elimination of target cells was measured by removing the spleen from challenged animals and measuring CFSE fluorescence in the resulting cell suspensions by flow cytometry. The relative depletion of the populations corresponding to peptide loaded splenocytes was calculated relative to the control unloaded population and expressed as specific lysis. In addition the frequency of Tyrosinase and Melan A specific T cells was evaluated by tetramer CD8 co staining HLA A 0201 tetramers Beckman Coulter .

The tyrosinase analog V377Nva was capable of expanding the population of tyrosinase specific T cells and amplifying cytotoxic immunity similarly to the native peptide and greater than the Tyrosinase analog M370V V377Nva .

HHD transgenic mice n 4 group were immunized according to the general protocol in with plasmid pSEM expressing the Tyrosinaseepitope by direct inoculation into the inguinal lymph nodes of 25 ug of plasmid in 25 ul of PBS per lymph node at day 0 3 14 and 17. This was followed by two peptide boosts same amount at day 28 and 31 with the native peptide or analogs bearing substitutions at primary anchor residues P2 and P 370 and 377 . One week after the boost splenocytes were stimulated ex vivo with the native Tyrosinasepeptide and assayed against Cr labeled human tumor cells 624.38 cells at various E T ratios. Both the native peptide and the M370V V377Nva analog generated robust cytotoxicity against 624.38 cells . Whereas there was some dilution of cytolytic activity with the native peptide there was none with the analog reinforcing the indication of greater immunogenicity gained from the tetramer results in Example 52. Together with the preceding example this observation illustrates the usefulness of complementing more stringent assays in vivo cytotoxicity and tetramer staining with more sensitive assays ex vivo cytotoxicity after in vitro stimulation to outline potentially useful analogs.

The various methods and techniques described above provide a number of ways to carry out the invention. Of course it is to be understood that not necessarily all objectives or advantages described may be achieved in accordance with any particular embodiment described herein. Thus for example those skilled in the art will recognize that the methods may be performed in a manner that achieves or optimizes one advantage or group of advantages as taught herein without necessarily achieving other objectives or advantages as may be taught or suggested herein.

Furthermore the skilled artisan will recognize the interchangeability of various features from different embodiments. Similarly the various elements features and steps discussed above as well as other known equivalents for each such element feature or step can be mixed and matched by one of ordinary skill in this art to perform methods in accordance with principles described herein. Among the various elements features and steps some will be specifically included and others specifically excluded in diverse embodiments.

Although the invention has been disclosed in the context of certain embodiments and examples it will be understood by those skilled in the art that the invention extends beyond the specifically disclosed embodiments to other alternative embodiments and or uses and obvious modifications and equivalents thereof.

