---

title: Electromagnetic wave propagation scheme
abstract: An apparatus for effecting propagation of electromagnetic waves, comprising a hull outer surface, a dielectric material disposed over the hull outer surface, and an electrically conductive member embedded within the dielectric material. When a liquid medium contacts the dielectric material, the liquid medium, the hull outer surface, the dielectric material and the electrically conductive member cooperate to provide a waveguide through which electromagnetic waves can propagate wherein the boundaries of the waveguide are defined by the liquid medium and the hull outer surface. A sensor network can be provided within the dielectric material for receiving power and transmitting information.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07111577&OS=07111577&RS=07111577
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretaryof the Navy
number: 07111577
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050425
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention generally relates to an electromagnetic wave propagation scheme for use with sensors on undersea vehicles.

Undersea vehicles such as submarines autonomous undersea vehicles and autonomous undersea platforms typical use sensors that are external to the pressure hull of the undersea vehicles. Such sensors are used to measure or detect pressure acceleration magnetic fields and acoustic energy. One such sensor is known as a MEMS Micro Electronic Mechanical System sensor. MEMS sensors are miniaturized sensors that are very adaptable to the undersea environment.

The sensors are typically arranged in a sensor grid plane or array that can include hundreds of sensors. However future missions and roles for undersea vehicles will certainly require a significant increase in the number of sensors. Furthermore the requirements to reduce spectral signatures and increase detection capabilities in hostile and or unforgiving littoral environments will require sensors that can be integrated into the structure of the undersea vehicles. Prior art techniques of extracting data and providing power to sensor grids or planes will not be able to accurately and efficiently extract data from and provide power to such future sensor configurations.

Therefore what is needed is an apparatus that enables efficient accurate quick interrogation powering and reading of sensors used on undersea vehicles.

The present invention is directed to in one aspect an apparatus for effecting propagation of electromagnetic waves comprising a hull outer surface a dielectric material disposed over the hull outer surface and an electrically conductive member embedded within the dielectric material. When a liquid medium contacts the dielectric material the liquid medium the hull outer surface the dielectric material and the electrically conductive member define or form a waveguide through which electromagnetic waves can propagate wherein the boundaries of the waveguide are defined by the liquid medium and the hull outer surface. In one embodiment the electrically conductive member comprises microstrip. In another embodiment the electrically conductive member comprises stripline. In a further embodiment the electrically conductive member comprises metal tape. In one embodiment the apparatus further comprises a parasitic radiator embedded in the dielectric material and in electrical signal communication with the waveguide. In one embodiment the dielectric material is formed by a Special Hull Treatment SHT made from a commonly used material such as dura which is well known in the art.

In describing the preferred embodiments of the present invention reference will be made herein to of the drawings in which like numerals refer to like features of the invention.

As used herein the terms electromagnetic wave and electromagnetic signals are used interchangeably and are construed to have the same meaning. As used herein the terms hull and pressure hull includes the hulls of ocean going vessels submarines undersea or underwater vehicles motor boats and pleasure craft. As used herein the term liquid medium includes oceans lakes and rivers. Therefore although the ensuing description is in terms of the present invention being used in conjunction with an undersea vehicle it is to be understood that the present invention can be used with almost any type of vessel configured for travel though a liquid medium.

Referring to there is shown communication system that utilizes the electromagnetic wave propagation channel of the present invention. Communications system generally comprises transceiver electromagnetic wave propagation channel of the present invention parasitic radiator and sensor network .

Transceiver includes circuitry for generating and transmitting an encoded R.F. radio frequency or microwave signal. The encoded signal contains data that defines interrogation and or read signals that are used to address individual sensors in sensor network . In a preferred embodiment the encoded signal contains data that defines a code that corresponds to a particular sensor thereby allowing each sensor to be individually addressed. The encoded signal generated by transceiver also includes a signal component that powers the sensors in sensor network . Transceiver also includes processing circuitry for processing sensor data detected by the sensors of sensor network .

In one embodiment transceiver includes circuitry for formatting sensor data signals into a format that is suitable for processing by a central processor not shown that is typically located within the undersea vehicle. In one embodiment transceiver includes circuitry for converting the formatted sensor data signals into optical signals. In such an embodiment transceiver includes a fiber optic penetrator not shown that functions as an interface between transceiver and the central processor not shown within the undersea vehicle.

Referring to and electromagnetic wave propagation channel is in electrical signal communication with transceiver and parasitic radiator . Wave propagation channel utilizes pressure hull of the undersea vehicle. Specifically wave propagation channel generally comprises outer surface of pressure hull a coating of dielectric material that is disposed over outer surface and electrically conductive member that is embedded within dielectric material . Dielectric material has a predetermined dielectric constant and insulates electrically conductive member from the liquid medium . Dielectric material has an outer surface that is exposed to liquid medium . When hull is disposed in liquid medium and liquid medium contacts outer surface of dielectric material a waveguide is formed by liquid medium dielectric material electrically conductive member and hull outer surface . The signals transmitted by transceiver propagate through the waveguide. The boundaries of the aforementioned waveguide are hull outer surface and liquid medium . The electromagnetic wave propagation through dielectric material emulates the properties and characteristics of a Goubau wave which is well known in the art.

In one embodiment the coating of dielectric material has a thickness between one 1 and three 3 inches. However dielectric material can be configured to have a thickness less than one 1 inch or more than three 3 inches. In one embodiment dielectric material is formed by a process known in the art as Special Hull Treatment SHT . In such a process conductive member is inserted into dielectric material as the dielectric material is being poured or disposed over outer surface . However it is to be understood that other suitable processes and materials may be used to form the coating of dielectric material .

In one embodiment conductive member is configured as microstrip which is well known in the art. In another embodiment conductive member is configured as stripline which is well known in the art. In a further embodiment conductive member is configured as metal tape.

In a preferred embodiment the properties dimensions and characteristics of dielectric material and conductive member are selected to effect efficient propagation of electromagnetic waves or signals at predetermined R.F. or microwave frequencies.

Preferably the environmental conditions i.e. pressure temperature etc. to which wave propagation channel will be exposed are considered when determining the dimensions and properties of conductive member and when selecting the particular dielectric material so as to avoid significant impedance mismatches.

Parasitic radiator is embedded in dielectric material and is in electrical signal communication with wave propagation channel . Parasitic radiator radiates the signals generated by transceiver through dielectric material . Parasitic radiator may be realized by any one of a number of well known suitable techniques or schemes.

Sensor network comprises a plurality of sensors that are arranged in an array grid plane or any other suitable configuration. Sensor network further comprises a transceiver that is configured to receive and decode the signals radiated from parasitic radiator . Each sensor may be configured as a MEMS sensor described in the foregoing description. However other suitable sensors may be used as well. The transceiver of sensor network generates and transmits an encoded R.F. or microwave signal that contains data that represents the sensor output data. The encoded signals transmitted by the transceiver of sensor network are received by parasitic radiator . As a result the encoded signals generated by the transceiver of sensor network propagate through electromagnetic wave propagation channel and are received by transceiver . Transceiver decodes and processes the received signals and routes the processed signal to the central processor not shown within the undersea vehicle.

In one embodiment of the invention each sensor has an inactive operational mode and an active operational mode. When the sensors are in the inactive operational mode each sensor utilizes energy from the signals generated by transceiver to power the sensor electronic circuitry and or to charge micro batteries that power the sensors. When the sensors are in the active operational mode transceiver module receives the encoded signals generated by the transceiver associated with the sensor network decodes these signals formats the decoded signals into a format that is suitable for processing by the central processor not shown and converts the formatted signals into optical signals. As described in the foregoing description the optical signals are routed to the central processor not shown via the optical penetrator.

In one embodiment of the invention conductive member is configured as a conductive lattice having a plurality of conductive members that are embedded within and extend throughout the dielectric material so as to form a plurality of waveguides that are in electrical signal communication with each other. This configuration is useful when a plurality of sensor networks are utilized. In such a configuration each waveguide corresponds to a particular sensor network and transceiver generates and outputs encoded radio frequency signals or microwave signals that contain data that defines particular codes wherein a particular code corresponds to a particular sensor grid and a particular sensor within that sensor grid. This embodiment enables transceiver to interrogate read or power individual sensors within a particular sensor grid.

Useful techniques and schemes for interrogating powering and reading sensor networks are described in commonly owned and co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 652 084 filed 25 Aug. 2003 the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference. The techniques and schemes described in the aforementioned pending application may be used in conjunction with the present invention.

Although the foregoing description is in terms of the sensor network being embedded in dielectric material it is to be understood that the sensor network can be located on the exterior of the dielectric material . In such an embodiment the interface for coupling the encoded electromagnetic signals generated by transceiver to the input of the transceiver of the sensor network is embedded within the dielectric material .

Electromagnetic wave propagation channel parasitic radiator and dielectric material cooperate to substantially eliminate the need to use bundles of wires to communicate with the sensors. As a result the present invention provides a substantial cost savings when a significantly large number of sensors are being used. Furthermore electromagnetic wave propagation channel parasitic radiator and dielectric material enable transceiver to detect encoded signals from individual sensors regardless of the direction from which these signals emanate. Thus the present invention allows the sensors to be efficiently accurately and quickly interrogated and read thereby providing an active laboratory for hydrophone monitoring platform self quieting cancellation of magnetic signatures and other monitoring and processing activities.

The electromagnetic wave propagation channel of the present invention can be used in conjunction with commercially available integrated circuits dedicated to R.F. or microwave communication as well as commercially available DSP digital signal processor circuits.

While the present invention has been particularly described in conjunction with a specific preferred embodiment it is evident that many alternatives modifications and variations will be apparent to those skilled in the art in light of the foregoing description. It is therefore contemplated that the appended claims will embrace any such alternatives modifications and variations as falling within the true scope and spirit of the present invention.

