---

title: Projector/printer for displaying or printing of documents
abstract: A combined projector/printer that can receive data in a printer format or a projector format, and then either generate a displayable image, a printed document or both. In the case that the input data is not in a video format but rather in a print format, the projector system is further capable of converting the print format data to image data and to render the image data on a digital display. The print format to image data conversion is provided by a coder/decoder. The combined projector/printer system is capable of displaying an image, printing an image, or recording a presentation according to the needs of the user. The present invention also includes a variety of methods for performing the functionality of the present invention including a “print-to-display” method.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08274666&OS=08274666&RS=08274666
owner: Ricoh Co., Ltd.
number: 08274666
owner_city: Tokyo
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050330
---
This application is a continuation in part of the following U.S. Patent Applications each of which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 814 580 titled Printer With Document Triggered Processing by Jonathan J. Hull Kurt W. Piersol and Peter E. Hart filed Mar. 30 2004 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 440 126 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 814 842 titled Printer with Multimedia Server by Jonathan J. Hull Jamey Graham Peter E. Hart and Kurt W. Piersol filed Mar. 30 2004 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 864 352.

The present invention relates generally to the field of generating images or documents from digital data. More specifically the present invention relates generally to printers and projectors. Still more particularly the present invention relates to a device capable of accepting a document or image data in multiple formats and outputting the document in multiple formats.

Data projectors for use with portable computers are well known and have become commonplace in the home and business environments. A conventional projector is shown in and includes a memory an image processing unit a display controller a system controller a video decoder and optics . The system controller of the projector receives raw video data like RGB data and stores the data in the memory buffer . The memory buffer is used to store the data in various formats before use by the video decoder the image processing unit and the display controller . Once stored in the memory buffer the video decoder converts the raw video data into a format that is understandable to the image processing unit . After conversion by the decoder the video data is converted to pixel and color data by the image processing unit . Finally the display controller and optics use the pixel and color data to generate an image in light output by the projector and displayed on the screen .

However there are shortcomings with such prior art projectors. One problem is that they are only able to receive data in limited number of formats. Another problem is that the computer such as a laptop must by physically coupled to the projector for use and display only what is shown on the computer s display. Also they generally do not have any ability to store multiple presentations and display them at user request and under user control. Finally projectors are often limited to the display resolution of the computer providing the image for display even if the projector is capable of displaying the image at a higher resolution than can be output by the computer.

Like data projectors printers are well known and have become ubiquitous. A conventional printer is shown in and includes an Input Output I O controller a print engine an image processing module a system controller a memory buffer and a print encoder decoder Codec . The I O controller receives and directs incoming raw print data i.e. a description of a document in a language understood by the printer such as PCL or PDL to the system controller for distribution and storage in the printer . The raw print data is converted by the print codec into print data and control signals that can be sent to and understood by the image processing module . The image processing module renders the image as print data at a print element level to the print engine which in turn generates the image on paper. The memory buffer is available to store instructions data and documents for use by the image processing module the system controller or the print Codec . For example the memory buffer allows the printer to receive data faster than it can be printed such that documents can be queued on the printer for printing in first in first out FIFO order.

However there are a number of problems with conventional printers. First they like projectors must receive the information in one of a limited number of print languages. Second they have not been combined with projectors for a multifunction output device and finally cannot generate a printed document based on input in projector format.

Therefore what is needed is a device capable of accepting a document or image data in multiple formats and outputting the document in multiple formats. Moreover there is a need for such a system that overcomes the other problems noted above with both projectors and printers of the prior art.

The present invention satisfies the foregoing needs by providing a system capable of accepting a document or image data in different formats and outputting the document in any one of multiple formats. More specifically the present invention is a combined projector printer that can receive data in a printer format or a projector format and then either generate a displayable image a printed document or both. In a first embodiment the projector system is capable of accepting a variety of input formats including video LAN or parallel inputs and displaying a projectable image of any of these inputs through the digital display of a digital projector. In the case that the input data is not in a video format but rather in a print format the projector system is further capable of converting the print format data to image data and to render the image data on a digital display. The print format to image data conversion is provided by a unique coder decoder Codec . In another embodiment the combined projector printer system is capable of displaying an image printing an image or recording a presentation according to the needs of the user. Yet another embodiment offers an option for storing a received image for later use and associating an image with a particular presentation by matching the name slide number and pointer position of the presentation. The present invention also includes a variety of methods for performing the functionality of the present invention including a print to display method.

A digital projector for displaying an image in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention is shown in . The digital projector preferably comprises an I O controller a system controller an image generator a conventional display controller and conventional optics . The novel I O controller system controller and image generator allow the digital projector to generate displayable images from standard printer files or documents such as postscript or portable document format PDF files. The present invention provides a unique print to display action for sending a document to the digital projector the document in a format as it would be sent to a conventional printer converting the document to an image format suitable for a digital projector and generating a project able image from the converted document.

The I O controller preferably has a variety of connectors such at a file can be sent to the digital projector as parallel port data from a direct parallel connection with a PC or media card as network data received over a local area network LAN coupled by a network connection wired or wireless or as video data through a display connector like most conventional projector systems. Furthermore a user can print a file to the digital projector system over Bluetooth in yet another embodiment where the digital projector includes a Bluetooth transceiver. I O controller supports a variety of data input formats through connection between a video input port LAN input port parallel input port or any particular data port configured to accept any particular data format that a user chooses for display.

Once the particular data file is input to digital projector by way of I O controller the data file is then sent to the system controller where the system controller determines whether the incoming data file is a compatible format for display by digital projector . In an embodiment system controller is adapted to control the flow of data within digital projector by receiving input data in a variety of formats including video or print data and outputting data to the appropriate modules for processing conversion or storage. The system controller is coupled by signal line to the image generator for conversion of the input file to a format such as pixel and color data that can be provided to the display controller to produce an image. In one embodiment I O controller accepts network input data from a LAN port or parallel port data in a standard printer language such as postscript portable document format PDF or the like. A data file of this type is directed by system controller to an image generator for data conversion to a format conducive for display and for image processing. Image generator receives the data file in a standard printer language and converts the file to a projectable format like RGB or CYN data that can be displayed through display controller and optics .

In another embodiment video data enters the digital projector from a video input port on I O controller . The video data is then directed by I O controller to system controller for analysis. At this point system controller determines that the video data is in proper format for display and sends the data directly to controller and optics for display on screen .

A more detailed view of an image generator in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention that supports rendering standard printer files such as postscript or PDF is shown in . The image generator preferably includes an image processing module a Codec a storage controller digital storage and an application controller coupled by signal line . The digital storage is directly connected to the storage controller which in turn is coupled to signal line . Depending on the type and format of the incoming data the system controller determines which of these components of the image generator receive the incoming data. The image generator of the present invention is advantageously able to receive an input file in a variety of different formats and convert that input file into pixel and color data that can be sent to the display controller to generate a displayable image. Different modules of the image generator are used to manipulate the input file depending on its format.

In one embodiment the image processing module receives video data and converts that data to pixel and color data. The image processing module is coupled to the signal line and is capable of receiving data from the codec or the digital storage via the storage controller . The image processing unit also provides the pixel and color data to the display controller via the system controller .

The storage controller and digital storage handle storage of input data partially converted data or processed pixel and color data. The storage controller also orchestrates storage of multiple image files based on the order in which the I O controller receives the incoming data. Storage controller accesses the temporary digital storage to allow the digital projector to receive data faster than it can be rendered thus allowing the digital projector and other devices coupled to it to perform other tasks while the display of images continues.

The codec has an input and an output coupled to line to receive input data and output data. The codec is configurable and capable of performing compression decompression encoding and decoding signals. The codec is responsive to the application controller and the system controller as will be described in more detail below.

The application controller is also coupled to line for communication with the system controller the codec the image processing module and the storage controller . The application controller controls the storage and conversion of files from a print format into video data format. As will be described in more detail below the application controller controls the codec including identifying what type of coding or decoding to use to convert an input print file to a video data format. Such conversion includes running applications necessary to translate and interpret the print file format.

In a first mode the projector operates in a conventional manner and video data is received at the I O controller and identified by the system controller as such. The system controller sends the video data to the image generator . At the direction of the system controller the video data is first processed by the codec to modify the video data to the projector s display format and then to the image processing unit for processing in a conventional manner to generate pixel and color data. This pixel and color data in turn is provided to the display controller .

In a second mode the system controller identifies the input as a file in printer format. For example this identification could be based on the port of the I O controller that received the file. Alternatively the identification could be from identification of the file format or header information. In this mode the system controller receives data in a printer format such as printer control language PCL PDF or PDL and it needs to be converted for display. The system controller sends the printer format data to application controller of the image generator for appropriate data conversion. Application controller sends translation instructions to codec such that codec can successfully carry out a printer format to video data conversion. The particular translation instructions sent from the application controller to codec depend on the exact form of the incoming printer format data. Different printer formats i.e. postscript or PDF have different translation instructions as will be recognized by those skilled in the art. During the conversion step the incoming printer format data is converted to a data file suitable for further manipulation by the image processing module to generate an image displayable by the digital projector . Typical data display formats include but are not limited to RGB and CYN data. Once the print format data is converted successfully to a projectable format the converted data is ready for processing and display.

A method for displaying a file in a printer format in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention is described in the flow diagram of . Initially a file in a printer format is generated and sent to the projector for display. The file in the printer format is received by I O controller . The projector then converts the file from standard printer language to projectable image data using the codec within image generator . Finally the projectable data is output to display controller and an image is generated and send through optics for projection onto screen .

A block diagram of an embodiment of a digital projector printer is shown in . The digital projector printer is capable of five major processes 1 projecting a display of an incoming video data file 2 projecting a display of an incoming print file 3 printing an incoming print file 4 printing an incoming video file and or 5 recording a presentation. The process for projecting an input file regardless of input format has been described above and similar structure and functionality are provided in the digital projector printer as has been described above for the projector . However the operation of printing and recording require additional structure and functionality and the processes will be described below.

As shown in the digital projector printer preferably comprises an I O controller an image generator a system controller a display controller optics a print engine and a presentation recorder . Some of the components of the digital projector printer have similar function and form as has been described above with reference to so like reference numerals and terminology have been used to indicate similar functionality. For example the I O controller the display controller and the optics are similar to that described above with reference to so they will not be described here again.

The system controller is similar to that described above however it includes the added functionality for the operations noted above specifically 1 projecting a display of an incoming video data file 2 projecting a display of an incoming print file 3 printing an incoming print file 4 printing an incoming video file and 5 recording a presentation. The system controller is adapted to control the flow of data within digital projector printer by receiving input data in a variety of formats from the I O controller and sending the data as appropriate to the image generator the presentation recorder and the print engine and the display controller . The system controller is coupled to send and receive data and control signals to the image generator and the presentation recorder . The system controller is coupled to send data and control signals to the print engine and the display controller .

The print engine can be any one of a conventional type and using input and control signals from the system controller generates a document that may be printed text drawings or images. The print engine has an input coupled to the system controller to receive data and commands. The system controller preferably provides the information and data in a format understood by the print engine such as PDL PCL or other similar printer language.

The image generator is similar to that described above however the image generator for the projector printer embodiment of the present invention also includes functionality to output the file in print format to the print engine for printing or a format suitable for the presentation recorder . The image generator includes the image processing module the Codec the storage controller the digital storage and the application controller coupled by signal line as has been described above. Depending on the type and format of the incoming data the system controller determines which of these components of the image generator receive the incoming data. The image generator of the present invention is advantageously able to receive an input file in a variety of different formats and convert that input file into pixel and color data that can be sent to the display controller to generate a displayable image or convert the input file into control and print data that can be provided to the print engine for generating a document. Different modules of the image generator are used to manipulate the input file depending on its input format and the desired output.

In one mode the image processing module receives video data and converts that data to pixel and color data. In another mode the image processing module receives print data and converts it to data and control signals understood by the print engine . The image processing module is coupled to the signal line and is capable of receiving data from the codec or the digital storage via the storage controller . The image processing unit is also coupled to the system controller .

The storage controller and digital storage handle storage of input data partially converted data or processed pixel and color data or processed print and control data. The storage controller is capable of storing multiple files based on the order in which the I O controller receives the incoming data. Storage controller accesses the temporary digital storage to allow the projector printer to receive data faster than it can be rendered thus allowing it and other devices coupled to it to perform other tasks while the display or printing of images continues.

The codec has an input and an output coupled to line to receive input data and output data. The codec is configurable and capable of performing compression decompression encoding and decoding signals. The codec is responsive to the application controller and the system controller as will be described in more detail below.

The application controller is also coupled to line for communication with the system controller the codec the image processing module and the storage controller . The application controller controls 1 the storage and conversion of files from a print format into video data format 2 the storage and conversion of files from a video format into print format and 3 conversion to and from a meeting recorder format. As will be described in more detail below the application controller controls the codec including identifying what type of coding or decoding to use to convert an input file to a output data format whether it be print or video format. Such conversion includes running applications necessary to translate and interpret the print and video file formats.

In an embodiment process projector printer system is equipped with a presentation recorder for capturing presentation data . The presentation recorder is part of a larger system for recording meeting and presentations. Presentation data such as from cameras microphones and other capture devices as well as from a server not shown may be input to the presentation recorder of the projector printer . This data under direction and control of the system controller and input from the user may be displayed printed or later recalled by the projector printer . The system controller may store a displayed image to the presentation recorder as well for used in recording a meeting that used the projector printer . An exemplary presentation recorder that could be incorporated as part of the present invention is disclosed in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 728 560 filed Nov. 30 2000 titled Techniques for Capturing Information During Multimedia Presentations by Jonathan Hull Michael Baxter Pamela Gage Jamey Graham Dar Shyang Lee and Peter Hart which is incorporated by reference herein. The format of presentation data can include at least video audio or print media. Presentation recorder allows a user to simultaneously project a presentation and also record the presentation for later use or editing. The video recording portion of presentation recorder also allows for recording of a completely interactive presentation through capture of audience reaction feedback or questioning. Also in an embodiment presentation recorder is equipped with a digital scanner to receive incoming print media for editing and printing the print media.

Referring now to a method for printing a displayed image in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention is described. Initially image data is generated and sent to the projector printer for printing. The image data is received by I O controller and converted by the system controller and the image generator from image data to a data format suitable for interpretation by print engine . The converted data is transmitted to the print engine by the system controller and the converted data is printed by the print engine to generate the document .

In an embodiment process where the incoming data file to be printed is video data system controller directs the video data to application controller located within image generator for appropriate data conversion. Application controller sends translation instructions to codec such that codec can successfully carry out a video format data to print format data such as PCL conversion. The particular translation instructions sent from the application controller to codec depend on the exact form of the incoming video data . Different video data formats i.e. RGB or CYN have different translation instructions. During the conversion step the incoming video data is converted to a data file suitable for printing by print engine . Typical PCL formats include but are not limited to postscript and PDF. Once the video data is converted successfully to a printable format the converted data is ready for processing and printing.

A method for processing data by digital projector printer system is described in flow diagrams A H. Initially data is received at the I O controller and the I O controller directs the incoming data to system controller to determine what type of data has been received. If the input data is video data the process continues in step as shown in FIGS. A and F H. If the input data is not video data it is presumed to be print data and the process continues in step of as will be described with reference to .

FIGS. A and F H describe the method of the present invention for processing video data . If the system controller determines the command associated with the input data is the display command the method transitions to step of . In step the method sends the video data to the image generator for conversion. The method coverts the video data to color and pixel data in a conventional manner similar to how projectors typically operate. The color and pixel data is provided to the display controller and the display controller generates an image that can be projected on to a screen and the method is complete.

If the system controller determines the command associated with the input data is not the display command the method continues in step to determine whether the command associated with the data is the store for later use command. If so the method stores stores the data in system memory and the process is complete and ends. For example the system controller provides the video data to storage controller and digital storage such that the video data can be stored in system memory for later use. If not the method continues on to step .

In step the method determines whether the command associated with the input data is the print video data command. If so the method continues in step of . In step the system controller provides the video data to the application controller and the codec to convert the video data to a data format suitable for interpretation by print engine . The system controller then transmits the converted data to the print engine where the print engine prints the converted data into the document and the method is complete.

If the command is not the print video data command in step the method continues in step . In step the system controller determines whether the command associated with the input video data is the associate video data with a presentation command. If so the method continues in step of . In step the system controller next determines which presentation is being recorded. The system controller determines the video data currently being displayed and creates a copy of the current video data such that the copy of the video data is stored in a data structure associated with the presentation that is recorded. To insure proper association between the video data and the presentation the system controller also stores a time and context index to the presentation with the data structure. Once the storage is complete the process ends.

If in step of the input data was determined not to be video data the processes continues to step of . are flow diagrams that describe modes for operating the present invention where the incoming data is determined to be data in a printer format i.e. network data parallel port data or any other data formatted for input to a printer . In step the system controller determines if a print command is associated with the input data image data. If so the method continues in step of . In step the system controller provides the input data to the image generator . The image generator converts the input data into a format usable by the print engine. Once converted the system controller provides the converted data to the print engine and the print engine prints the image data as document .

If in step the system controller determines the print command is not associated with the input data then the method continues to step of to determine if the display command was associated with the input data. If so the method continues in step of . In step the method sends the input data to the image generator . In step the system controller instructs the application controller and the codec to convert the image data from printer format to a projector format. Then the data is converted from the projector format to color and pixel data. The color and pixel data is sent to the display controller . The system controller then instructs the display controller to generate a displayable image and output it through the optics for display onto screen before the method ends.

If in step the system controller determines the display command was not associated with the input data the method continues to step where the system controller determines whether the command associated with the input data was to store image data for later use. If so the system controller provides the image data to storage controller and digital storage such that the image data can be stored in system memory for later use.

If the command associated with the input data is not a storage command the method continues in step . In step the system controller determines if the command was to associate the image data with a presentation. If not the method is completed. If so the method continues to step of . In step the system controller next determines which presentation is being presented. The system controller then determines the particular image data currently being referenced and copies the image data currently being referenced such that a copy of the image data is stored in a data structure associated with the presentation in the presentation recorder . To insure proper association between the image data and the presentation the system controller stores a time and context index to the presentation in the data structure.

Another embodiment of the present invention relates to retrieving a file stored within system memory of the projector printer module for display. is a flow diagram of a method for displaying a file in printer format stored in system memory such as by executing step or of . Initially system controller receives an input indicator with the name of the file stored in digital storage . The system controller then retrieves the stored file and provides the file to the application controller and the codec to convert the file into projectable image data. This can be done in a single conversion step or in multiple conversion steps as has been described above. The projectable image data is then provided to display controller and optics for display onto screen .

In order for projector printer to communicate with a LAN to receive incoming data in an embodiment a network driver installs the projector printer as a network projector printer with a property dialog box interface for specifying action taken by the projector printer . In this embodiment a user can select projector printer to receive a document via LAN input port at I O controller for either display or printing depending on the desires of the user or the requirements of a particular presentation. is a flow diagram describing a method according to an embodiment for installing projector printer as a network projector and printer. Initially the projector printer is assigned a unique network address and a unique name. The drivers on a user s PC are updated to reflect the unique network address and name of the projector printer . At this point communication between the PC and the projector printer is established via a LAN.

Referring now to a method for providing documents in a printer format to the projector printer of the present invention is shown. A method for generating a document in PCL and sending the PCL file to a projector printer for display is described in the flow diagram of in accordance with a final embodiment of the present invention. Initially a user runs an application and a document is edited. The application interface that uses the driver is called to access projector printer at the print menu of the application. Next the user selects the particular display parameters i.e. resolution color etc. for the display and a document is created in printer control language. The document is then sent to the addresses of the projector printer as prescribed by the network driver with the particular display parameters selected by the user for display by display controller and optics .

While the present invention has been described with reference to certain preferred embodiments those skilled in the art will recognize that various modifications may be provided. For example certain embodiments employ multiple application servers acting in cooperation to perform a function or request. Any of the above functions or requests can be sent across a network or using local cables such as IEEE1394 Universal Serial Bus or wireless networks such as IEEE 802.11 or IEEE 802.15 networks in any combination. Variations upon and modifications to the preferred embodiments are provided for by the present invention which is limited only by the following claims.

