---

title: Domain ID mapping for wireless device identifiers
abstract: A wireless telecommunication device and method of generating a domain ID from the wireless telecommunications network identifier of other communicating devices, such as a telephone number or mobile identification number (MIN), and creating a SIP URL to direct communications across a TCP/IP capable network. The wireless telecommunication device can generate more than one domain ID for same network identifier, and can include geographic information in the domain name to provide additional information about the other communicating device within the SIP URL address.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08340710&OS=08340710&RS=08340710
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 08340710
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050225
---
This application claims benefit of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 548 684 filed Feb. 26 2004 and U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 549 218 filed Mar. 1 2004 the entirety of which is hereby incorporated herein by this reference.

The present invention generally relates to wireless telecommunications. More particularly the present invention relates to a system and method for mapping domain identifiers common in TCP IP protocol to wireless telecommunication device identifiers such as mobile identification numbers MIN and phone numbers.

The first cellular networks were introduced in the early 1980s using analog radio transmission technologies such as AMPS Advanced Mobile Phone System . Within a few years cellular systems began to hit a capacity ceiling as millions of new subscribers signed up for service requiring increased airtime. Dropped calls and network busy signals became common in many areas. To accommodate more traffic within a limited amount of radio spectrum the industry developed a new set of digital wireless technologies called TDMA Time Division Multiple Access GSM Global System for Mobile and CDMA Code Division Multiple Access . TDMA and GSM use a time sharing protocol to provide three to four times more capacity than analog systems. CDMA however is based upon a multiple access technique using orthogonal codes to keep information channels separate from each other.

A modern standard of CDMA technology CDMA2000 supports both voice and data services over a standard CDMA communication channel. In such system wireless telecommunication carrier networks offer data services to CDMA subscribers as an overlay Internet Protocol IP based application network over the CDMA infrastructure. Session Initiation Protocol SIP is an application layer control signaling protocol for creating modifying and terminating sessions with one or more participants. In services offered under CDMA 2000 the system uses a SIP universal resource locator URL based user addresses in the form of . Based on the SIP URL addressing scheme a default domain name or ID as defined in an existing mapping table can be appended to the ENUM RFC 3761 phone number mobile identification number MIN mobile directory number MDN or other wireless device identifier. However a service carrier may wish to partition its network based on different domains assigned to its subscribers and the present standard does not allow such partitioning.

Accordingly it would be advantageous to provide a system and method that allows wireless telecommunication carriers to partition their network and deploy multiple domain IDs for their subscribers. Such service should allow the carrier s subscribers to type in a phone number i.e. the MIN MDN in order to contact another wireless device and use the same wireless data service of the carrier. Such system and method should be able to implemented on an existing wireless telecommunication infrastructure. It is thus to the provision of such a system and method of domain ID mapping of wireless telecommunication device identifiers that the present invention is primarily directed.

Briefly described the invention is a wireless telecommunication device that can generate a domain ID such as a SIP URL from the Wireless telecommunications network identifier such as a telephone number or mobile identification number MIN to direct communications across a TCP IP network. The wireless telecommunication device can generate more than one domain ID for incoming network identifiers and can include information regarding the home region or area of subscription in the domain name to provide additional information about the device for which it has created a SIP URL address. Through use of the system the wireless telecommunications systems carrier can partition its application network using SIL URL addressing by assigning different domains to users based upon subscription criteria as identified in the MIN MDN number already e.g. the area code of the phone number. The solution is also flexible as the definition of the application network region does not need to be rigidly tied to the wireless telecommunication network region or geographical regions identified by the MIN MDN of the wireless device subscriber.

In one embodiment there is provided a wireless telecommunication device including a computer platform having at least a memory and a communication interface the device further selectively interfacing and sending and receiving data across a wireless telecommunication network through the communication interface. The device further receives a specific first wireless device identifier such as a MIN or phone number in a first network protocol to identify the device on the wireless telecommunication network. The device further includes a converter in the memory to generate a second wireless device identifier for the device in a second network protocol such as a SIP URL or domain ID and the converter is capable of making a plurality of second wireless device identifiers based upon the first wireless device identifier.

The system accordingly provides a method of generating a second network identifier such as a SIP URL of a second network protocol at a wireless telecommunication device having a first network identifier such as a MIN in a first network protocol. The method includes the steps of selectively interfacing a wireless telecommunication network from the wireless telecommunication device and generating a second network identifier at the wireless telecommunication device in a second network protocol with the wireless telecommunication device being capable of generating a plurality of second network identifiers based upon the first network identifier. Thus the wireless device can assign a variety of domain IDs to any incoming first network identifier as needed as opposed to only appending one default domain name to a known MIN.

Other objects advantages and features of the present invention will become apparent after review of the herein after set forth Brief Description of the Drawings Detailed Description of the Invention and the Claims.

With reference to the figures in which like numerals represent like elements throughout illustrates an exemplary embodiment of a wireless telecommunication system for that allows communication channels between one or more wireless telecommunication devices such as the wireless telephones smart pager and personal digital assistant PDA with other wireless telecommunication devices across a wireless network . A first group communication server provides one or more communication channels to one or more mobile communication devices such as devices and at least one mobile communication device such as cellular telephone selectively communications at least data over one or more communication channels provided by the first communication server . At least one data server communicates data with the wireless telecommunication devices and a converter server converts voice data to data transmittable over one or more communication channels and the converter server sending the converted voice data to the first communication server for transmission across at least one communication channel to the at least one mobile communication device such as cellular telephone . The wireless telecommunication devices are also shown here in a push to talk PTT group wherein direct communication can be had between the group member devices.

As shown in cellular telephone sends voice data in typically in frames or packets to the wireless network typically to the first communication server which is present on a server side LAN across the wireless network. The first communication server relays the data to the converter server . In other embodiments further described herein other computer devices can be resident on the server side LAN or be accessible across the wireless network to the wireless devices. The first communication server can have an attached or accessible database such as subscriber data that stores the identification data of subscribers for the wireless devices whereby the communications for various subscribers can be known by the system i.e. which mobile devices can communication in which format. Database can also hold the look up table for the wireless devices to convert the MIN MDN to SIP URLs as is further described below. It should be appreciated that the number of computer components resident on server side LAN or across the wireless network or Internet generally are not limited.

In one embodiment the mobile device can receive both voice data and data communication over the wireless telecommunication network . And as necessary for bandwidth the system can establish a second communication channel between the first communication server and a mobile device where the second communication can also support both voice and data packets interleaved as is specified in the CDMA 2000 standard. Further as shown herein the converter server preferably converts the voice data into internet protocol IP data packets but can alternately use any data frame format where voice data and other computer readable data can be simultaneously encoded. Thus in the embodiment of the converter server receives both voice data from mobile devices such as cellular telephone and converts the received voice data into voice packet data in an IP protocol and can do the opposite transformation to return IP packet data to voice analog data or voice data in the appropriate frames and send the voice data to the communication server . And if the mobile communication device is so embodied the device can convert the transmitted data packets into voice data and in such embodiment the communication server need only relay IP packet data to the mobile device and the converter server is unnecessary as the conversion to voice data occurs at the mobile device .

The converter server s are connected to a wireless service provider s packet data service node PDSN such as PSDN shown here resident on a carrier network . Each PDSN can interface with a base station controller of a base station through a packet control function PCF . The PCF is typically located in the base station . The carrier network controls messages generally in the form of data packets sent to a messaging service controller MSC . The carrier network communicates with the MSC by a network the Internet and or POTS plain ordinary telephone system . Typically the network or Internet connection between the carrier network and the MSC transfers data and the POTS transfers voice information. The MSC can be connected to one or more base stations . In a similar manner to the carrier network the MSC is typically connected to the branch to source BTS by both the network and or Internet for data transfer and POTS for voice information. The BTS ultimately broadcasts and receives messages wirelessly to and from the wireless devices such as mobile devices by short messaging service SMS or other over the air methods known in the art.

Cellular telephones and telecommunication devices such as wireless telephone are being manufactured with increased computing capabilities and are becoming tantamount to personal computers and hand held PDAs and accordingly communicate as much computer data as voice data. These smart cellular telephones allow software developers to create software applications that are downloadable and executable on the processor of the wireless device. The wireless device such as cellular telephone can download and send many types of applications such as web pages applets MIDlets games and stock monitors or simply data such as news and sports related data. In direct communications the mobile device such as cellular telephone will transmit its voice and or computer data to the wireless network an the devices of the wireless network will occur through or at the control of the group communication server . All data packets of the devices do not necessarily have to travel through the group communication server itself but the server must be able to ultimately control the communication because it will typically be the only server side component that is aware of and or can retrieve the identity of the members of the set or direct the identity of the members of the set to another computer device such as mapping server .

As further shown in the cellular telephone uses a communication channel with the base station and establishes a forward fundamental channel F FCH and a reverse fundamental channel R FCH each fundamental channel using a Walsh code for communication and hence the establishing of the dedicated channel requiring a pair of Walsh codes. For voice data the data is typical encapsulated in data frames and handled by the PCF . In this embodiment the converter server will receive the stream of standard voice packets from the PDSN and convert the voice packets into data packets preferably in IP Protocol such as a common Voice over IP Protocol as known in the art.

In telecommunications a frame is data transmitted between network points as unit with addressing and the requisite protocol control information. The information or data in the frame may contain another encapsulated frame that is used in a higher level or different protocol. Actually in many instances a frame constructed for data relay typically carries data that has been framed by an earlier protocol program. Thus for example voice packets used in the CDMA communication protocol will typically be in a frame or packet of a first transmission protocol and the converter server can either encapsulate the voice packet frame of the first transmission protocol within an IP protocol frame second transmission protocol for relay or can completely convert the voice data into IP protocol data. If so embodied the converter server likewise can remove extract or convert the voice data from the IP protocol frame and relay the voice data typically in common voice packet relay form to the communication server for relay to the mobile device .

As shown here the wireless device can be a cellular telephone but can also be any wireless device with a computer platform as known in the art such as a personal digital assistant PDA a pager with a graphics display or even a separate computer platform that has a wireless communication portal and may otherwise have a wired connection to a network or the Internet. Further the memory can be comprised of read only or random access memory RAM and ROM EPROM EEPROM flash cards or any memory common to computer platforms. The computer platform can also include a local database for storage of software applications not actively used in memory . The local database is typically comprised of one or more flash memory cells but can be any secondary or tertiary storage device as known in the art such as magnetic media EPROM EEPROM optical media tape or soft or hard disk.

The preceding background and the forgoing description is in terms of a CDMA infra structure a push to talk system and the use of a MIN MDN parameter to translate to a domain name. It should be recognized by those skilled in the art that the scope of the invention includes network topologies other than CDMA and data communication systems including voice over IP systems that allow applications to transmit data to another device and addressing parameters that can be used in translating a domain name other than MIN MDN.

In the wireless telecommunication device the communication interface selectively interfacing and sending and receiving data across the wireless telecommunication network and the wireless telecommunication device further receives a first wireless device identifier in a first network protocol to identify a specific other device on the wireless telecommunication network such as a MIN MDN from a communicating wireless telecommunication device . The wireless telecommunication device further includes a converter or other software program in the memory or local database to generate a second wireless device identifier for the specific other device in a second network protocol such as a SIP URL so that communications can be made in the second network protocol. The converter is capable of making a plurality of second wireless device identifiers based upon the first wireless device identifier such as shown in the domain mapping table of .

When a user of the wireless telecommunication device types in the MIN MDN for another device a domain is appended onto the phone number based on a part of the number that may be specified a particular region or area such as a prefix to or a portion of the phone number as per pre defined mapping. For example for numbers in the United States the area code may be used in the min domain mapping table e.g. area codes 858 619 map to regionSD.carrier.com area codes 848 732 map to regionNJ.carrier.com as shown in the table .

In a PTT embodiment the system uses an address in the form of a SIP URL to identify each device or predefined group. Every user is assigned a single unique user address per group wireless telecommunication device they own. Every predefined group is assigned a single unique group address. These addresses may be exposed to the receiving wireless telecommunication device and can be exchanged between wireless devices when sharing contact information.

Thus in one process of use a user of the originating device manually enters the MIN MDN number of the target deice and presses the PTT button to initiate a PTT call. The user then stores the contact entry for another user in the contact list by storing the MIN MDN under the device name of that user and when a user receives an incoming call from another user the MIN MDN of the caller is displayed. The wireless device then place automatically if so desired the incoming MIN MDN into a list of contact entries and store the contact entry for an ad hoc group defined at the wireless device with the MIN MDN for the members in that group under the name of the ad hoc group.

In one embodiment a default domain is configured at the wireless telecommunication device throughout the PTT system. When a user types in the MIN MDN for an outgoing communication the default domain is appended onto the number. For pre defined group and chat room addresses another default domain may be used with the string group and chat as a part of the domain name respectively. Thus the SIP URL for user addresses in the client request sent to the group communication server is of the following form . This approach requires minimal changes on the wireless device i.e. a default domain that is pre configured on each client.

In another embodiment with a MIN Domain Mapping Table such as that shown in is configured on the wireless devices throughout the system. When the originating wireless device types in the MIN MDN for a target wireless device a domain is appended onto the MIN MDN numbers based on a part of the number that may be specifying a particular region or area such as a area code prefix to or a portion of the phone number as per the mapping table . The MIN Domain Mapping Table is a carrier configurable parameter used when the carrier would like to allow its subscribers to type in MIN MDN numbers to contact each other. The MIN Domain Mapping Table can define multiple prefixes being mapped to a single domain.

Thus when a user of the originating wireless device types in a MIN MDN to make a call the originating wireless device detects the portion of the phone number used for looking up the domain in the MIN Domain Mapping Table . Then the device looks up the Domain ID for the domain in the Domain ID Mapping Table and appends the Domain ID to the phone number in order to generate the target wireless device in the SIP URL address sent in the CALL request message to the group communication server .

If there is not a second identifier at decision then a second identifier is created using the look up table as shown at step and then the generated second identifier is stored for the MIN as shown at step . Then the second identifier is appended to the MIN as shown at step which also is arrived at after a stored second identifier is retrieved at step . Finally the PTT message is transmitted with the second identifier appended as shown at step . The PTT message can be text VoIP a program or any other communication that would use a SIP URL address for messaging purposes.

It can thus be seen that the system provides a method of generating a second network identifier of a second network protocol such as a SIP URL at a wireless telecommunication device having a first network identifier in a first network protocol for other wireless telecommunication devices on the wireless telecommunication network through the steps of selectively interfacing a wireless telecommunication network from the wireless telecommunication device then receiving a first network identifier from a communicating wireless telecommunication device such as originating device and generating a second network identifier at the wireless telecommunication device in a second network protocol for the communicating wireless telecommunication device the wireless telecommunication device capable of generating a plurality of second network identifiers based upon the first network identifier such as from a Domain ID Mapping Table in .

In one embodiment the second network protocol can be TCP IP and the second wireless device identifier can be a session initiation protocol universal resource locator SIP URL and the step of generating a second network identifier is then generating a SIP URL. And if the first network protocol is telephony protocol and the first wireless device identifier is a telephone number the step of generating a second network identifier is appending a domain to the telephone number. Where the first wireless device identifier is a mobile identification number MIN the step of generating a second network identifier is appending a domain to the MIN as is shown in .

In another embodiment the step of generating a second network identifier includes generating a second network identifier including information on the geographic location of the communicating wireless telecommunication device such as using a domain ID for a specific geographic region of the wireless telecommunication device . The method can further include the step of generating a plurality of second network identifiers for the communicating wireless telecommunication device based upon the first wireless device identifier such as making more than one possible SIP URL. In one exemplary embodiment the step of generating a second network identifier occurs from using a look up table to convert the first network identifier into a second network identifier.

While there has been shown a preferred and alternate embodiment of the present invention it is to be understood that certain changes may be made in the form and arrangement of the elements of the present invention without departing from the underlying spirit and scope of the invention as set forth in the Claims appended hereto. Furthermore although elements of the invention may be described or claimed in the singular the plural is contemplated unless limitation to the singular is explicitly stated. Also as used herein the term exemplary is meant to be only illustrative and is not intended to mean preferred or otherwise indicate any degree of preference.

