---

title: Allosterically catalyzed signal amplification in chemical and biological sensing
abstract: Coordination complexes having at least two structural conformations are disclosed. The coordination complexes contain at least one metal center and at least one hemi-labile ligand, and change structural conformations due to the presence or absence of allosteric effectors. Methods of detecting an analyte using the coordination complexes are also disclosed.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07754907&OS=07754907&RS=07754907
owner: Northwestern University
number: 07754907
owner_city: Evanston
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050818
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 602 814 filed Aug. 18 2004 and U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 652 404 filed Feb. 10 2005.

This invention was made with government support under National Science Foundation grant EEC 0118025 and Air Force Office of Scientific Research grant F49620 00 1 0283.

The present invention relates to coordination complexes and methods of detecting an analyte using the coordination complexes. In particular the present invention relates to novel coordination complexes comprising metals and hemi labile ligands which upon coordination with an analyte or an allosteric effector rearrange their coordination environment at the metal and cause a structural conformation change throughout the coordination complex. These structural changes activate the coordination complex for use as a catalyst or for the binding of an analyte. The subsequent catalytic reaction or analyte binding event amplifies the signal and allows for detection of the analyte.

Allosteric regulation is a powerful tool utilized efficiently and elegantly in biological systems to control substrate binding and catalysis Lim et al. 12 61 2002 Kobe et al. 402 373 1999 . Recently advances have been made in the design of abiotic supramolecular structures that exhibit allosteric or pseudoallosteric behavior analogous to their biological counterparts. Sensors capable of signal amplification Kovbasyuk et al. 104 3161 2004 Saghatelian et al. 125 344 2003 Gianneschi et al. 125 10508 2003 Gianneschi et al. 43 5503 2004 Nabeshima et al. 125 28 2003 Nabeshima et al. 32 1407 1993 Reaendiz et al. 6 651 2004 Yoshizawa et al. 126 6846 2004 and asymmetric catalysts with activities and enantioselectivities that can be controlled with allosteric regulators have been designed Gianneschi et al. 125 10508 2003 Gianneschi et al. 43 5503 2004 . Thus far recognition of analytes induced by an allosteric regulator has not been demonstrated. This capability however would be a first step towards a system having recognition properties that could be selectively activated or deactivated using small molecule coordination chemistry at an allosteric regulatory site. Thus the detection of an analyte of interest either through the allosteric effect of a second molecule on a coordination complex or through the allosteric effect that the analyte has on a coordination complex has not been achieved. Further the use of these coordination complexes as catalysts with the ability to be activated or deactivated has not been demonstrated.

An analyte of interest can be detected by its ability to alter the coordination about a metal center of a coordination complex in a manner that affects the catalytic activity of the metal center. Alternatively an analyte of interest can be detected through its ability to coordinate to the coordination complex only in one structural conformation of the coordination complex wherein the structural conformation for binding the analyte is achieved through first binding an allosteric effector to a coordination complex. Further the catalytic activity of a catalyst can be modulated by interaction between the catalyst and an allosteric effector.

The presence of the analyte can be detected by different methods depending upon which of the two processes is in effect. In cases wherein the binding of the analyte activates the catalytic activity of the coordination complex a product of the catalytic reaction can be detected. In cases wherein the binding of an allosteric effector causes a structural conformation change to the coordination complex the analyte binds to the new structural conformation of the coordination complex and can be detected. This detection can be achieved through for example the addition of a fluorescent detection molecule that acts as a sensor for the binding of the analyte to the coordination complex.

The present invention relates to coordination complexes. In particular the present invention provides coordination complexes comprising one or more metal centers and at least one hemi labile ligand wherein the coordination complex has at least two structural conformations e.g. one in which the hemi labile ligand is fully coordinated to a metal center and one in which the hemi labile ligand is partially displaced by a second ligand and is semi coordinated to the metal center. In some embodiments the coordination complex is arranged in a macrocycle. In other embodiments the coordination complex assumes a nominally U shaped conformation termed herein a tweezer conformation in which the arms of the tweezer may be spaced in close proximity to one another or spaced apart. The spacing of the arms of the tweezer of the coordination complex can either enable the catalytic ability of the coordination complex or occlude the catalytic activity.

One aspect of the present invention provides coordination complexes that can act as a catalyst wherein the catalytic ability of the coordination complex is modulated by an allosteric effector.

In another aspect the invention provides coordination complexes wherein the second ligand is an analyte or an allosteric effector.

Yet another aspect of the present invention provides coordination complexes wherein the coordination complex is chiral and preferentially interacts with a chiral analyte of interest or a chiral allosteric effector.

Still another aspect of the present invention provides coordination complexes wherein the coordination complex is able to catalyze a catalytic reaction wherein the catalytic ability of the coordination complex is influenced by an allosteric effector.

Another aspect of the invention is to provide a method of detecting an analyte whereby a coordination complex undergoes a structural conformation change upon de coordination of the labile portion of the hemi labile ligand and coordination of that site to an allosteric effector. The structural change permits binding of the analyte to the coordination complex.

Still another aspect of the present invention is to provide a method of detecting an analyte wherein a coordination complex undergoes a structural change upon binding to an analyte which activates the coordination site as an active catalyst. Detection of the analyte occurs indirectly through detection of a product of a subsequent catalytic reaction.

A new approach in supramolecular chemistry termed the Weak Link Approach WLA has recently been developed Farrell et al. 37 465 1998 Holliday et al. 121 6316 1999 Ovchinikov et al. 99 4927 2002 Farrell et al. 18 4856 1999 Eisenberg et al. 20 2052 2001 Liu et al. 40 2940 2001 Slone et al. in 48 233 Karlin K. D. ed. John Wiley Sons Inc. New York 1999 Dixon et al. 39 3432 2000 Masar et al. 43 4693 2004 . WLA utilizes condensed intermediates templated by hemi labile ligands that strategically form both strong and weak coordination bonds with metal centers. Such structures can be selectively and often reversibly opened into flexible conformations or macrocycles by reacting them with small molecules that break the weak coordination bonds of the hemi labile ligands to a metal center. This ability to use small molecules to interconvert rigid condensed structures to flexible open conformations or macrocycles is ideal for creating allosterically regulated systems. One embodiment of the present invention utilizes this mediated conformational change to provide catalysts whose activity can be modulated or controlled by allosteric effectors.

A significant advance would be the development of allosteric coordination complexes with chiral recognition elements that could be activated and deactivated. Such a capability would allow the development of a receptors and chemical sensors and b separation materials that could selectively recognize transport manipulate and chemically release target chiral agents. The present invention utilizes WLA to synthesize coordination complexes comprising a metal and a hemi labile ligand. For example a four coordinate copper I Cu I complex in the following scheme having chiral recognition for mandelic acid is activated by chelating 2 2 bipyridine bipy to the Cu I center in a reaction that concomitantly breaks weak Cu sulfur S links and opens the condensed structure into a 27 membered macrocycle.

As used herein coordination complex refers to a structure comprising at least one metal center and at least one hemi labile ligand and optionally non labile ligands labile ligands or both wherein the coordination complex has at least two structural conformations related to a complete or partial coordination of the hemi labile ligand to the metal center and wherein the two structural conformations exhibit an opposite binding ability to an analyte or allosteric effector or wherein the structural conformations exhibit differing catalytic activities. The coordination complex can exist as a macrocyclic coordination complex or as a tweezer.

As used herein a macrocycle is a structure wherein twelve or more atoms are arranged in a continuous ring. Preferred macrocycles of the present invention include 15 to 60 atoms inclusive. Macrocycles larger than 60 atoms are envisioned but are not preferred.

As used herein a tweezer coordination complex is a structural conformation wherein the members of the coordination complex are oriented in a fixed U shaped manner as illustrated in the following structure 2 where M can be any metal.

As used herein structural conformation refers to the three dimensional arrangement of the coordination complex with respect to its metal center s hemi labile ligand s and other optional fully labile and non labile ligands. For example one structural conformation exists when the hemi labile ligand is fully complexed to the metal center while a second structural conformation exists when the hemi labile ligand is only partially complexed to the metal center.

As used herein a metal center refers to a metal that is capable of coordinating with various organic and inorganic ligands. Exemplary metals include but are not limited to copper zinc nickel cobalt manganese chromium vanadium titanium scandium yttrium zirconium niobium molybdenum technetium ruthenium rhodium palladium silver cadmium lanthanum hafnium tantalum tungsten rhenium osmium iridium platinum gold tin cerium aluminum magnesium calcium strontium barium praseodymium neodymium promethium samarium europium gadolinium terbium dysprosium holmium erbium thulium ytterbium lutetium or a mixture thereof. The metal center can be in any oxidation state e.g. copper I copper II manganese III manganese V and can have any number of ligands coordinated in any coordination geometry e.g. tetrahedral square planar trigonal bipyramidal square pyramidal octahedral .

As used herein a hemi labile ligand refers to a ligand that has at least two coordinating atoms one that is weakly associated to the metal center and one that is more strongly associated to the metal center. In accordance with the present invention the coordinating atoms are not identical and the weaker coordinating atom can be displaced by a second ligand such as an analyte or an allosteric effector whereas the stronger coordinating atom remains coordinated to the metal center of the coordination complex. The coordinating atom can be but not limited to phosphorus nitrogen sulfur and oxygen.

One non limiting example of a hemi labile ligand is a ligand that contains both a sulfur atom the weak coordinating atom and a phosphorus atom the strong coordinating atom . Other non limiting examples include ligands having nitrogen and oxygen coordinating atoms. One achiral ligand and an example of coordination complexes contemplated in the present invention are 

The hemi labile ligand also can optionally include a chiral backbone that allows for selective binding of one enantiomer of an analyte or allosteric effector over another. Nonlimiting examples of chiral backbones include 1 1 binaphthol BINOL Mikami et al. 111 1940 1989 2 2 bis diphenylphosphino 1 1 binaphthyl BINAP Miyashita et al. 102 7932 1980 salen based complexes i.e. coordinatino complexes containing the N N bis 3 5 di t butylsalicylidene 1 2 cyclohexane diamino ligand see e.g. Li et al. 115 5326 1993 variations of the salen ligand e.g. free nitrogen version of salen or a salen ligand motif and Evans et al. 34 7027 1993 bisoxazoline containing compounds Evans et al. 115 6460 1993 taddol and tartrate esters. Nonlimiting examples of salen based ligand and the corresponding coordination complexes both macrocyclic and tweezer are shown below.

As used herein an allosteric effector is any molecule that can coordinate to a metal center of a coordination complex and effects a structural conformation change in the coordination complex i.e. from conformation A to conformation B . An analyte is a molecule of interest. In some embodiments the allosteric effector is the analyte. In other embodiments the allosteric effector is different from the analyte but effects detection of the analyte of interest. In some embodiments the analyte is a substrate of a catalytic reaction. In other embodiments the analyte is a molecule that coordinates to specific structural conformations of a coordination complex but not other structural conformations. In still other embodiments the analyte is both the allosteric effector and the substrate of a catalytic reaction.

In some embodiments the allosteric effector is an allosteric protagonist. An allosteric protagonist is a ligand that effects a structural conformation change of the coordination complex and activates the catalytic activity of the coordination complex or allows for coordination of the analyte of interest to the metal center. In other embodiments the allosteric effector is an allosteric antagonist. An allosteric antagonist is a ligand that effects a structural conformation change to the coordination complex and deactivates the catalytic activity of the coordination complex or prevents coordination of the analyte of interest.

Non limiting examples of allosteric effectors include CO SO CHCN HN R NH RHN R NHR NC R CN R CN NC R NC heteroaryl and CN wherein R is selected from the group consisting of optionally substituted linear or branched Calkyl linear or branched Calkenyl linear or branched Calkynyl aryl Ccycloalkyl and Ccycloalkenyl and Ris the same or different and is selected from the group consisting of hydrogen and linear or branched Calkyl. Specific nonlimiting examples of allosteric effectors are illustrated below.

As used herein Calkyl refers to a linear or branched saturated hydrocarbon group containing 1 to 8 carbon atoms for example methyl ethyl n propyl isopropyl n butyl isobutyl t butyl octyl and the like. Ccycloalkyl refers to a ring having 3 to 8 carbon atoms for example cyclopentyl cyclohexyl and the like.

As used herein Calkenyl refers to a linear or branched hydrocarbon group having 2 to 8 carbon atoms and having at least one carbon carbon double bond for example ethenyl n propenyl isopropenyl n butenyl isobutenyl octenyl and the like.

As used herein Calkynyl refers to a linear or branched hydrocarbon group having 2 to 8 carbon atoms and having at least one carbon carbon triple bond for example ethynyl propynyl 1 butynyl 2 butynyl octynyl and the like.

Ccycloalkenyl is defined identically to Ccycloalkyl except the ring contains at least one carbon carbon double bond.

The term halo and halide are used in the conventional sense to refer to a chloro bromo fluoro or iodo substituent or corresponding ion.

As used herein aryl is an aromatic moiety generally containing 6 to 30 carbon atoms. An aryl group can contain a single aromatic ring or multiple aromatic rings that are fused together directly linked or indirectly linked such that the different aromatic rings are bound to a common group such as a methylene or ethylene moiety . Preferred aryl groups contain 6 to 20 carbon atoms and particularly preferred aryl groups contain 6 to 12 carbon atoms. Exemplary aryl groups contain one aromatic ring or two fused or linked aromatic rings e.g. phenyl naphthyl biphenyl diphenyl ether diphenylamine benzophenone and the like. Aryl groups can optionally be substituted with one or more substituent groups. Nonlimiting examples of substituent groups include halo nitro cyano linear or branched Calkyl linear or branched Calkenyl aryl Ccycloalkyl Ccycloalkenyl amino amido carboxylate and hydroxy.

As used herein heteroaryl is an aromatic moiety as defined above for aryl and that further contains at least one ring heteroatom selected from the group consisting of oxygen nitrogen and sulfur. Non limiting examples of heteroaryl groups include pyrrolyl pyrrolidinyl pyridinyl quinolinyl indolyl pyrimidinyl imidazolyl 1 2 4 triazolyl tetrazolyl 2 2 bipyridinyl and pyridine 3 2 h quinolinyl.

One embodiment of the present invention is the use of a coordination complex to identify an analyte of interest and particularly one enantiomer of a chiral analyte as illustrated below. For example the binaphthyl metallocyclophanes termed S 3 and S 4 have been designed to allosterically recognize chiral hydroxy carboxylic acids. S 4 has two different binding sites but S 3 because of its condensed nature only has one. In the case of S 4 one binding site is a Cu P S 2 site that allows for allosteric regulation by reaction with 2 2 bipyridyl 2 2 bipy . The other binding site is a hydrogen bonding site for chiral guest molecules such as mandelic acid derivatives. Therefore as S 3 is converted to S 4 through a reaction between 2 2 bipy and the allosteric Cu I regulatory site a chiral recognition pocket is generated. This structure was designed based upon its resemblance to a bisbinaphthyl macrocycle an organic structure known to selectively recognize enantiomers of mandelic acid Lin et al 4 3297 2002 .

Another embodiment of the present invention is the use of a present coordination complex having a hemi labile ligand to effect a change in the catalytic ability of the coordination complex. The invention includes the design synthesis and application of an allosterically activated catalyst. The artificial allosteric catalyst can be switched from a deactivated to an activated state by the introduction of allosteric protagonists. These protagonists take the form of molecules ions or any input signal such as electromagnetic radiation capable of effecting a change in conformation of the catalyst which in turn results in a change in catalyst activity and or selectivity. The species that influences the catalyst is a protagonist or antagonist for positive or negative effects respectively on catalyst selectivity or rate of reaction.

The activated catalyst of the coordination complex as described above allows for the amplification of an analyte signal via coupling with a catalytic cycle detection step. In some embodiments the catalyst effects the production of a product that can be detected. In other embodiments the analyte is both the allosteric effector and the substrate for the catalytic reaction. Whereas the amount of the catalyst remains constant the amount of product increases and detection of the analyte is facilitated. The analyte can bind to only one coordination complex molecule but the product that is detected is produced in larger quantities allowing for smaller amounts of analyte to be detected due to this amplification of a detectable signal. This concept is schematically represented in wherein the analyte of interest plays the role of the allosteric effector and a product of the catalytic reaction is detected. In this example the production of acetic acid is detected by the change in fluorescence of a sensor molecule.

Detection of the analyte can occur through various means. When binding of the analyte activates the catalytic activity of the coordination complex detection of the analyte can be measured indirectly by detecting the presence of a product of the catalytic reaction or consumption of a starting material . Detection can occur by measuring changes in fluorescence pH temperature or color for example or by using chromatography techniques such as high pressure liquid chromatography HPLC gas chromatography GC and the like. Measurement of the production of a product or consumption of a starting material is dependent upon the particular catalytic reaction taking place and the best means for detecting such will be apparent to persons of skill in the art.

More particularly one means of indirect detection of an analyte of interest via a product of a catalytic reaction is illustrated in . A coordination complex having two domains containing rhodium I Rh I metal centers and a catalytic domain containing two zinc II Zn II metal centers is shown. The macrocyclic cavity of the coordination complex can be opened to form an open coordination complex by the introduction of carbon monoxide gas CO 1 atmosphere atm in the presence of chloride ions Cl benzyltriethylammonium chloride in methylene chloride. Both CO and Cl are required to break the thioether Rh I bonds leaving the phosphine Rh I bonds intact. The result of the selective breaking of these bonds is a concomitant significant change in the molecular shape. This change in molecular shape corresponds to a change in the catalytic activity of the catalyst i.e. k

In another embodiment a fixed U shaped i.e. tweezer coordination complex in combination with an allosteric effector can be activated or deactivated as a catalyst allowing for the detection of an analyte of interest. This activation deactivation of the catalytic ability of a coordination complex shown below deactivated below structure 3 activated top structure 2 is illustrated in for the reaction of the asymmetric ring opening of cyclohexene oxide by azidotrimethylsilane TMSN . In left graph the coordination complex is an active catalyst when the hemi labile ligand is fully coordinated to the metal center closed complex 2 below and deactivated as a catalyst by CO saturation open complex 3 below . The coordination of CO to the metal center causes the coordination complex to change structural conformations from the closed U shaped active catalyst structural conformation to the open inactive catalyst structural conformation. The formation of a product of the catalytic reaction is monitored as illustrated by the graph on the right. The activation and deactivation of the coordination complex is translated to the rate of production of the product and to the enantiomeric excess ee observed.

In cases where binding of the analyte to the coordination complex does not trigger a catalytic reaction analyte detection can be achieved by monitoring spectroscopic changes in the coordination complex. For example changes in fluorescence can be measured to monitor binding of the analyte to the coordination complex. Chromatographic methods also can be employed to measure binding of the analyte for example size exclusion chromatography and the like. Other means of analyzing a sample can be employed such as mass spectrometry raman spectroscopy nuclear magnetic resonance and the like.

In some embodiments sensor molecules can be added to the sample as a means of detecting the analyte. One non limiting example of such a sensor molecule is a fluorescent probe that changes fluorescence depending upon the pH of the sample. See wherein the generation of acetic acid protonates the sensor molecule which is highly fluorescent Other types of sensor molecules also can be used depending upon the analyte of interest.

When the analyte is chiral another embodiment of the present invention is a selective binding of the analyte enantiomer of interest to the coordination complex compared to the other enantiomer. In such cases the structural conformation that allows for binding of a chiral analyte has a coordination site that preferentially complexes with the enantiomer of interest. The analyte enantiomer of interest binds to the coordination complex more preferentially than the other enantiomer which also permits the separation of enantiomers.

All reactions were carried out under an inert atmosphere of nitrogen using standard Schlenk techniques or an inert atmosphere glovebox unless otherwise noted. Methylene chloride CHCl and pentane were dried and distilled over calcium hydride. All solvents were degassed via nitrogen gas N bubbling prior to use. 2 2 Dihydroxy 1 1 binaphthalenyl 3 3 dicarbaldehyde was prepared via a literature procedure Zhang et al. 66 481 2001 . Deuterated solvents were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories Inc. Andover Mass. and used as received. All other chemicals were used as received from Aldrich Chemical Company Milwaukee Wis. . Proton nuclear magnetic resonance H NMR and proton decoupled carbon nuclear magnetic resonance C H NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian Mercury 300 MHz FT NMR spectrometer and referenced relative to TMS resonances in deuterated chloroform CDCl and to residual proton resonances in deuterated methylene chloride CDCl . Proton decoupled phosphorus nuclear magnetic resonance PH NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian Mercury 300 MHz FT NMR spectrometer at 121.4 MHz and referenced relative to an external 85 phosphoric acid standard. All chemical shifts are reported in ppm. UV V is spectra were recorded on a Varian Cary 50 Bio spectrophotometer in HPLC grade acetonitrile. Circular dichroism CD spectra were recorded on a Jasco J 715 spectrometer. Electrospray mass spectra ESI MS were recorded on a Micromas Quatro II triple quadrapole mass spectrometer. Electron ionization mass spectra EI MS were recorded on a Sisions VG 70 250 SE mass spectrometer. Elemental analyses were performed by Quantitative Technologies Inc. Whitehouse N.J.

The synthesis of the hemi labile ligand and corresponding coordination complex outlined below can be used to synthesize other hemi labile ligands and coordination complexes by variation of the starting materials such as using a different dialdehyde. The appropriate choice of starting materials to synthesize a hemi labile ligand will be readily apparent to one of skill in the art in view of the examples set forth below.

Enantiomerically pure S BINOL 3 3 dicarbaldehyde and 4 2 diphenylphosphanylethylthio phenylamine were coupled via imine condensation to give compound S 1 which was reduced with lithium aluminum hydride to give a new amine compound S 2 in moderate yield. One equivalent of ligand S 2 was reacted with one equivalent of Cu I perchlorate tetraacetonitrile in CHClto form the condensed intermediate S 3. Compound S 3 reacts with 2 2 bipy one equivalent to cleanly yield S 4 in CHCl. The synthetic procedure for S 1 S 2 S 3 and S 4 are as follows.

3 3 Bis 4 2 diphenylphosphanyl ethylthio phenylimino methyl 1 1 binaphthylenyl 2 2 diol S 1 was prepared according to the following procedure. 2 2 Dihydroxy 1 1 binaphthylenyl 3 3 dicarbaldehyde 700 mg 2.04 mmol 4 2 diphenylphosphanyl ethylthio phenylamine 1 38 g 4.10 mmol CHCl 30 mL and methanol CHOH 50 mL were added to a Schlenk flask. The resulting solution was refluxed for 24 hours h . The solution was dried in vacuo and the resulting orange solid was purified by column chromatography eluent CHCl . The yield was 1.94 g 95 . H NMR CDCl . 13.11 s 2H OH 8.85 s 2H N CH 8.09 s 2H aromatic 7.87 m 2H aromatic 7.35 7.11 m 34H aromatic 2.89 m 4H HC S 2.30 m 4H HC P . CH NMR CDCl 162.57 s 154.74 s 146.12 s 138.01 d J 13.5 Hz 135.75 d J 15.8 Hz 132.96 br m 130.02 br m 128.82 br m 127.93 s 124.77 br m 123.80 br m 121.99 br m 121.54 s 117.01 s 30.31 d J 24.0 Hz 28.28 d J 16.5 Hz . PH NMR CDCl 16.3 s . EI MS m z Calcd 980.28. Found 981.4. Anal. Calcd for CHNOPSHO C 74.53 H 5.25 N 2.80. Found C 74.43 H 5.00 N 2.78.

3 3 Bis 4 2 diphenylphosphanyl ethylsulfanyl phenylamino methyl 1 1 binaphthylenyl 2 2 diol S 2 was prepared according to the following procedure. S 1 3.477 g 3.48 mmol in CHCl dimethoxyethane DME 30 mL 30 mL was reacted with lithium aluminum hydride 3.0 equivalents at 0 C. The reaction mixture was stirred overnight at room temperature and quenched with water 20 mL . Volatiles were evaporated under reduced pressure and more water 100 mL was added. The mixture was extracted with CHCl 3 times 100 mL . The combined organic layers were washed with brine and water concentrated under reduced pressure and then dried with sodium sulfate. Filtration and purification by column chromatography gave monohydrated amine ligand as a yellowish solid eluent CHCl . Yield 2.19 g 63 . H NMR CDCl 7.86 s 2H aromatic 7.76 d 2H aromatic 7.27 7.11 m 28H aromatic 6.98 d 2H aromatic 6.66 d 4H aromatic 4.54 s 4H HC NH 2.76 m 4H CH S 2.20 m 4H HC P . CH NMR CDCl 152.03 s 147.37 s 138.23 d J 14.3 Hz 133.91 br m 133.34 s 132.89 br m 129.25 br m 128.80 br m 126.93 s 124.40 br m 123.51 s 115.04 br m 113.39 s 46.20 s 32.81 s 28.41 s . PH NMR CDCl 16.9 s . EI MS m z Calcd 985.2. Found 985.2. Anal. Calcd for CHNOPSHO C 74.23 H 5.63 N 2.79. Found C 74.22 H 5.44 N 2.68.

 3 3 Bis 4 2 diphenylphosphanyl ethyldulfanyl phenylamino methyl 1 1 binaphthalenyl 2 2 diol Cu ClO S 3 was prepared according to the following procedure. In a Schlenk flask the ligand S 2 295 mg 0.299 mmol was dissolved in CHCl 10 mL . A solution of copper 1 perchlorate tetraacetonitrile Cu MeCN ClO 98 mg 0.300 mmol in CHCl 10 mL was added via cannula to the stirring ligand solution to give a colorless solution. After stirring for 12 h solvent was removed under reduced pressure and the resulting white solid was dried at 150 C. under vacuum to give a yellowish sticky solid. Recrystallization from CHCl diethyl ether EtO afforded an analytically pure compound as determined by NMR spectroscopy in quantitative yield 322 mg 94 . H NMR CDCl 7.75 s 2H aromatic 7.68 d 2H aromatic 7.25 6.92 m 28H aromatic 6.45 s 4H aromatic 4.41 br 4H HC NH 2.89 br 4H HC S 2.42 br 4H HC P . CH NMR CDCl 151.71 s 149.50 s 134.49 br m 133.07 s 132.50 br m 130.88 br m 129.29 br m 127.05 s 126.76 m 124.19 br m 116.32 m 114.47 br m 112.85 s 100.09 s 44.99 br m 38.15 br m 28.56 br m . PH NMR CDCl 0.2 s . ESI MS m z Calcd 1047.2. Found 1047.2. Anal. Calcd for CHNOPSCCu.HO C 63.85 H 4.84 N 2.40. Found C 64.07 H 4.77 N 2.40.

 3 3 Bis 4 2 diphenylphosphanul ethylsulfanyl phenylamino methyl 1 1 binaphthylenyl 2 2 diol Cu 2 2 bipyridine ClO S 4 was prepared according to the following procedure. In a Schlenk flask copper complex S 3 103 mg 0.0897 mmol and 2 2 bipyridine 14 mg 1 equivalent were dissolved in CHCl 5.0 mL to give a yellow solution. After stirring for 1 h the solvent was removed to yield analytically pure yellow solid in quantitative yield 114 mg 97 H NMR CDCl 7.86 m br 8H aromatic 7.57 s br 2H aromatic 7.31 7.11 m 22H aromatic 6.99 s br 2H aromatic 6.90 s br 4H aromatic 6.52 6.49 m 4H aromatic 4.74 d 2H J 13.8 Hz HC NH 4.36 d 2H J 14.4 Hz HC NH 1.86 br 4H HC S 1.82 br 8H HC P . CH NMR CDCl 153.19 s0 148.75 s 139.95 br m 135.76 br m 134.41 s 132.87 br m 132.34 br m 129.68 br m 127.84 s 126.72 br m 124.12 br m 121.31 s 115.31 br m 46.74 br m 32.41 br m 28.19 br m . PHNMR CDCl 6.4 s . ESI MS m z Calcd 1203.3. Found 1203.4. Anal. Calcd for CHNOPSCCu HO C 65.40 H 4.88 N 4.24. Found C 65.67 H 4.87 N 4.30.

The formation of S 4 was confirmed by an upfield shift of the H NMR resonances for the methylene groups of the chelating arms of the tetradentate ligand SCHCHPPh. These resonances shift from 3.00 and 2.53 to 1.86 and 1.83 respectively. The BINOL CHNH resonances exhibit peak splitting Kovbasyuk et al. 104 3161 2004 Nabeshima et al. 32 1407 1993 that is highly diagnostic of a chiral macrocycle from a singlet at 4.46 to two doublets at 4.80 and 4.43 . The PH NMR spectroscopy of S 4 also is consistent with that of a symmetric CuP phenanthroline complex with a singlet at 6.4 ppm. All other data including ESI mass spectroscopy and elemental analyses are consistent for the proposed structures.

The CD spectrum of S 2 exhibits a characteristic positive couplet which is similar to that of S BINOL due to the exciton coupling between the long axis polarized Btransition with a positive maximum at 237 nm and a negative minimum at 226 nm. A further negative bond at 205 nm was observed and corresponds to a higher energy Btransition Peacitelli et al 23 4223 2004 Rosini et al. 61 2000 Hug et al. 96 3407 1974 . S 3 and S 4 displayed additional positive maxima at 270 nm that can be attributed to a chiral arrangement of the PPhgroup on the Cu I center. The CD spectra of S 3 and S 4 are very similar suggesting that there is very little change in the chirality and dihedral angle of the BINOL center. .

To study the allosteric effect of the macrocyclic coordination complexes closed complex S 3 and open complex S 4 were independently treated with both enantiomers of mandelic acid and monitored by fluorometry Pu et al 104 1687 2004 Xu et al. 124 14239 2002 Lin et al. 124 2008 2002 Lin et al. 4 3297 2002 . First S 3 0.10 mM was treated with a 50 fold excess of S or R mandelic acid 5.0 mM . In both cases no significant changes in fluorescence were observed . This is because the binding pocket is closed and the multiple hydrogen bonding sites required to complex mandelic acid are not accessible.

In contrast open complex S 4 can accommodate mandelic acid and the fluorescence intensity of S 4 increases in the presence of S or R mandelic acid. This increase in fluorescence is due to the suppressed photo induced electron transfer fluorescence quenching as the amine nitrogen of S 4 is protonated by the acid peacock et al 102 2043 1980 Naruta et al. 113 6865 1991 Kubo et al 382 521 1996 Hu et al. 125 11490 2003 Lee et al 124 12948 2002 Lee et al. 124 4554 2002 Jua et al 6 861 2004 James et al. 374 345 1995 . In CHClsolution containing 2 of DME the fluorescence intensity of S 4 0.10 mM was increased 3.1 fold upon treatment of S mandelic acid 5.0 mM but only 1.9 fold for R mandelic acid 5.0 mM . The net fluorescence intensity increase of S 4 by S mandelic acid was 2.33 times that by R mandelic acid. When S 4 0.10 mM was treated with mandelic acid in the concentration range of 5.0 mM to 20 mM the fluorescence enhancement of the open complex exhibits a Benesi Hildebrand type relationship Benesi and Hildebrand 71 2703 1949 . Thus the association constant of S 4 S mandelic acid was found to be 764 NT while that of S 4 and R mandelic acid was 367 M. This indicates that the complex S 4 S mandelic acid is more stable than the S 4 R mandelic acid by approximately 0.43 kcal mol G .

The synthesis of the hemi labile ligand and corresponding coordination complex outlined below can be used to synthesize other hemi labile ligands and coordination complexes by variation of the starting materials such as using a different diamine e.g. 1 1 diamino naphthalene or by coupling different aldehydes to the diamine. The appropriate choice of starting diamine or intermediate aldehyde will be readily apparent to one of skill in the art in the art in view of the examples set forth below.

3 tert butyl 5 4 2 diphenylphosphinoethanesulfanyl phenyl salicylaldehyde and R R 1 2 cyclohexanediamino N 3 5 di t butylsalicylidene hydrochloride were prepared via published procedures Gianneschi et al 125 10508 2003 and Campbell et al. 42 1221 2001 . Rhodium I norboridene chloride dimer Rh NBD Cl was purchased from Strem Chemicals Newbury Mass. and used as received.

 R R 1 2 cyclohexanediamino N 3 5 di t butylsalicylidene N 3 t butyl 5 4 2 diphenylphosphinoethanesulfanyl phenyl salicylidene. HL R R 1 2 cyclohexanediamino N 3 5 di t butylsalicylidene hydrochloride 0.74 g 2.0 mmol was placed in a Schlenk flask with triethylamine 0.28 mL 2 mmol and ethanol 5 mL and stirred for 5 minutes min at which time 3 t butyl 5 4 2 diphenylphosphinoethanesulfanyl phenyl salicylaldehyde 1.0 g 2.0 mmol in CHCl ethanol 10 mL 1 1 was added to the solution. The resulting yellow solution was stirred for 18 h before the solvent was removed in vacuo. The resulting yellow microcrystalline powder was purified by silica gel chromatography 1 1 CHCl hexanes . Yield 1.4 g 85 . H NMR CDCl 14.02 s 1H OH 13.69 s 1H OH 8.33 s 1H N CH 8.29 s 1H N CH 7.43 6.96 m 18H aromatic 3.33 m 2H cyclohexyl 2.95 m 2H HC P 2.36 m 2H HC S 1.88 m 8H cyclohexyl 1.45 s 9H C CH 1.40 s 9H C CH 1.21 s 9H C CH . CH NMR CDCl 166.2 165.7 160.3 158.1 140.2 139.4 137.7 d J 5.7 Hz 136.6 133.9 133.1 132.8 130.1 129.0 128.8 d J 6.3 Hz 128.3 127.3 127.1 126.2 118.9 118.0 72.6 38.2 34.9 33.4 33.3 31.8 31.6 31.5 30.6 d J 21.9 Hz 29.6 29.5 28.6 d J 14.9 Hz 25.5 24.5 22.9. PH NMR CDCl 16.0. High resolution EIMS m z Calcd. for CHONSP 810.4342. Found 810.4359. Anal. Calcd. for CHONSP C 77.00 H 7.83 N 3.16. Found C 76.87 H 7.56 N 3.16.

Formation of Chromium Complex 1 structure above M CrCl . HL prepared above 0.60 g 0.74 mmol chromium II chloride 0.18 g 1.5 mmol and tetrahydrofuran THF 20 mL were combined in a small vial in an inert atmosphere glovebox and the resulting brown solution was stirred under a static nitrogen atmosphere for 3 h then opened to air for a further 3 h. The solvent was removed in vacuo. The crude brown solid was dissolved in CHCl washed with saturated ammonium chloride aq and brine and the organic layer was dried over sodium sulfate. Vacuum removal of the solvent and subsequent recrystallization from CHCl ether yielded a brown microcrystalline solid. Yield 0.50 g 75 . PH NMR CDCl 15.6 broad s . EIMS m z Calcd for CHONPCrCl 895.3. Found 895.2. Anal. Calcd for CHONSPCrCl.CHCl C 64.95 H 6.48 N 2.86. Found C 65.18 H 6.59 N 3.10.

Formation of zinc complex 1 structure above M Zn . HL prepared above 0.14 g 0.17 mmol was dissolved in THF 3 mL . To this solution diethyl zinc 0.023 g 0.19 mmol in THF 2 mL was added. The resulting yellow solution was stirred for 22 h. The solvent was removed in vacuo. The crude yellow solid was recrystallized from CHCl hexanes to yield a microcrystalline solid. Yield 0.14 g 90 . H NMR CDCl 8.45 s 1H N CH 8.39 s 1H N CH 7.58 7.28 m 18H aromatic 3.15 m 2H cyclohexyl 2.98 m 2H HC P 2.44 m 2H HC S 1.99 m 8H cyclohexyl 1.50 s 9H C CH 1.49 s 9H C CH 1.34 s 9H C CH . PH NMR CDCl 16.3. EIMS m z Calcd for CHONSPZn 872.35. Found 872.35. Anal calcd for CHONSPZn C 71.53 H 7.05 N 3.21. Found C 71.43 H 6.97 N 2.98.

Formation of rhodium chromium complex 2 structure above M CrCl . A small vial was charged with Rh NBD Cl 0.052 g 0.11 mmol silver tetrafluoroborate 0.044 g 0.22 mmol and CHCl 2 mL . This reaction was stirred for 2 h then filtered dropwise through Celite into a Schlenk flask. The resulting red solution the was diluted with CHCl 10 mL to give a light red orange Rh solution. Compound 1 from above 0.40 g 0.45 mmol in CHCl 10 mL was added to the Rh solution and allowed to stir for 22 h. The solvent was removed in vacuo to yield a brown microcrystalline solid. This solid then was dissolved in a minimal amount of CHCland filtered through Celite. The brown solution then was recrystallized from CHCl hexanes. Yield 0.40 g 90 . PH NMR CDCl 67.7 br . ESMS m z Calcd. for CHONSPRhCrCl 1896.1. Found 1896.2. Anal. Calcd. for CHONSPRhCrClBF . CHCl C 61.97 H 6.12 N 2.77. Found C 62.13 H 6.18 N 2.71.

Formation of rhodium zinc complex 2 structure above M Zn . A small vial was charged with Rh NBD Cl 0.015 g 0.03 mmol silver tetrafluoroborate 0.012 g 0.06 mmol and CHCl 2 mL . This reaction was stirred for 2 h then filtered dropwise through Celite into a Schlenk flask. The resulting red solution then was diluted with CHCl 10 mL to give a light red orange Rh solution. Compound 2 from above 0.11 g 0.13 mmol in CHCl 10 mL was added to the Rh solution and stirred for 22 h. The solvent was removed in vacuo to yield a yellow microcrystalline solid which was recrystallized from CHCl hexanes. Yield 0.12 g 95 . H NMR CDCl 8.84 br 4H N CH 7.74 7.23 m 36H aromatic 3.71 m 4H cyclohexyl 2.81 m 4H HC P 2.66 m 4H HC S 2.16 m 16H cyclohexyl 1.50 s 18H C CH 1.47 s 18H C CH 1.34 s 18H C CH . PH NMR CDCl 66.3 d J 162 Hz . ESMS m z Calcd for CHONSPRhZn 1851.9. Found 1851.7. Anal. Calcd for CHONSPRhZnBF .CHCl C 62.32 H 6.18 N 2.77. Found C 62.41 H 5.97 N 2.66.

Synthesis of the open macrocycles 3 structure above M Zn or CrCl . Compound 2 M Zn or M CrCl was placed in NMR tubes in either benzonitrile THF or CHClin the presence of 1 equiv bis triphenylphosphoranylidene ammonium chloride PPNCl . Benzyltriethylammonium chloride also can be used as efficiently. CO 1 atm then was bubbled through the solutions for 30 seconds. Yields of complex 3 M Zn or M CrCl were quantative as determined by PH NMR spectroscopy. The liability of the Cl and CO ligands precluded elemental analysis and determination of the mass of the parent ion by mass spectrometry.

3 M CrCl PH NMR CDCl 25.4 br 21.2 s PPN . FTIR 1976 cm . ESMS m z Calcd for CHONSPRhCrCl 1896.1. Found 1896.0.

3 M Zn H NMR CDCl 8.50 s 2H N CH 8.41 s 2H N CH 7.72 7.31 m 36H aromatic 3.65 m 4H cyclohexyl 3.01 m 4H HC P 2.45 m 4H HC S 1.98 m 16H cyclohexyl 1.51 s 18H C CH 1.47 s 18H C CH 1.31 s 18H C CH . P H NMR CDCl 23.5 d J 123 Hz 21.2 s PPN . FTIR 1978 cm. ESMS m z Calcd for CHONSPRhZn 1851.9. Found 1851.7.

Product formation was monitored by GC on a Selco dex 120 chiral column relative to 1 2 4 5 tetramethylbenzene. All reactions were performed at room temperature. In the examples below solvent refers to either THF or benzonitrile.

 Closed catalyst experiment no allosteric effectors Complex 2 above M CrCl 0.01 g 7.5 10mmol cyclohexene oxide 0.6 mL 6.1 mmol and solvent 0.5 mL were added to a 10 mL Schlenk flask and stirred for 5 min. After this time TMSN 0.3 mL 2.3 mmol was added to the solution. At various times typically 0.5 h apart a 0.05 mL aliquot was taken from the solution and added to diethyl ether 1 mL . This aliquot then was passed down a 3 0.5 cm plug of silica gel and eluted with diethyl ether 5 mL . Samples were taken for GC from the eluent.

 Open catalyst experiments allosteric effectors present. Complex 2 above M CrCl 0.01 g 5.1 10mmol PPNCl 2.9 mg 5.1 10mmol and solvent 0.1 mL were added to a 10 mL Schlenk flask. This solution then was purged with CO for 30 seconds. 1 2 4 5 tetramethylbenzene 0.01 g 7.5 10mmol cyclohexene oxide 0.6 mL 6.1 mmol and solvent 0.4 mL were added to the flask and stirred for 5 min. TMSN 0.3 mL 2.3 mmol was then added to the solution. At various time points typically 0.5 h apart a 0.05 mL aliquot was taken from the solution and added to diethyl ether 1 mL . This aliquot then was passed down a 3 0.5 cm plug of silica gel and eluted with diethyl ether 5 mL . Samples were taken for GC from the eluent.

In situ Cycling Experiment Complex 2 above M CrCl 0.01 g 5.1 10mmol PPNCl 2.9 mg 5.1 10mmol 1 2 4 5 tetramethylbenzene 0.01 g 7.5 10mmol cyclohexeneoxide 0.6 mL 6.1 mmol and benzonitrile 0.5 mL were added to a 10 mL Schlenk flask and stirred for 5 min. After this time TMSN 0.3 mL 2.3 mmol was added to the solution. At various time points typically 0.5 h apart a 0.05 mL aliquot was taken from the solution and added to diethyl ether 1 mL . This aliquot then was passed down a 3 0.5 cm plug of silica gel and eluted with diethyl ether 5 mL . Samples were taken for the GC from the eluent. At 110 min the solution was exposed to CO using a syringe containing 20 mL of CO. At 240 min the solution was purged with 30 mL of nitrogen using a gas tight syringe. The reaction progress was monitored using GC. The reverse of this experiment was performed wherein the starting solution was exposed to CO prior to TMSNaddition and subsequently purged with Nat 110 min and then again with CO at 240 min. right shows the amount of product produced under both of these experimental conditions.

In another example the formation of 4 acetoxymethylpyridine was monitored by GC relative to an internal standard biphenyl and quantified using a previously established calibration curve. All reactions were performed at room temperature in CHCl. Complex 1 top complex 1 mM biphenyl 1.5 mM pyridyl carbinol 1 mM acetic anhydride 1 mM and appropriate amounts of benzyltriethylammonium chloride see were added to a 10 mL Schlenk flask followed by introduction of CO 1 atm . The total volume of the reactions was 2.5 mL CHCl. At various times typically 0.5 h apart a 0.1 mL aliquot was taken from the solution and added to diethyl ether 2 mL . This aliquot then was passed down a plug of Celite 3 cm 0.5 cm . The resulting samples were used for GC analysis. The GC settings were as follows initial time 0 min initial temperature 65 C. final temperature 135 C. rate 5 C. min final time 14 min.

