---

title: Supersonic all gas-phase iodine laser
abstract: A continuous wave laser based on the electronic I*(P)−I(P) transition of atomic iodine at 1.315 microns from the NCl(aΔ)+I(P) energy transfer reaction using a transverse flow device having gas flow from an upstream subsonic combustor section through a converging-diverging supersonic slit nozzle to a downstream supersonic section and an intersecting optical resonator. Laser operation is achieved through the transformation of the gas phase chemical reagents, D(deuterium), F(fluorine), NF(nitrogen trifluoride), DCl (deuterium chloride) HI (hydrogen iodide) in the subsonic section and HN(hydrogen azide) in the supersonic section.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07453917&OS=07453917&RS=07453917
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Air Force
number: 07453917
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050712
---
The conditions under which this invention was made are such as to entitle the Government of the United States under paragraph 1 a of Executive Order 10096 as represented by the Secretary of the Air Force to the entire right title and interest therein including foreign rights.

Chemical lasers are devices that derive their population inversions from exothermic chemical reactions whether directly or indirectly and include photochemical induced bond dissociation radiative recombination of atoms or molecules and energy transfer processes. In view of their generally efficient conversion of chemical potential into laser radiation chemical lasers have been sought after for numerous applications in which lightweight self contained lasers are utilized.

On the first chemically pumped electronic transition laser continuous wave cw laser oscillation was achieved using the I P I P transition via the energy transfer reaction between the oxygen metastable O a and a ground state iodine atom I P . This chemistry forms the basis of the high powered Chemical Oxygen Iodine Laser COIL which operates in the near infrared at 1.315 m with cw power of up to 40 kW. The COIL uses a heterogeneous mixture of chlorine gas and an aqueous peroxide based solution to generate the I P . It is based on the following chemical mechanism 2OH Cl 2 Cl HO O a 1 2 2 5 2 O a I I O X 3 I P Hv I P 2 hv 4 The principal limitations of this device are derived from the aqueous HO based chemistry. In general the use of the aqueous reagents reduces the overall efficiency and increases the complexity of the system because the aqueous peroxide solution is heavy and difficult to engineer and control in a zero gravity environment. In addition water HO quenches or destroys the I P lasing species. Finally heat generated by reaction 1 is retained in the basic hydrogen peroxide mixture and must be removed to prevent further gas phase HO generation.

As such to make the COIL laser viable and robust in all environments ground air and space extensive engineering is required to accommodate the aqueous chemistry. One approach to mitigate these drawbacks was the all gas phase laser system described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 459 717 hereby incorporated by reference. This cw subsonic all gas phase iodine laser AGIL eliminated the water based chemistry and its attendant problems.

The subsonic AGIL is a device in which the energy required for laser operation is achieved through the transformation of the solely gas phase chemical reagents NF nitrogen trifluoride DCl deuterium chloride HI hydrogen iodide and HN hydrogen azide into I P laser radiation at 1.315 m. Helium is also used but its role is limited to a buffer or carrier gas for these reagents. The chemical generation of I P lasing is based on a sequential process in which Cl and I atoms are produced F DCl DF Cl 5 Cl HI HCl I P 6 followed by NCl a production Cl HN HCl N 7 Cl N NCl a N X 8 and finally the energy transfer reaction between NCl a and I P to generate I P NCl a I P NCl X I P 9 I P hv I P nhv 1.315 m laser radiation 10 

The demonstration of I P I P laser action using this mode and chemistry was performed in a transverse subsonic flow reactor. The essential features of this apparatus included a device for fluorine F atom production. The device can be an electrical discharge DC RF or microwave radiation or chemical combustion. Fluorine atoms were generated using a 10 kW DC discharge of NFin helium. The pressure in the system was regulated by flowing N1.5 meters downstream of the reactor cavity through a 3 cm choke orifice. Downstream of the fluorine atom injection point were nozzles or injectors for the insertion of DCl HI and HNinto the flow stream.

The supersonic all gas iodine laser is a device in which the energy required for laser operation is achieved through the transformation of the gas phase chemical reagent D deuterium F fluorine NF nitrogen trifluoride DCl deuterium chloride HI hydrogen iodide and HN hydrogen azide into I P laser radiation at 1.315 m. Helium is also used as a buffer carrier gas for these reagents. The chemical generation of I P lasing is based on a sequential process in which F Cl and I atoms are produced via the following spontaneous reactions D F 2 DF heat 11 F heat 2 F 12 NF heat NF xF 13 F DCl DF Cl 14 Cl HI HCl I P 15 This mixture is gas dynamically cooled and accelerated through a converging diverging supersonic slit nozzle. Subsequent injection of HNfacilitates NCl a and I P production via reactions 16 through 18 Cl HN HCl N 16 Cl N NCl a N 17 NCl a I P NCl X I P 18 

Laser action on the I P I P transition at 1.315 microns will occur in the supersonic region downstream of the HNinjectors shown in . In this embodiment the apparatus includes a subsonic combustion section comprised of the combustion chamber and D F NF DCl and HI injectors the supersonic nozzle comprised of a converging diverging nozzle and the HNinjectors. The subsonic combustion section provides a source of fluorine atoms by way of the chemical reactions of equations 11 13. Injections of DCl and HI result in the reactions of equations 14 and 15. The converging diverging nozzle separates the upstream and downstream sections and converts the high pressure high temperature subsonic gas flow in the combustion section into a low pressure low temperature supersonic gas flow. The injection of HNinto the downstream supersonic section of the flow device results in the production of NCl a and I P via reactions of equations 16 18.

The pressure in the combustion chamber may be monitored with a capacitance monometer. The static pressure and temperature in the supersonic region downstream of the nozzle exit may be monitored with a series of capacitance monometers and thermocouples. The gaseous Fmay be stored as a 30 50 mixture in He while the gaseous HNmay be stored as a 5 20 mixture in helium. Helium diluent Matheson 99.995 D Matheson 99 NF Spectra Gas 99 DCl Cambridge Isotopes 99 and HI Matheson 99 are used without further purification.

There exist a number of alternative fuels and schemes for the AGIL laser. Deuterium azide DN could be substituted for hydrogen azide HN . In addition deuterium iodide DI could be substituted for hydrogen iodide HI . In principle nitrogen trichloride NCl could be used to replace hydrogen or deuterium azide HN DN .

