---

title: Large flattened mode tuned cladding photonic crystal fiber laser and amplifier
abstract: A modified photonic crystal fiber yielding a higher peak power for a given maximum intensity. The multi-mode signal core has a depressed index of refraction that pushes the mode distribution to the core edges while a pattern of larger air holes is used to flatten the mode distribution. The core is further surrounded by tuned cladding elements defined by a pattern of smaller air holes that cause loss in all of the core modes except the fundamental while maintaining robust guiding of the fundamental mode.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07142757&OS=07142757&RS=07142757
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Air Force
number: 07142757
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050920
---
The conditions under which this invention was made are such as to entitle the Government of the United States under paragraph I a of Executive Order 10096 as represented by the Secretary of the Air Force to the entire right title and interest therein including foreign rights.

Fiber lasers and amplifiers make use of a dielectric waveguide the fiber to constrain the degrees of freedom of the electromagnetic field while it is amplified by excited laser atoms within the core of the fiber. Given an amplifying waveguide a fiber laser is formed by introducing it into a resonant cavity. One of the main advantages of fiber lasers is that if a single transverse waveguide mode is present in the fiber then the output will have diffraction limited beam quality. Only one type of dielectric waveguide is considered here a modified total internal reflection photonic crystal fiber MTIR PCF also known as solid core photonic crystal fiber microstructured fiber or holey fiber. All fibers are assumed to be uniform along their length axisymmetric and therefore completely determined by the geometry of their cross section.

The guiding mechanism for a MTIR PCF can be thought of in the context of total internal reflection. Rays within the core that hit the air holes will be reflected due to the index difference on the boundary of the air hole. Maxwell s equations may be solved to determine the detailed characteristics of the guided mode.

In general the modes of an MTIR PCF may be described by an electromagnetic field distribution over the cross section of the fiber and a propagation constant that determines the periodicity of the fields along the axis of the fiber at a given optical wavelength. In addition to the guided modes there are also modes that are not localized to the core. In these modes the field intensity is spread across the cladding and they are called cladding modes. Their properties will be determined by the geometry of the cladding specifically the index difference at the cladding boundary. Double clad fibers have a region outside the cladding in order to confine pump light to the cladding. These fibers are also called cladding pumped fibers. Single clad fibers have no special material outside the cladding except that which provides mechanical stability to the fiber.

The signal in the core of a single mode fiber also experiences loss as a result of manufacturing irregularities and physical perturbations such as bending. The lost energy transfers to the cladding modes in this case. This can be viewed as a coupling process. The irregularities cause the core mode to couple to the cladding modes. Cladding modes may also be characterized by a field distribution and propagation constant.

The maximum power in a diffraction limited beam from rare earth doped fiber lasers is limited by the maximum electromagnetic intensity that can persist within the core without undesired effects and the maximum core area that can operate with a single propagating transverse mode. The intensity limit is fixed by the material properties. Therefore any significant increase in power output must be achieved by increasing the core size and flattening the mode for a given maximum intensity level. As the core size of a modified total internal reflection photonic crystal fiber is increased either the beam quality degrades due to the propagation of multiple transverse modes or the fundamental mode losses become excessive as the waveguide is made weaker by decreasing the air hole size in order to eliminate the higher order modes. Standard single mode fibers designed to operate at a wavelength of about 1 micron have a core diameter of approximately 7 microns. One successful strategy that has yielded a three fold increase in core size is to use a fiber with a core supporting multiple modes but then introducing mode dependent losses so that the higher order modes experience more loss than the fundamental mode. In other words the higher order modes experience a greater amount of coupling into the cladding modes. By the time the signal reaches the output of the fiber only the fundamental mode is propagating in the fiber core.

In practice this mode discrimination is often accomplished in a step index fiber by coiling the fiber at an optimal radius. A coiled fiber exhibits substantially more loss in the higher order modes than the fundamental for a core sized up to approximately 25 microns Koplow et. al. Optics Letters 25 442 2000 . Above this diameter however the loss differential between the modes becomes so small that it does not sufficiently discriminate the fundamental mode from the higher order modes during amplification. Liu et. al. SSDLTR 2004 paper FIBER 5 2004 . If larger area cores are sought the tradeoff between fundamental mode loss and multi mode operation is unavoidable if the cladding around the core is uniform either in the sense of having a uniform index of refraction or having a uniform array of air holes in the case of the MTIR PCF. The uniformity of the cladding causes the cladding modes to couple uniformly to the fundamental mode and the undesired higher order guided modes leading to inefficient mode discrimination.

The maximum power in a diffraction limited beam from rare earth doped fiber lasers is currently limited by the maximum core area that can operate with a single propagating transverse mode and the maximum intensity permitted by material limitations. Increases in the core area is the subject of co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 204 146 filed Aug. 15 2005 and is hereby incorporated by reference. That application enabled large increases in the core area but with a relatively narrow profile of the fundamental mode intensity curve.

Further power increases will not only require a fiber with a larger core area as obtained with the tuned cladding fiber designed for a multimode central core but also will need to flatten the intensity curve for a given maximum intensity level.

Computer simulations show that microstructures that guide a fundamental mode with an effective index matched to the effective index of the undesired higher order modes will couple the power away from the undesired modes in the core. This is analogous to index matching at an optical boundary inhibiting reflection at that boundary. Different detailed microstructures may therefore be used for each of the different undesired modes in the core.

Increases in the core area are the subject of co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 204 146 filed Aug. 15 2005. is a cross section of a tuned cladding fiber example from the 146 application having an outer cladding layer of uniform index of refraction n. The inner cladding is comprised of tuned cladding fiber material that has an average index of refraction of n

Single or multiple instances of each tuned element may be employed to provide a path not unlike a transmission line for the energy in the undesired core modes to be coupled all the way out to the outer cladding . If the cladding modes are tuned in this manner the overall average index of the inner cladding can be lower thus ensuring robust guiding and amplification through the gain medium of the fundamental mode with low loss. This effect will only occur at specific wavelengths for which the fiber must be designed. Away from this wavelength the inner cladding will no longer be tuned to the higher order modes of the core . This is in contrast to the ability for conventional TIR PCF to exhibit endlessly single mode behavior over a wide wavelength range.

One embodiment of the present invention is a method for designing large mode area photonic crystal fibers in which the mode is flattened in order to give a higher peak power for a given maximum intensity. This is accomplished by lowering the refractive index in the core n to slightly below that of silica nand adjusting the size of selected air holes within the inner cladding. The lowered index of the core n is still higher than the average index nof the inner cladding.

Single or multiple instances of each tuned element may be employed to provide a path not unlike a transmission line for the energy in the undesired core modes to be coupled all the way out to the outer cladding . If the cladding modes are tuned in this manner the overall average index of the inner cladding can be lower thus ensuring robust guiding and amplification through the gain medium of the fundamental mode with low loss. This effect will only occur at specific wavelengths for which the fiber must be designed. Away from this wavelength the inner cladding will no longer be tuned to the higher order modes of the core . This is in contrast to the ability for conventional TIR PCF to exhibit endlessly single mode behavior over a wide wavelength range.

The multimode central core area of is doped with an active lasing ionic species designed for operation at a desired fundamental wavelength. In this example the doped core parameters are n 8.0 10 4 1.0 10 5 absorption equals 320 decibels per meter times the ratio of the areas of the core and pump cladding at 975 nm and the spatial extent of the core area is 50 microns. The effective diameter is 100 microns and the effective area is 7 800 square microns. These calculations were performed using the multi pole method White el. al. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B19 2322 2002 .

The core of this fiber is multi mode. However single mode operation can be obtained by low overlap of the mode profile with the gain provided by the active core region and high loss in the higher order modes. Low overlap is achieved by using a tuned cladding as per application Ser. No. 11 204 146 and by depressing the index of the core thereby pushing the mode distribution to the core edges. The 1 micron holes in create the tuned elements. The 3 micron holes are the base lattice within which the 1 micron holes form the tuned elements. The 8 micron holes push the corners of the core inward leading to a more circular mode since these holes are further from the center of the core than the others forming the core boundaries. High loss is achieved by using a tuned inner cladding that index matches the higher order modes thus allowing them to pass through the lattice into the outer cladding .

The design analysis process for the LFMTCPCF is comprised of a sequence of steps. The geometry of the core is chosen first by determining how many missing air holes there will be. The next step is to increase the size of the air holes at the corners of the core region to create a more circular effective core area. Then specify the average index of the inner cladding in order to achieve the desired fundamental mode loss for the particular operating parameters of the laser such as the laser ion species the pump power the output power and for an amplifier the input power and gain. Next calculate the effective indices and for all the guided modes in the core. There are several methods for calculating the effective indices of guided fiber modes including the beam propagation method the plane wave expansion and the multi pole method. These methods have been implemented in commercially available software packages. For a regularly shaped core circle or hexagon for example there will be many degenerate modes. For example the University of Sydney in Australia has a software program to calculate the modes of an arbitrary photonic crystal structure with circular air holes. The software is available from their website at http www.physics.usyd.edu.au cudos mofsoftware index.html.

Next determine the core index difference n i.e. the difference between the average inner cladding index and the core index. Depressing the index of the core slightly below that of glass npushes the mode distribution toward the core edges. Then calculate the mode shape intensity distribution of the fundamental mode for different values of the index difference n and choose the value that gives the desired flattened mode shape. Once this step is finished the remaining process is the same as that for the tuned cladding fiber application Ser. No. 11 204 146 .

Specifically for each undesired higher order core guided mode specify a tuned element geometry whose fundamental mode effective index matches the effective index of that core guided mode. Begin with a tuned element size approximately equal to the size of the local maxima in the intensity in that mode and calculate the effective index. If it is higher than the effective index of the specified core mode then make the tuned element slightly smaller and if it is lower make the tuned element slightly larger. Refine the tuned element geometry in this manner until the effective indices match to within the manufacturing tolerances for the fiber usually on the order of 10in the index of refraction. Then check to see if any of the higher order modes of the tuned element accidentally match any of the higher order modes of the core. If this is the case then these higher order modes do not need a separate tuned element with matching fundamental mode. Once all the required tuned elements are identified place them within the cladding in multiple instances leading from the neighboring region of the core to the uniform cladding area. Then calculate the effective index and power loss per unit length of each of the modes of the overall structure. The tuned elements will cause overall modes to propagate with a slightly different effective index then they would individually due to coupling between elements. At this point slightly vary the size of each tuned element so that there are no higher order modes localized in the core and the fundamental core mode is the only localized mode or so the loss in the higher order modes is maximized relative to that of the fundamental mode.

The design may then be incorporated into a fiber pre form and the fiber fabricated through the normal draw process. Once the fiber is drawn it may be incorporated into a laser or amplifier in the standard fashion. The tuned cladding fiber may or may not be double clad however for large power handling capacity it is anticipated that the fiber will normally be double clad.

