---

title: Photodynamic therapy with spatially resolved dual spectroscopic monitoring
abstract: An instrument for photodynamic therapy applies treatment light from a dye laser, white light, and ultraviolet fluorescence excitation light from an LED onto a lesion and surrounding areas in a time-multiplexed manner. The reflected white light is analyzed in a spectrometer to determine a correction for the dynamic optical spectral properties of the patient's tissue. Light emitted by fluorescence from the lesion and the surrounding areas is analyzed in another spectrometer, and the results are corrected in a computer, using the correction. An optical switch has been developed for the instrument, using a bistable solenoid and a sled.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09044140&OS=09044140&RS=09044140
owner: University of Rochester
number: 09044140
owner_city: Rochester
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050630
---
The present application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 583 786 filed Jun. 30 2004 whose disclosure is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety into the present disclosure.

The research leading to the present invention was supported by the Roswell Park Cancer Institute NIH under Grant No. P01 CA55719. The government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention is directed to photodynamic therapy PDT and more particularly to a method and apparatus for accurate real time determination of a therapeutic dose delivered by photodynamic therapy.

The accurate real time determination of therapeutic dose delivered by photodynamic therapy PDT is an area of active research and clinical importance. Photosensitizer evolution including photobleaching and photoproduct formation and accumulation of endogenous porphyrins provide attractive implicit dose metrics as these processes are mediated by similar photochemistry as dose deposition and report cellular damage respectively. Reflectance spectroscopy can similarly report blood volume and hemoglobin oxygen saturation.

However the accuracy of known techniques is still not sufficient. In particular living human tissue has dynamic optical properties which may reduce the accuracy.

It is an object of the invention to provide real time in vivo determination of photodynamic therapy dose metrics and tissue optical properties.

To achieve the above and other objects the present invention is directed to an apparatus for real time determination of photodynamic therapy dosimetry in vivo employing measurements of fluorescence emission spectra corrected for the effects of dynamic tissue optical properties using white light diffuse reflectance. This system accurately measures photosensitizer photobleaching photoproduct formation and tissue oxygenation all of which are useful as dose metrics.

Compact instrumentation is developed that controls delivery and monitoring of PDT dose. In at least one embodiment the instrumentation provides 405 nm fluorescence excitation light to two spatially resolved points on the skin delivered through fiber pigtailed LEDs terminated with GRIN microlenses. One point is located inside the PDT target lesion and the other in the perilesion margin. The fluorescence spectra generated from sensitizer photoproducts autofluorescence and various endogenous porphyrins are measured from both points concurrently with excitation. Emission spectra from these points are corrected for the effects of tissue optical properties with division by white light reflectance spectra delivered through the treatment fiber. Spectral fitting reports fluorophore concentrations and blood oxygenation. This instrumentation employs multimode fiber switches and time multiplexing to deliver the treatment beam at 635 nm fluorescence excitation beam at 405 nm and white light interrogation beam while monitoring the aforementioned dose metrics with a pair of thermoelectrically cooled spectrometers.

The present invention can provide real time determination of photodynamic therapy dosimetry in vivo during PDT treatment. The fluorescence spectra and white light reflectance are measured from each point during brief interruption of the treatment beam. Emission spectra are corrected for the effects of tissue optical properties with division by white light reflectance spectra and spectral fitting is used to accurately characterize photosensitizer photobleaching photoproduct formation blood volume and tissue oxygenation all of which are useful as dose metrics.

Preferred embodiments of the present invention will be set forth in detail with reference to the drawings in which like reference numerals refer to like elements or operational steps throughout.

An instrument according to a first preferred embodiment of the present invention is shown in as . As shown the instrument includes a treatment laser such as a dye laser a white light source such as a tungsten halogen or xenon lamp fiber optic switches a shutter two thermoelectrically cooled spectrometers an optical probe an optical filter circuitry housings not shown and a computer . The computer and the spectrometers communicate through a USB cable connection . Each of the spectrometers has reserved auxiliary AUX pins on its on board circuitry. The AUX pins are connected to the LEDs shutter and fiber optic switches via external circuitry . Transistor transistor logic TTL pulses transmit from the AUX pins to the circuitry .

In a delivery arm of the instrument the white light source and treatment laser are coupled via fibers into the 2 1 fiber optic switch . The output of this switch is coupled via a fiber to part of the optical probe and is terminated with a microlens .

In the detection arm two more optical fibers terminated with microlenses are in the probe. Each of the two fibers is directed to a housing not shown with a dichroic optical filter . The reflection path of the filter housing contains an LED and the transmission path contains a secondary optical fiber . The secondary optical fibers are connected to the 2 2 optical switch . One of the two outputs of the 2 2 switch is directed to the first spectrometer and the second output is directed to the optical filter and then to the second spectrometer .

The computer determines which of two states the first fiber optic switch is in and the state of the white light shutter . Depending on the states of the switch and shutter the light is blocked white light is transmitted through the treatment fiber or laser light from the treatment laser is transmitted though the treatment fiber . Light transmitted through the treatment fiber is directed onto the treatment area A comprising both the lesion region L and the perilesion region M. The treatment areas may have different optical chemical or physiological properties.

Light emitted or reflected from the area A is collected by the two optical fibers terminated with microlenses . One of the optical fibers collects primarily from the target lesion region L and the other fiber collects primarily from the perilesion margin region M. Light may also be generated by the LEDs in the detection arm. Light generated by the LEDs will be reflected off the dichroic mirror and transmitted through the optical fibers and directed through the microlenses onto the corresponding treatment regions L M. Light omitted or reflected from these regions will be collected by the fibers and directed onto the dichroic mirror . Light that is at a different wavelength from the LED sources will be transmitted through the filter . Light transmitted through the secondary fibers is directed into the 2 2 optical switch . Depending on the state of the 2 2 optical switch light from either of the two secondary detection fibers can be directed either through another optical filter followed by a spectrometer or directly into a spectrometer .

Up to three measurements can be made for each of two spatially resolved locations during photodynamic therapy. The laser source is used as a treatment beam. Light from this source is directed into the treatment area and activates photoactive drugs within that area.

Treatment beam excited fluorescence can be measured. Some of the absorbed laser light may be emitted as fluorescence. By directing collected light through the filtered path of the system before the spectrometer the fluorescent signal can be evaluated without the spectrometer being optically saturated by the treatment laser. Therefore with the first switch transmitting the laser and the second switch directing light collected from the treatment area region of interest spatially resolved fluorescence from that region can be measured.

In measuring 405 nm excited fluorescence the fluorescent signals of interest are highly excited by light emitted by the LED sources. By using the first fiber switch and shutter to stop the laser and white sources and using pulses to turn on the LED source the 405 nm light can be directed onto either treatment region of interest and excited fluorescence can be collected through that same path and directed by the 2 2 fiber switch directly to the non filtered spectrometer path. Therefore a spatially resolved measurement of fluorescence can be made.

The reflected spectrum of a white light source provides information about tissue optical properties blood volume and blood oxygenation. White light can be directed through the first optical switch on the treatment area and the reflected signal can be collected by the detection arm. Either of the two fibers in the detection path can be directed into the non filtered spectrometer and the spatially resolved white light reflectance can be measured. The computer receives detection signals for all types of reflected light and uses the reflected white light to correct the detection signals for the dynamic optical properties of the tissue particularly the spectral reflectivity.

During the measurements listed data are transmitted from the spectrometers into the computer where characteristics about the treatment regions are stored and analyzed. Analysis of the data from these measurements can be fed back into the system to control the timing of the measurements and the treatment.

An example of timing is shown in . The timing of the light source alternates among the laser the white light source and the LED an ultraviolet source . The corresponding time periods for measurement are fluorescence from the laser reflectance from the white light and fluorescence from the LED. With those measurements it is possible to correct for dynamic tissue optical characteristics.

A second preferred embodiment using an optical probe will now be described. An instrument according to the second preferred embodiment is shown in as . Except as noted below the instrument can be constructed and used like the instrument .

The optical probe is capable of two point spatial resolution. A single or plurality of optical fibers can be used in concert with either a single or plurality of MEMS micro electro mechanical systems scanning mirrors in a housing to scan the treatment area. At each location pixel in the scan analogous measurements to those above can be performed. Also the delivery of the laser white light and LED sources may be delivered through the same optical probe that is doing the collection depending on switching configuration.

Several embodiments of large diameter multimode fiber switches the switches and of are provided as illustrated in . The purpose of the switches is to control the flow of light through the system as previously disclosed. In addition some embodiments contain in line filters which can be moved into or out of the path in order to control the light transmitted through the system.

Use of a precision linear slide to improve throughput repeatability and lifetime and inclusion of coupling optics to improve robustness separates this system from known prior art examples. No prior art incorporating y couplers and bulkheads with through holes is known. Switches incorporating bistable solenoids can be purchased commercially from Fibersense Signals Inc. San Jose Calif. U.S.A.

While preferred embodiments and variations thereon have been set forth above those skilled in the art who have reviewed the present disclosure will readily appreciate that other embodiments can be realized within the scope of the invention. For example wavelengths and other numerical values are illustrative rather than limiting. Therefore the present invention should be construed as limited only by the appended claims.

