---

title: Hasylated polypeptides
abstract: The present invention relates to hydroxyalkylstarch (HAS)-polypeptide-conjugate (HAS-polypeptide) comprising one or more HAS molecules, wherein each HAS is conjugated to the polypeptide via a carbohydrate moiety or a thioether as well as to methods for the production thereof. In a preferred embodiment, the polypeptide is erythropoietin (EPO).
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08618266&OS=08618266&RS=08618266
owner: Fresenius Kabi Deutschland GmbH
number: 08618266
owner_city: Bad Homburg v.d.H.,
owner_country: DE
publication_date: 20050311
---
This application is a continuation in part and claims benefit under 35 U.S.C. 120 of International Application No. PCT EP03 08858 having an International Filing Date of Aug. 8 2003 which published in English as International Publication Number WO 2004 024761 and which claims the benefit of priority of European Patent Application No. 02020425.1 having a filing date of Sep. 11 2002 and U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 409 781 having a filing date of Sep. 11 2002.

The present invention relates to polypeptides especially erythropoietin conjugated to hydroxyalkylstarch HAS especially to hydroxyethylstarch.

The application of polypeptides especially enzymes or cytokines to the circulatory system in order to obtain a particular physiological effect is a well known tool in modern medicine.

Erythropoietin EPO is a glycoprotein hormone necessary for the maturation of erythroid progenitor cells into erythrocytes. In human adults it is produced in the kidney. EPO is essential in regulating the level of red blood cells in the circulation. Conditions marked by low levels of tissue oxygen provoke an increased biosynthesis of EPO which in turn stimulates erythropoiesis. A loss of kidney function as it is seen in chronic renal failure for example typically results in decreased biosynthesis of EPO and a concomitant reduction in red blood cells.

Erythropoietin is an acid glycoprotein hormone of approximately 34 000 Da. Human erythropoietin is a 166 amino acid polypeptide that exists naturally as a monomer Lin et al. 1985 PNAS 82 7580 7584 EP 148 605 B2 EP 411 678 B2 . The identification cloning and expression of genes encoding erythropoietin are described e.g. in U.S. Pat. No. 4 703 008. The purification of recombinant erythropoietin from cell culture medium that supported the growth of mammalian cells containing recombinant erythropoietin plasmids for example is described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 667 016.

It is generally believed in this technical field that the biological activity of EPO in vivo mainly depends on the degree of sialic acids bound to EPO see e.g. EP 428 267 B1 . Theoretically 14 molecules of sialic acid can be bound to one molecule EPO at the terminal ends of the carbohydrate side chains linked to N and O glycosylation sites. Highly sophisticated purification steps are necessary to obtain highly sialylated EPO preparations.

For further detailed information on erythropoietin see Krantz Erythropoietin 1991 Blood 77 3 419 34 Review and Cerami Beyond erythropoiesis novel applications for recombinant human erythropoietin 2001 Semin Hematol. 3 Suppl 7 33 9 Review .

A well known problem with the application of polypeptides and enzymes is that these proteins often exhibit an unsatisfactory stability. Especially erythropoietin has a relatively short plasma half live Spivak and Hogans 1989 Blood 73 90 McMahon et al. 1990 Blood 76 1718 . This means that therapeutic plasma levels are rapidly lost and repeated intravenous administrations must be carried out. Furthermore in certain circumstances an immune response against the peptides is observed.

It is generally accepted that the stability of polypeptides can be improved and the immune response against these polypeptides is reduced when the polypeptides are coupled to polymeric molecules. WO 94 28024 discloses that physiologically active polypeptides modified with polyethyleneglycol PEG exhibit reduced immunogenicity and antigenicity and circulate in the bloodstream considerably longer than unconjugated proteins i.e. have a longer clearance rate.

However PEG drug conjugates exhibit several disadvantages e.g. they do not exhibit a natural structure which can be recognized by elements of in vivo degradation pathways. Therefore apart from PEG conjugates other conjugates and protein polymerates have been produced. A plurality of methods for the cross linking of different proteins and macromolecules such as polymerase have been described in the literature see e.g. Wong Chemistry of protein conjugation and cross linking 1993 CRCS Inc. .

Hydroxyethylstarch HES is a derivative of naturally occurring amylopektine and is degraded by Amylase in the body. The preparation of HES protein conjugates is described in the state of the art see e.g. HES hemoglobin conjugates in DE 26 16 086 or DE 26 46 854 .

DE 26 46 854 discloses methods for the conjugation of hemoglobin to HES. In these methods HES is reacted with sodiumperiodate which results in the production of dialdehydes which are linked to hemoglobin. In contrast to this DE 26 16 086 discloses the conjugation of hemoglobin to HES according to a procedure wherein first a cross linking agent e.g. bromocyane is bound to HES and subsequently hemoglobin is linked to the intermediate product.

HES is a substituted derivative of the carbohydrate polymer amylopektine which is present in corn starch at a concentration of up to 95 per weight. HES exhibits advantageous biological properties and is used as a blood volume replacement agent and in hemodilution therapy in the clinics Sommermeyer et al. 1987 Krankenhauspharmazie 8 8 271 278 and Weidler et al. 1991 Arzneim. Forschung Drug Res. 41 494 498 .

Amylopektine consists of glucose moieties wherein in the main chain 1 4 glycosidic bonds are present and at the branching sites 1 6 glycosidic bonds are found. The physical chemical properties of this molecule are mainly determined by the type of glycosidic bonds. Due to the nicked 1 4 glycosidic bond helical structures with about six glucose monomers per turn are produced.

The physical chemical as well as the biochemical properties of the polymer can be modified via substitution. The introduction of a hydroxyethyl group can be achieved via alkaline hydroxyethylation. By adapting the reaction conditions it is possible to exploit the different reactivity of the respective hydroxy group in the unsubstituted glucose monomer with respect to a hydroxyethylation. Owing to this fact the skilled person is able to influence the substitution pattern to a limited extent.

Consequently HES is mainly characterized by the molecular weight distribution and the degree of substitution. There are two possibilities of describing the substitution degree 

HES solutions are present as polydisperse compositions wherein each molecule differs from the other with respect to the polymerisation degree the number and pattern of branching sites and the substitution pattern. HES is therefore a mixture of compounds with different molecular weight. Consequently a particular HES solution is determined by average molecular weight with the help of statistical means. In this context Mis calculated as the arithmetic mean depending on the number of molecules. Alternatively M the weight mean represents a unit which depends on the mass of the HES.

The HES drug conjugates disclosed in the art suffer from the disadvantage that HES is not conjugated site specifically to the drug. Consequently the conjugation results in a very heterogenous product having many components that may be inactive due to the destruction of the 3 dimensional structure during the conjugation step.

In summary there is still a need for further improved polypeptides with improved stability and or bioactivity. This applies especially to erythropoietin where isoforms with a high degree of sialic acids and therefore high activity have to be purified from isoforms with a low degree of sialic acids see EP 428 267 B1 . Therefore it would be highly advantageous if production methods were available which provide highly active polypeptides without requiring extensive purification. Unfortunately the production of polypeptides in bacteria or insect cells is often difficult because the polypeptides are often not produced in a properly folded native confirmation and lack proper glycosylation.

Consequently it is an object of the present invention to provide polypeptide derivatives especially erythropoietin derivatives having a high biological activity in vivo which can be easily produced and at reduced costs. Furthermore it is a further object of the present invention to provide a method for the production of polypeptide derivatives which is easy to perform and yields in products with high biological activity. It is a further object of the invention to provide pharmaceutical compositions comprising polypeptide derivatives with high biological activity.

According to one aspect of the present invention the problem is solved by a hydroxyalkylstarch HAS erythropoietin EPO conjugate HAS EPO comprising one or more HAS molecules wherein each HAS is conjugated to the EPO via

The HAS EPO of the invention has the advantage that it exhibits an improved biological stability when compared to the erythropoietin before conjugation. Furthermore it exhibits a higher biological activity than standard BRP EPO. This is mainly due to the fact that HAS EPO is less or even not recognized by the removal systems of the liver and kidney and therefore persists in the circulatory system for a longer period of time. Furthermore since the HAS is attached site specifically the risk of destroying the in vivo biological activity of EPO by conjugation of HAS to EPO is minimized.

The HAS EPO of the invention has mainly two components namely the erythropoietin EPO polypeptide and the hydroxyalkylstarch HAS linked thereto.

The EPO can be of any human see e.g. Inoue Wada Takeuchi 1994 An improved method for the purification of human erythropoietin with high in vivo activity from the urine of anemic patients Biol Pharm Bull. 17 2 180 4 Miyake Kung Goldwasser 1977 Purification of human erythropoietin. J Biol. Chem. 252 15 5558 64 or another mammalian source and can be obtained by purification from naturally occurring sources like human kidney embryonic human liver or animal preferably monkey kidney. Furthermore the expression erythropoietin or EPO encompasses also an EPO variant wherein one or more amino acids e.g. 1 to 25 preferably 1 to 10 more preferred 1 to 5 most preferred 1 or 2 have been exchanged by another amino acid and which exhibits erythropoietic activity see e.g. EP 640 619 B1 . The measurement of erythropoietic activity is described in the art for measurement of activity in vitro see e.g. Fibi et al. 1991 Blood 77 1203 ff Kitamura et al 1989 J. Cell Phys. 140 323 334 for measurement of EPO activity in vivo see Ph. Eur. 2001 911 917 Ph. Eur. 2000 1316 Erythropoietini solutio concentrata 780 785 European Pharmacopoeia 1996 2000 European Pharmacopoeia 1996 Erythropoietin concentrated solution Pharmaeuropa. 8 371 377 Fibi Hermentin Pauly Lauffer Zettlmeissl. 1995 N and O glycosylation muteins of recombinant human erythropoietin secreted from BHK 21 cells Blood 85 5 1229 36 EPO and modified EPO forms were injected into female NMRI mice equal amounts of protein 50 ng mouse at day 1 2 and 3 blood samples were taken at day 4 and reticulocytes were determined . Further publications where tests for the measurement of the activity of EPO are Barbone Aparicio Anderson Natarajan Ritchie 1994 Reticulocytes measurements as a bioassay for erythropoietin J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 12 4 515 22 Bowen Culligan Beguin Kendall Villis 1994 Estimation of effective and total erythropoiesis in myelodysplasia using serum transferrin receptor and erythropoietin concentrations with automated reticulocyte parameters Leukemi 8 1 151 5 Delorme Lorenzini Giffin Martin Jacobsen Boone Elliott 1992 Role of glycosylation on the secretion and biological activity of erythropoietin Biochemistry 31 41 9871 6 Higuchi Oh eda Kuboniwa Tomonoh Shimonaka Ochi 1992 Role of sugar chains in the expression of the biological activity of human erythropoietin J. Biol. Chem. 267 11 7703 9 Yamaguchi Akai Kawanishi Ueda Masuda Sasaki 1991 Effects of site directed removal of N glycosylation sites in human erythropoietin on its production and biological properties J. Biol. Chem. 266 30 20434 9 Takeuchi Inoue Strickland Kubota Wada Shimizu Hoshi Kozutsumi Takasaki Kobata 1989 Relationship between sugar chain structure and biological activity of recombinant human erythropoietin produced in Chinese hamster ovary cells Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85 20 7819 22 Kurtz Eckardt 1989 Assay methods for erythropoietin Nephron. 51 1 114 German Zucali Sulkowski 1985 Purification of human urinary erythropoietin on controlled pore glass and silicic acid Exp. Hematol. 13 3 833 7 Krystal 1983 Physical and biological characterization of erythroblast enhancing factor EEF a late acting erythropoetic stimulator in serum distinct from erythropoietin Exp. Hematol. 11 1 18 31.

Preferably the EPO is recombinantly produced. This includes the production in eukaryotic or prokaryotic cells preferably mammalian insect yeast bacterial cells or in any other cell type which is convenient for the recombinant production of EPO. Furthermore the EPO may be expressed in transgenic animals e.g. in body fluids like milk blood etc. in eggs of transgenic birds especially poultry preferred chicken or in transgenic plants.

The recombinant production of a polypeptide is known in the art. In general this includes the transfection of host cells with an appropriate expression vector the cultivation of the host cells under conditions which enable the production of the polypeptide and the purification of the polypeptide from the host cells. For detailled information see e.g. Krystal Pankratz Farber Smart 1986 Purification of human erythropoietin to homogeneity by a rapid five step procedure Blood 67 1 71 9 Quelle Caslake Burkert Wojchowski 1989 High level expression and purification of a recombinant human erythropoietin produced using a baculovirus vector Blood 74 2 652 7 EP 640 619 B1 and EP 668 351 B1.

The EPO may comprise one or more carbohydrate side chains preferably 14 preferably 4 attached to the EPO via N and or O linked glycosylation i.e. the EPO is glycosylated. Usually when EPO is produced in eukaryotic cells the polypeptide is posttranslationally glycosylated. Consequently the carbohydrate side chains may have been attached to the EPO during biosynthesis in mammalian especially human insect or yeast cells. The structure and properties of glycosylated EPO have been extensively studied in the art see EP 428 267 B1 EP 640 619 B1 Rush Derby Smith Merry Rogers Rohde Katta 1995 Microheterogeneity of erythropoietin carbohydrate structure Anal Chem. 67 8 1442 52 Takeuchi Kobata 1991 Structures and functional roles of the sugar chains of human erythropoietins Glycobiology 1 4 337 46 Review .

The HAS may be directly conjugated to the EPO or alternatively via a linker molecule. The nature of the linker molecule depends on the way how the HAS is linked to the EPO. Possible functional groups of linkers are described in Table 1 and below. Several linkers are commercially available e.g. from Pierce available from Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany . Some suitable linkers are described in Table 2. The nature of the linker and its purpose are described in detail below in the section concerning the method for the production of HES EPO.

According to a preferred embodiment of the HAS EPO conjugate of the invention the HAS is conjugated to the EPO via a carbohydrate moiety.

In the context of the present invention the term carbohydrate moiety refers to hydroxyaldehydes or hydroxyketones as well as to chemical modifications thereof see R mpp Chemielexikon Thieme Verlag Stuttgart Germany 9edition 1990 Volume 9 pages 2281 2285 and the literature cited therein . Furthermore it also refers to derivatives of naturally occuring carbohydrate moieties like glucose galactose mannose sialic acid and the like. The term also includes chemically oxidized naturally occuring carbohydrate moieties wherein the ring structure has been opened.

The carbohydrate moiety may be linked directly to the EPO polypeptide backbone. Preferably the carbohydrate moiety is part of a carbohydrate side chain. In this case further carbohydrate moieties may be present between the carbohydrate moiety to which HAS is linked and the EPO polypeptide backbone. More preferably the carbohydrate moiety is the terminal moiety of the carbohydrate side chain.

In a more preferred embodiment the HAS is conjugated to a galactose residue of the carbohydrate side chains preferably the terminal galactose residue of the carbohydrate side chain. This galactose residue can be made available for conjugation by removal of terminal sialic acids followed by oxidation see below .

In a further more preferred embodiment the HAS is conjugated to a sialic acid residue of the carbohydrate side chains preferably the terminal sialic acid residue of the carbohydrate side chain.

Furthermore the HAS may be conjugated to the EPO via a thioether. As explained in detail below the S atom can be derived from any SH group attached to the EPO both naturally or non naturally occurring.

In a preferred embodiment the S atom may be derived from a SH group which has been introduced in an oxidized carbohydrate moiety of HES preferably an oxidized carbohydrate moiety which is part of a carbohydrate side chain of EPO see below .

Preferably the S atom in the thioether is derived from a naturally occurring cysteine or from an added cysteine. More preferably the EPO has the amino acid sequence of human EPO and the naturally occurring cysteines are cysteine 29 and or 33. In a more preferred embodiment HAS is conjugated to cysteine 29 and cysteine 33 is replaced by another amino acid. Alternatively HAS may be conjugated to cysteine 33 and cysteine 29 is replaced by another amino acid.

In the context of the present invention by the term added cysteines it is meant that the polypeptides preferably EPO comprise a cysteine residue which is not present in the wild type polypeptide.

In the context of this aspect of the invention the cysteine may be an additional amino acid added at the N or C terminal end of EPO.

Furthermore the added cysteine may have been added by replacing a naturally occuring amino acid by a cysteine. Suitable methods are known in the art see above . Preferably in the context of this aspect of the invention the EPO is human EPO and the replaced amino acid residue is serine 126.

In the context of the present invention the term hydroxyalkylstarch is used to indicate starch derivatives which have been substituted by hydroxyalkylgroups. In this context the alkyl group may be substituted. Preferably the hydroxyalkyl contains 2 10 carbon atoms more preferably 24 carbon atoms. Hydroxyalkylstarch therefore preferably comprises hydroxyethylstarch hydroxypropylstarch and hydroxybutylstarch wherein hydroxyethylstarch and hydroxypropylstarch are preferred.

The expression hydroxyalkylstarch also includes derivatives wherein the alkyl group is mono or polysubstituted. In this context it is preferred that the alkyl group is substituted with an halogen especially flourine or with an aryl group provided that the HAS remains water soluble. Furthermore the terminal hydroxy group of hydroxyalkyl may be esterified or etherified. In addition the alkyl group of the hydroxyalkylstarch may be linear or branched.

Furthermore instead of alkyl also linear or branched substituted or unsubstituted alkene groups may be used.

In the context of the present invention hydroxyethylstarch may have a mean molecular weight weight mean of 1 300 kDa wherein a mean molecular weight of 5 100 kDa is more preferred. Hydroxyethylstarch can further exhibit a molar degree of substitution of 0.1 to 0.8 and a ratio between C C substitution in the range of 2 20 with respect to the hydroxyethylgroups.

The HAS EPO may comprise 1 12 preferably 1 9 1 6 or 1 3 most preferred 1 4 HAS molecules per EPO molecule. The number of HAS molecules per EPO molecule can be determined by quantitative carbohydrate compositional analysis using GC MS after hydrolysis of the product and derivatisation of the resulting monosaccharides see Chaplin and Kennedy eds. 1986 Carbohydrate Analysis a practical approach IRL Press Practical approach series ISBN 0 947946 44 3 especially Chapter 1 Monosaccharides page 1 36 Chapter 2 Oligosaccharides page 37 53 Chapter 3 Neutral Polysaccharides page 55 96 .

The HAS EPO conjugate of the invention may exhibit essentially the same in vitro biological activity as recombinant native EPO since the in vitro biological activity only measures binding affinity to the EPO receptor. Methods for determining the in vitro biological activity are known in the art see above .

Furthermore the HAS EPO exibits a greater in vivo activity than the EPO used as a starting material for conjugation unconjugated EPO . Methods for determining the in vivo biological activity are known in the art see above . Furthermore assays for the determination of in vivo and in vitro EPO activity are given in Examples 9 and 10.

The HAS EPO conjugate may exhibit an in vivo activity of 110 to 500 preferably 300 to 400 or 110 to 300 preferably 110 to 200 more preferred 110 to 180 or 110 to 150 most preferred 110 to 140 if the in vivo activity of the unconjugated EPO is set as 100 .

Compared to the highly sialylated EPO of Amgen see EP 428 267 B1 the HAS EPO exibits preferably at least 50 more preferred at least 70 even more preferred at least 85 or at least 95 at least 150 at least 200 or at least 300 of the in vivo activity of the highly sialylated EPO if the in vivo activity of highly sialylated EPO is set as 100 . Most preferred it exhibits at least 95 of the in vivo activity of the highly sialylated EPO.

The high in vivo biological activity of the HAS EPO conjugate of the invention mainly results from the fact that the HAS EPO conjugate remains longer in the circulation than the unconjugated EPO because it is less recognized by the removal systems of the liver and because renal clearance is reduced due to the higher molecular weight. Methods for the determination of the in vivo half life time of EPO in the circulation are known in the art Sytkowski Lunn Davis Feldman Siekman 1998 Human erythropoietin dimers with markedly enhanced in vivo activity Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 3 1184 8 .

Consequently it is a great advantage of the present invention that a HAS EPO is provided that may be administered less frequently than the EPO preparations commercially available at present. While standard EPO preparations have to be administered at least all 3 days the HAS EPO conjugate of the invention is preferable adminstered twice a week more preferably once a week.

All embodiments disclosed below with respect of the method of the invention to produce a HAS EPO concerning properties of EPO or HAS apply also to the HAS EPO conjugate of the invention.

Hydroxyalkylstarch is an ether derivative of starch. Besides of said ether derivatives also other starch derivatives can be used in the context of the present invention. For example derivatives are useful which comprise esterified hydroxy groups. These derivatives may be e.g. derivatives of unsubstituted mono or dicarboxylic acids with 2 12 carbon atoms or of substituted derivatives thereof. Especially useful are derivatives of unsubstituted monocarboxylic acids with 2 6 carbon atoms especially of acetic acid In this context acetylstarch butylstarch or propylstarch are preferred.

In the case of derivatives of dicarboxylic acids it is useful that the second carboxy group of the dicarboxylic acid is also esterified. Furthermore derivatives of monoalkyl esters of dicarboxylic acids are also suitable in the context of the present invention.

For the substituted mono or dicarboxylic acids the substitute groups may be preferably the same as mentioned above for substituted alkyl residues.

Techniques for the esterification of starch are known in the art see e.g. Klemm D. et al Comprehensive Cellulose Chemistry Vol. 2 1998 Whiley VCH Weinheim N.Y. especially chapter 4.4 Esterification of Cellulose ISBN 3 527 29489 9 .

In a further aspect the present invention relates to a method for the production of a hydroxyalkylstarch HAS erythropoietin EPO conjugate HAS EPO comprising the steps of 

The method of the invention has the advantage that a HAS EPO conjugate is produced which exhibits a high biological activity. Furthermore the method of the invention has the advantage that an effective EPO derivative can be produced at reduced costs since the method does not comprise extensive and time consuming purification steps resulting in low final yield e.g. it is not necessary to purify away undersialylated EPO forms which are known to exhibit low or no in vivo biological activity. Especially Example 20 demonstrates that a HES EPO produced with few modifications steps exhibits a 3 fold activity over standard BRP EPO.

Accordingly in the first step of the method of the invention an EPO is provided which is capable of reacting with modified HAS.

As used in the present invention the term providing has to be interpreted in the way that after the respective step a molecule in step a EPO in step b HAS with the desired properties is available.

In the case of step a this includes the purification of EPO from natural sources as well as the recombinant production in host cells or organisms and if necessary the modification of the EPO so obtained.

With respect to the EPO being the starting material of the present invention the same applies as for the erythropoietin being part of the HAS EPO conjugate of the invention. In this context the preferred embodiments disclosed above apply also for the method of the invention.

Preferably the EPO is recombinantly produced. This includes the production in eukaryotic or prokaryotic cells preferably mammalian insect yeast bacterial cells or in any other cell type which is convenient for the recombinant production of EPO. Furthermore the EPO may be expressed in transgenic animals e.g. in body fluids like milk blood etc. in eggs of transgenic birds especially poultry preferred chicken or in transgenic plants.

The recombinant production of a polypeptide is known in the art. In general this includes the transfection of host cells with an appropriate expression vector the cultivation of the host cells under conditions which enable the production of the polypeptide and the purification of the polypeptide from the host cells Krystal Pankratz Farber Smart 1986 Purification of human erythropoietin to homogeneity by a rapid five step procedure Blood 67 1 71 9 Quelle Caslake Burkert Wojchowski 1989 High level expression and purification of a recombinant human erythropoietin produced using a baculovirus vector Blood 74 2 652 7 EP 640 619 B1 and EP 668 351 B1 .

The EPO may comprise one or more carbohydrate side chains attached to the EPO via N and or O linked glycosylation i.e. the EPO is glycosylated. Unsually when EPO is produced in eukaryotic cells the polypeptide is posttranslationally glycosylated. Consequently the carbohydrate side chains may have been attached to the EPO during production in mammalian especially human insect or yeast cells which may be cells of a transgenic animal see above either extracted from the animal or still in the animal.

These carbohydrate side chains may have been chemically or enzymatically modified after the expression in the appropriate cells e.g. by removing or adding one or more carbohydrate moieties see e.g. Dittmar Conradt Hauser Hofer Lindenmaier 1989 Advances in Protein design Bloecker Collins Schmidt and Schomburg eds. GBF Monographs 12 231 246 VCH Publishers Weinheim N.Y. Cambridge 

It is the object of the method of the invention to provide an HAS EPO comprising one or more HAS molecules where the HAS is conjugated to the EPO via a carbohydrate moiety i or via a thioether ii . Consequently the EPO provided in step a should have the properties that a conjugation via a carbohydrate moiety and or via a thioether is possible. Therefore the EPO after step a may preferably contain either

With respect to possibility 1 above the EPO of step a is preferably obtainable by conjugating an appropriate linker molecule to the SH group s or carbohydrate moieties of EPO. An example for such a modified EPO is provided in Example 4 2.1. It is important to ensure that the addition of the linker molecule does not damage the EPO. However this is known to the person skilled in the art.

With respect to possibility 2 above in a preferred embodiment the modified HAS is conjugated to the EPO via a carbohydrate moiety.

The carbohydrate moiety may be linked directly to the EPO polypeptide backbone. Preferably the carbohydrate moiety is part of a carbohydrate side chain. In this case further carbohydrate moieties may be present between the carbohydrate moiety to which HAS is linked and the EPO polypeptide backbone. More preferably the carbohydrate moiety is the terminal moiety of the carbohydrate side chain.

Consequently in a preferred embodiment the modified HAS is attached via a linker or not see below to carbohydrate chains linked to N and or O glycosylation sites of EPO.

However it is also included within the present invention that the EPO contains a further carbohydrate moiet y ies to which the modified HAS is conjugated. Techniques for attaching carbohydrate moieties to polypeptides either enzymatically or by genetic engineering followed by expression in appropriate cells are known in the art Berger Greber Mosbach 1986 Galactosyltransferase dependent sialylation of complex and endo N acetylglucosaminidase H treated core N glycans in vitro FEBS Lett. 203 1 64 8 Dittmar Conradt Hauser Hofer Lindenmaier 1989 Advances in Protein design Bloecker Collins Schmidt and Schomburg eds. GBF Monographs 12 231 246 VCH Publishers Weinheim N.Y. Cambridge .

In a preferred embodiment of the method of the invention the carbohydrate moiety is oxidized in order to be able to react with the modified HAS. This oxidation can be performed either chemically or enzymatically.

Methods for the chemical oxidation of carbohydrate moieties of polypeptides are known in the art and include the treatment with perjodate Chamow et al. 1992 J. Biol. Chem. 267 15916 15922 .

By chemically oxidizing it is principally possible to oxidize any carbohydrate moiety being terminally positioned or not. However by choosing mild conditions 1 mM periodate 0 C. in contrast to harsh conditions 10 mM periodate 1 h at room temperature it is possible to preferably oxidize the terminal carbohydrate moiety e.g. sialic acid or galactose of a carbohydrate side chain.

Alternatively the carbohydrate moiety may be oxidized enzymatically. Enzymes for the oxidation of the individual carbohydrate moieties are known in the art e.g. in the case of galactose the enzyme is galactose oxidase.

If it is intended to oxidize terminal galactose moieties it will be eventually necessary to remove terminal sialic acids partially or completely if the EPO has been produced in cells capable of attaching sialic acids to carbohydrate chains e.g. in mammalian cells or in cells which have been genetically modified to be capable of attaching sialic acids to carbohydrate chains. Chemical or enzymatic methods for the removal of sialic acids are known in the art Chaplin and Kennedy eds. 1996 Carbohydrate Analysis a practical approach especially Chapter 5 Montreuill Glycoproteins pages 175 177 IRL Press Practical approach series ISBN 0 947946 44 3 .

However it is also included within the present invention that the carbohydrate moiety to which the modified HAS is to be attached is attached to the EPO within step a . In the case it is desired to attach galactose this can be achieved by the means of galactosyltransferase. The methods are known in the art Berger Greber Mosbach 1986 Galactosyltransferase dependent sialylation of complex and endo N acetylglucosaminidase H treated core N glycans in vitro FEBS Lett. 203 1 64 8 .

In a most preferred embodiment in step a the EPO is modified by oxidizing at least one terminal saccharide unit preferably galactose of the one or more carbohydrate side chains of the EPO preferably after partial or complete enzymatic and or chemical removal of the terminal sialic acid if necessary see above .

Consequently preferably the modified HAS is conjugated to the oxidized terminal saccharide unit of the carbohydrate chain preferably galactose.

Furthermore the modified HAS may be preferably conjugated to a terminal sialic acid which is preferably oxidized in step a of the method of the invention.

According to a preferred embodiment this SH group may be linked to a preferably oxidized carbohydrate moiety e.g. by using a hydroxylamine derivative e.g. 2 aminooxy ethylmercaptan hydrochloride Bauer L. et al. 1965 J. Org. Chem. 30 949 or by using a hydrazide derivative e.g. thioglycolic acid hydrazide Whitesides et al. 1977 J. Org. Chem. 42 332. The methods for conjugating these molecules to the oxidized carbohydrate moiety of EPO may be analogous to those described in Example Protocols 8 and 9.

According to a further preferred embodiment the free SH group is part of a naturally occurring cysteine or of an added cysteine.

Mammalian EPO has several cysteines which normally form disulfide bonds. However by replacing at least one of the cysteines by another amino acid e.g. by recombinant means it is possible to obtain an EPO where at least one of the naturally occurring cysteines comprises a free SH group. Methods for the replacement of amino acids are known in the art Elliott Lorenzini Chang Barzilay Delorme 1997 Mapping of the active site of recombinant human erythropoietin Blood 89 2 493 502 Boissel Lee Presnell Cohen Bunn 1993 Erythropoietin structure function relationships. Mutant proteins that test a model of tertiary structure J Biol. Chem. 268 21 15983 93 .

Preferably the EPO has the amino acid sequence of human EPO and the naturally occurring cysteines are cysteine 29 and or 33.

Accordingly in a preferred embodiment cysteine 33 is replaced by another amino acid and in step c the modified HAS is conjugated to cysteine 29.

In a further preferred embodiment cysteine 29 is replaced by another amino acid and in step c the modified HAS is conjugated to cysteine 33.

In the context of the present invention by the term added cysteines it is meant that the polypeptides preferably EPO comprise a cysteine residue which is not present in the wild type polypeptide. This can be achieved by adding e.g. by recombinant means a cysteine residue either at the N or at the C terminus of the polypeptide or by replacing e.g. by recombinant means a naturally occurring amino acid by cysteine. The respective methods are known to the person skilled in the art see above .

Preferably the added cysteine has been added by replacing a naturally occuring amino acid by a cysteine.

In step b of the method of the invention modified HAS is provided which is capable of reacting with the EPO of step a .

In this context the HAS may be preferably modified at its reducing end. This has the advantage that the chemical reaction can be controlled easily and that the skilled person can be sure which group of HAS is modified during the reaction. Since only one group is introduced into the HAS crosslinking between different EPO molecules by multifunctional HAS molecules and other side reactions can be prevented.

With respect to point 1 above the modification of HAS will depend on the group linked to EPO. The underlying mechanism are known in the art. An example is given in Example 4 2.1.

With respect to points 2 and 3 above several methods are known in the art to modify HAS. The basic principle underlying these methods is that either a reactive group of HAS is modified in order to be capable of reacting with the carbohydrate moiety or SH group or a linker molecule is conjugated to HAS which contains a reactive group being capable of reacting with the carbohydrate moiety or SH group.

In case of point 2 the modified HAS may be capable of reacting with oxidized carbohydrate moieties preferably a terminal saccharide residue more preferably galactose or a terminal sialic acid.

Several ways are known to modify HAS such that it is capable of reacting with an oxidized preferably terminal saccharide residue. As mentioned above this modification may be introduced regioselectively at the reducing end of the HES chain.

In this case in a first step the aldehyde group is oxidized to a lactone. The modifications include but are not limited to the addition of hydrazide amino also hydroxylamino semicarbazide or thiol functions to HAS either directly or via a linker. These techniques are explained in further detail in Examples 2 4. Furthermore the mechanisms per se are known in the art see e.g. DE 196 28 705 A1 Hpoe et al. 1981 Carbohydrate Res. 91 39 Fissekis et al. 1960 Journal of Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry 2 47 Frie 1998 diploma thesis Fach hochschule Hamburg Del. .

Within the present invention the addition of a hydrazide or hydroxylamino function is preferred. In this case by preferably conducting the reaction of step c of the method of the present invention at a pH of 5.5 it is ensured that the modified HAS reacts selectively with the oxidized carbohydrate moiety of EPO without inter or intramolecular EPO cross linking by imine formation of lysin side chains with the oxidized saccharide residue.

In the case of point 3 also several ways are known to modify HAS such that it is capable of reacting with a free SH group. Preferentially this modification is introduced regioselectively at the reducing end of the HES chain. The methods include but are not limited to the addition of maleimide disulfide or halogen acetamide functions to HAS. These techniques are explained in further detail in Examples 2 4.

Further details about these techniques can be obtained from Chamov et al. 1992 J. Biol. Chem. 267 15916 Thorpe et al. 1984 Eur. J. Biochem. 140 63 Greenfield et al. 1990 Cancer Research 50 6600 as well as from the literature cited in Example 2 1.3.

Further possible functions are listed in Table 1 providing a systematic overview over possible linker molecules. Furthermore the mechanisms per se are known in the art.

Several linker molecules which are useful in the context of the present invention are known in the art or commercially available e.g. from Pierce available from Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany . Examples are given in Table 2.

In step c of the method of the present invention the EPO of step a with the HAS of step b is reacted whereby an HAS EPO is produced comprising one or more HAS molecules wherein the HAS is conjugated to the EPO via a carbohydrate moiety or via a thioether.

In principle the detailed methods how to react the EPO with the modified HAS depend on the individual modification of the EPO and or the HAS and are known in the art see e.g. Rose 1994 J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116 30 O Shannessay and Wichek 1990 Analytical Biochemistry 191 1 Thorpe et al. 1984 Eur. J. Biochem. 140 63 Chamov et al. 1992 J. Biol. Chem. 267 15916 .

For the methods exemplified in the present invention the details are given in Examples 2 4 especially 4.

The reaction medium in this preferred embodiment of the method of the invention comprises at least 10 per weight water preferred at least 50 more preferred at least 80 e.g. 90 or up to 100 . The degree of organic solvents is calculated respectively. Consequently the reaction takes place in an aqueous phase. The preferred reaction medium is water.

One advantage of this embodiment of the method of the invention is that it is not necessary to use toxicologically critical solvents and that therefore it is not necessary to remove these solvents after the production process in order to avoid the contamination with the solvent. Furthermore it is not necessary to perform additional quality controls with respect to residual toxicologically critical solvents. It is preferred to use as organic solvents toxicologically not critical solvents like ethanol or propylenglycol.

Another advantage of the method of the invention is that irreversible or reversible structural changes are avoided which are induced by organic solvents. Consequently polypeptides obtained according to the method of the invention are different from those prepared in organic solvents such as DMSO.

Furthermore it has been surprisingly observed that the conjugation of HAS to drugs in an aqueous solution minimizes or avoids side reactions. Consequently this embodiment of the method of the invention leads to improved products with great purity.

In the context of the present invention the term hydroxyalkylstarch is used to indicate starch derivatives which have been substituted by hydroxyalkylgroups. In this context the alkyl group may be substituted. Preferably the hydroxyalkyl contains 2 10 carbon atoms more preferably 24 carbon atoms. Hydroxyalkylstarch therefore preferably comprises hydroxyethylstarch hydroxypropylstarch and hydroxybutylstarch wherein hydroxyethylstarch and hydroxypropylstarch are preferred.

The expression hydroxyalkylstarch also includes derivatives wherein the alkyl group is mono or polysubstituted. In this context it is preferred that the alkyl group is substituted with a halogen especially flourine or with an aryl group provided that the HAS remains water soluble. Furthermore the terminal hydroxy group of hydroxyalkyl may be esterified or etherified. In addition the alkyl group of the hydroxyalkylstarch may be linear or branched.

Furthermore instead of alkyl also linear or branched substituted or unsubstituted alkylene groups may be used.

In the context of the present invention hydroxyethylstarch may have a mean molecular weight weight mean of 1 300 kDa wherein a mean molecular weight of 5 100 kDa is more preferred. Hydroxyethylstarch may further exhibit a molar degree of substitution of 0.1 to 0.8 and a ratio between C C substitution in the range of 2 20 with respect to the hydroxyethylgroups.

Isolation of the HAS EPO can be performed by using known procedures for the purification of natural and recombinant EPO e.g. size exclusion chromatography ion exchange chromatography RP HPLC hydroxyapatite chromatography hydrophobic interaction chromatography the procedure described in Example 20.8 or combinations thereof .

The covalent attachment of HAS to the EPO polypetide can be verified by carbohydrate compositional analysis after hydrolysis of the modified protein ratio of hydroxyethylglucose and mannose present on the three N glycosylation sites of EPO .

Demonstration of HAS modification at N linked oligosaccharides of EPO can be accomplished by removal of the HAS modified N glycans and observation of the predicted shift to higher mobility in SDS PAGE Western Blotting analysis.

HAS modification of EPO at cysteine residues can be demonstrated by the failure to detect the corresponding proteolytic Cys peptide in RP HPLC and MALDI TOF MS in the proteolytic fragments of the HAS modified product Zhou et al. 1998 Application of capillary electrophoresis liquid chromatography electrospray mass spectrometry and matrix assisted laserdesorption ionization time of flight mass spectrometry to the characterization of recombinant human erythropoietin. Electrophoresis 19 13 2348 55 . The isolation of the HAS containing fraction after proteolytic digestion of the Cys modified EPO enables the verification in this fraction of the corresponding peptide by conventional amino acid compositional analysis.

All embodiments disclosed above with respect of the HAS EPO of the invention concerning properties of EPO or HAS apply also to the method of the invention for preparing a HAS EPO.

The invention further relates to a HAS EPO obtainable by the method of the invention. Preferably this HAS EPO has the features as defined for the above HAS EPO of the invention.

The invention further relates to a HAS EPO according to the invention for use in a method for treatment of the human or animal body.

Furthermore the present invention relates to a pharmaceutical composition comprising the HAS EPO of the invention. In a preferred embodiment the pharmaceutical composition comprises further at least one pharmaceutically acceptable diluent adjuvant and or carrier useful in erythropoietin therapy.

The pharmaceutical composition is preferably used for the treatment of anemic disorders or hematopoietic dysfunction disorders or diseases related thereto.

A therapeutically effective amount as used herein refers to that amount which provides therapeutic effect for a given condition and administration regimen. The administration of erythropoietin isoforms is preferably by parenteral routes. The specific route chosen will depend upon the condition being treated. The administration of erythropoietin isoforms is preferably done as part of a formulation containing a suitable carrier such as human serum albumin a suitable diluent such as a buffered saline solution and or a suitable adjuvant. The required dosage will be in amounts sufficient to raise the hematocrit of patients and will vary depending upon the severity of the condition being treated the method of administration used and the like.

The object of the treatment with the pharmaceutical composition of the invention is preferably an increase of the hemoglobin value of more than 6.8 mmol l in the blood. For this the pharmaceutical composition may be administered in a way that the hemoglobin value increases between 0.6 mmol l and 1.6 mmol l per week. If the hemoglobin value exceeds 8.7 mmol l the therapy should be preferably interrupted until the hemoglobin value is below 8.1 mmol l.

The composition of the invention is preferably used in a formulation suitable for subcutaneous or intravenous or parenteral injection. For this suitable excipients and carriers are e.g. sodium dihydrogen phosphate disodium hydrogen phosphate sodium chlorate polysorbate 80 HSA and water for injection. The composition may be administered three times a week preferably two times a week more preferably once a week and most preferably every two weeks.

Preferably the pharmaceutical composition is administered in an amount of 0.01 10 g kg body weight of the patient more preferably 0.1 to 5 g kg 0.1 to 1 g kg or 0.2 0.9 g kg most preferably 0.3 0.7 g kg and most preferred 0.4 0.6 g kg body weight.

In general preferably between 10 g and 200 g preferably between 15 g and 100 g are administered per dosis.

The invention further relates to the use of a HAS EPO of the invention for the preparation of a medicament for the treatment of anemic disorders or hematopoietic dysfunction disorders or diseases related hereto.

According to a further aspect of the present invention the problem is solved by a hydroxyalkylstarch HAS polypeptide conjugate HAS polypeptide comprising one or more HAS molecules wherein each HAS is conjugated to the polypeptide via

The HAS polypeptide of the invention has the advantage that it exhibits an improved biological stability when compared to the polypeptide before conjugation. This is mainly due to the fact that HAS polypeptide is less or not recognized by the removal systems of the liver and kidney and therefore persists in the circulatory system for a longer period of time. Furthermore since the HAS is attached site specifically the risk of destroying the in vivo biological activity of the polypeptide by conjugation of HAS to the polypeptide is minimized.

The HAS polypeptide of the invention has mainly two components namely the polypeptide and the hydroxyalkylstarch HAS linked thereto.

The polypeptide can be of any human or animal source. In a preferred embodiment the polypeptide is of human source.

The polypeptide may be a cytokine especially erythropoietin an antithrombin AT such as AT III an interleukin especially interleukin 2 IFN beta IFN alpha G CSF CSF interleukin 6 and therapeutic antibodies.

According to a preferred embodiment the polypeptide is an antithrombin AT preferably AT III Levy J H Weisinger A Ziomek C A Echelard Y Recombinant Antithrombin Production and Role in Cardiovascular Disorder Seminars in Thrombosis and Hemostasis 27 4 2001 405 416 Edmunds T Van Patten S M Pollock J Hanson E Beenasconi R Higgins E Manavalan P Ziomek C Meade H McPherson J Cole E S Transgenically Produced Human Antithrombin Structural and Functional Comparison to Human Plasma Derived Antithrombin Blood 91 12 1998 4661 4671 Minnema M C Chang A C K Jansen P M Lubbers Y T P Pratt B M Whittaker B G Taylor F B Hack C E Friedman B Recombinant human antithrombin III improves survival and attenuates inflammatory responses in baboons lethally challenged with Blood 95 4 2000 1117 1123 Van Patten S M Hanson E H Bernasconi R Zhang K Manavaln P Cole E S McPherson J M Edmunds T Oxidation of Methionine Residues in Antithrombin J. Biol. Chemistry 274 15 1999 10268 10276 .

According to another preferred embodiment the polypeptide is human IFN beta in particular IFN beta 1a cf. Avonex REBIF and IFN beta 1b cf. BETASERON .

A further preferred polypeptide is human G CSF granulocyte colony stimulating factor . See e.g. Nagata et al. The chromosomal gene structure and two mRNAs for human granulocyte colony stimulating factor EMBO J. 5 575 581 1986 Souza et al. Recombinant human granulocyte colony stimulating factor effects on normal and leukemic myeloid cells Science 232 1986 61 65 and Herman et to al. Characterization formulation and stability of Neupogen Filgrastim a recombinant human granulocyte colony stimulating factor in Formulalion characterization and stability of protein drugs Rodney Pearlman and Y. John Wang eds. Plenum Press New York 1996 303 328.

Preferably the polypeptide is recombinantly produced. This includes the production in eukaryotic or prokaryotic cells preferably mammalian insect yeast bacterial cells or in any other cell type which is convenient for the recombinant production of the polypeptide. Furthermore the polypeptide may be expressed in transgenic animals e.g. in body fluids like milk blood etc. in eggs of transgenic birds especially poultry preferred chicken or in transgenic plants.

The recombinant production of a polypeptide is known in the art. In general this includes the transfection of host cells with an appropriate expression vector the cultivation of the host cells under conditions which enable the production of the polypeptide and the purification of the polypeptide from the host cells. For detailled information see e.g. Krystal Pankratz Farber Smart 1986 Purification of human erythropoietin to homogeneity by a rapid five step procedure Blood 67 1 71 9 Quelle Caslake Burkert Wojchowski 1989 High level expression and purification of a recombinant human erythropoietin produced using a baculovirus vector Blood 74 2 652 7 EP 640 619 B1 and EP 668 351 B1.

The polypeptide may comprise one or more carbohydrate side chains attached to the polypetide via N and or O linked glycosylation i.e. the polypeptide is glycosylated. Usually when a polypeptide is produced in eukaryotic cells the polypeptide is posttranslationally glycosylated. Consequently the carbohydrate side chains may have been attached to the polypeptide during biosynthesis in mammalian especially human insect or yeast cells.

The HAS may be directly conjugated to the polypeptide or alternatively via a linker molecule. The nature of the linker molecule depends on the way how the HAS is linked to the polypeptide. Several linkers are commercially available e.g. from Pierce see above . The nature of the linker and its purpose are described in detail below in the section concerning the method for the production of HES polypeptide is discussed.

According to a preferred embodiment of the HAS polypeptide conjugate of the invention the HAS is conjugated to the polypeptide via a carbohydrate moiety. Preferably this applies if the polypeptide is an antithrombin preferably AT III.

In the context of the present invention the term carbohydrate moiety refers to hydroxyaldehydes or hydroxyketones as well as to chemical modifications thereof see R mpp Chemielexikon 1990 Thieme Verlag Stuttgart Germany 9edition 9 2281 2285 and the literature cited therein . Furthermore it also refers to derivatives of naturally occuring carbohydrate moieties like glucose galactose mannose sialic acid and the like. The term also includes chemically oxidized naturally occuring carbohydrate moieties wherein the ring structure has been opened.

The carbohydrate moiety may be linked directly to the polypeptide backbone. Preferably the carbohydrate moiety is part of a carbohydrate side chain. In this case further carbohydrate moieties may be present between the carbohydrate moiety to which HAS is linked and the polypeptide backbone. More preferably the carbohydrate moiety is the terminal moiety of the carbohydrate side chain.

In a more preferred embodiment the HAS is conjugated to a galactose residue of the carbohydrate side chains preferably the terminal galactose residue of the carbohydrate side chain. This galactose residue can be made available for conjugation by removal of terminal sialic acids followed by oxidation see below .

In a further more preferred embodiment the HAS is conjugated to a sialic acid residue of the carbohydrate side chains preferably the terminal sialic acid residue of the carbohydrate side chain.

Furthermore the HAS may be conjugated to the polypeptide via a thioether. As explained in detail below the S atom can be derived from any SH group attached to the polypeptide both naturally or non naturally occurring.

In a preferred embodiment the S atom may be derived from a SH group which has been introduced in an oxidized carbohydrate moiety of HES preferably an oxidized carbohydrate moiety which is part of a carbohydrate side chain of the polypeptide see below .

Preferably the S atom in the thioether is derived from a naturally occurring cysteine or from an added cysteine.

In the context of the present invention by the term added cysteines it is meant that the polypeptides comprise a cysteine residue which is not present in the wild type polypeptide.

In the context of this aspect of the invention the cysteine may be an additional amino acid added at the N or C terminal end of the polypeptide.

Furthermore the added cysteine may have been added by replacing a naturally occuring amino acid by a cysteine.

In the context of the present invention the term hydroxyalkylstarch is used to indicate starch derivatives which have been substituted by hydroxyalkylgroups. In this context the alkyl group may be substituted. Preferably the hydroxyalkyl contains 2 10 carbon atoms more preferably 2 4 carbon atoms. Hydroxyalkylstarch therefore preferably comprises hydroxyethylstarch hydroxypropylstarch and hydroxybutylstarch wherein hydroxyethylstarch and hydroxypropylstarch are preferred.

The expression hydroxyalkylstarch also includes derivatives wherein the alkyl group is mono or polysubstituted. In this context it is preferred that the alkyl group is substituted with an halogen especially flourine or with an aryl group provided that the HAS remains water soluble. Furthermore the terminal hydroxy group of hydroxyalkyl may be esterified or etherified. In addition the alkyl group of the hydroxyalkylstarch may be linear or branched.

Furthermore instead of alkyl also linear or branched substituted or unsubstituted alkene groups may be used.

In the context of the present invention hydroxyethylstarch may have a mean molecular weight weight mean of 1 300 kDa wherein a mean molecular weight of 5 100 kDa is more preferred. Hydroxyethylstarch can further exhibit a molar degree of substitution of 0.1 to 0.8 and a ratio between C C substitution in the range of 2 20 with respect to the hydroxyethylgroups.

The HAS polypeptide may comprise 1 12 preferably 1 9 1 6 or 1 3 most preferred 1 4 HAS molecules per polypeptide molecule. The number of HAS molecules per polypeptide molecule can be determined by quantitative carbohydrate compositional analysis using GC MS after hydrolysis of the product and derivatisation of the resulting monosaccharides Chaplin and Kennedy 1986 Carbohydrate Analysis eds. a practical approach ed. Chapter 1. Monosaccharides page 1 36 Chapter 2. Oligosaccharides page 37 53 Chapter 3. Neutral Polysaccharides 55 96 IRL Press Practical approach series ISBN 0 947946 44 3 .

All embodiments disclosed below with respect of the method of the invention to produce a HAS polypeptide concerning properties of the polypeptide or HAS apply also to the HAS polypeptide of the invention. Furthermore all embodiments disclosed above with respect to HAS EPO or the preparation thereof which relate to peptides in general or to HAS apply also to the HAS polypeptide of the invention.

Hydroxyalkylstarch is an ether derivative of starch. Besides of said ether derivatives also other starch derivatives can be used in the context of the present invention. For example derivatives are useful which comprise esterified hydroxy groups. These derivatives may be e.g. derivatives of unsubstituted mono or dicarboxylic acids with 2 12 carbon atoms or of substituted derivatives thereof. Especially useful are derivatives of unsubstituted monocarboxylic acids with 2 6 carbon atoms especially of acetic acid In this context acetylstarch butylstarch or propylstarch are preferred.

In the case of derivatives of dicarboxylic acids it is useful that the second carboxy group of the dicarboxylic acid is also esterified. Furthermore derivatives of monoalkyl esters of dicarboxylic acids are also suitable in the context of the present invention.

For the substituted mono or dicarboxylic acids the substitute groups may be preferably the same as mentioned above for substituted alkyl residues.

Techniques for the esterification of starch are known in the art see e.g. Klemm D. et al Comprehensive Cellulose Chemistry Vol. 2 1998 Whiley VCH Weinheim N.Y. especially chapter 4.4 Esterification of Cellulose ISBN 3 527 29489 9 .

In a further aspect the present invention relates to a method for the production of a hydroxyalkylstarch HAS polypeptide conjugate HAS polypeptide comprising the steps of 

The method of the invention has the advantage that a HAS polypeptide conjugate is produced which exhibits a high biological activity. Furthermore the method of the invention has the advantage that an effective polypetide derivative can be produced at reduced cost since the method does not comprise extensive and time consuming purification steps resulting in low final yield.

Accordingly in the first step of the method of the invention a polypeptide is provided which is capable of reacting with modified HAS.

As used in the present invention the term providing has to be interpreted in the way that after the respective step a molecule in step a a polypeptide in step b HAS with the desired properties is available.

In the case of step a this includes the purification of the polypeptide from natural sources as well as the recombinant production in host cells or organism and if necessary the modification of the polypeptide so obtained.

With respect to the polypeptide being the starting material of the present invention the same applies as for the erythropoietin being part of the HAS polypeptide conjugate of the invention. In this context the preferred embodiments disclosed above apply also for the method of the invention.

Preferably the polypeptide is recombinantly produced. This includes the production in eukaryotic or prokaryotic cells preferably mammalian insect yeast bacterial cells or in any other cell type which is convenient for the recombinant production of the polypeptide. Furthermore the polypeptide may be expressed in transgenic animals e.g. in body fluids like milk blood etc. in eggs of transgenic birds especially poultry preferred chicken or in transgenic plants.

The recombinant production of a polypeptide is known in the art. In general this includes the transfection of host cells with an appropriate expression vector the cultivation of the host cells under conditions which enable the production of the polypeptide and the purification of the polypeptide from the host cells Krystal Pankratz Farber Smart 1986 Purification of human erythropoietin to homogeneity by a rapid five step procedure Blood 67 1 71 9 Quelle Caslake Burkert Wojchowski 1989 High level expression and purification of a recombinant human erythropoietin produced using a baculovirus vector Blood 74 2 652 7 EP 640 619 B1 and EP 668 351 B1 .

The polypeptide may comprise one or more carbohydrate side chains attached to the polypeptide via N and or O linked glycosylation i.e. the polypeptide is glycosylated. Unsually when the polypeptide is produced in eukaryotic cells the polypeptide is posttranslationally glycosylated. Consequently the carbohydrate side chains may have been attached to the polypeptide during production in mammalian especially human insect or yeast cells wherein the cells may be those of a transgenic animal or plant see above .

These carbohydrate side chains may have been chemically or enzymatically modified after the expression in the appropriate cells e.g. by removing or adding one or more carbohydrate moieties see e.g. Dittmar Conradt Hauser Hofer Lindenmaier 1989 Advances in Protein design Bloecker Collins Schmidt and Schomburg eds. GBF Monographs 12 231 246 VCH Publishers Weinheim N.Y. Cambridge .

It is the object of the method of the invention to provide an HAS polypeptide comprising one or more HAS molecules wherein the HAS is conjugated to the polypeptide via a carbohydrate moiety i or via a thioether ii . Consequently the polypeptide provided in step a should have the properties that a conjugation via a carbohydrate moiety and or via a thioether is possible. Therefore the polypeptide after step a may preferably contain either

With respect to possibility 1 above the polypeptide of step a is preferably obtainable by conjugating an appropriate linker molecule to the SH group s or carbohydrate moieties of the polypeptide. An example for such a modified polypeptide is provided in Example 4 2.1. It is important to ensure that the addition of the linker molecule does not damage the polypeptide. However this is known to the person skilled in the art.

With respect to possibility 2 above in a preferred embodiment the modified HAS is conjugated to the polypeptide via a carbohydrate moiety.

The carbohydrate moiety may be linked directly to the polypeptide backbone. Preferably the carbohydrate moiety is part of a carbohydrate side chain. In this case further carbohydrate moieties may be present between the carbohydrate moiety to which HAS is linked and the polypeptide backbone. More preferably the carbohydrate moiety is the terminal moiety of the carbohydrate side chain.

Consequently in a preferred embodiment the modified HAS is attached via a linker or not see below to carbohydrate chains linked to N and or O glycosylation sites of the polypeptide.

However it is also included within the present invention that the polypeptide contains a further carbohydrate moiet y ies to which the modified HAS is conjugated. Techniques for attaching carbohydrate moieties to polypeptides either enzymatically or by genetic engineering followed by expression in appropriate cells are known in the art Berger Greber Mosbach 1986 Galactosyltransferase dependent sialylation of complex and endo N acetylglucosaminidase H treated core N glycans in vitro FEBS Lett. 203 1 64 8 Dittmar Conradt Hauser Hofer Lindenmaier 1989 Advances in Protein design Bloecker Collins Schmidt and Schomburg eds. GBF Monographs 12 231 246 VCH Publishers Weinheim N.Y. Cambridge .

In a preferred embodiment of the method of the invention the carbohydrate moiety is oxidized in order to be able to react with the modified HAS. This oxidation can be performed either chemically or enzymatically.

Methods for the chemical oxidation of carbohydrate moieties of polypeptides are known in the art and include the treatment with perjodate Chamow et al. 1992 J. Biol. Chem. 267 15916 15922 .

By chemically oxidizing it is principally possible to oxidize any carbohydrate moiety being terminally positioned or not. However by choosing mild conditions 1 mM periodate 0 C. in contrast to harsh conditions 10 mM periodate 1 h at room temperature it is possible to preferably oxidize the terminal carbohydrate moiety e.g. sialic acid or galactose of a carbohydrate side chain.

Alternatively the carbohydrate moiety may be oxidized enzymatically. Enzymes for the oxidation of the individual carbohydrate moieties are known in the art e.g. in the case of galactose the enzyme is galactose oxidase.

If it is intended to oxidize terminal galactose moieties it will be eventually necessary to remove terminal sialic acids partially or completely if the polypeptide has been produced in cells capable of attaching sialic acids to carbohydrate chains e.g. in mammalian cells or in cells which have been genetically modified to be capable of attaching sialic acids to carbohydrate chains. Chemical or enzymatic methods for the removal of sialic acids are known in the art Chaplin and Kennedy eds. 1996 Carbohydrate Analysis a practical approach especially Chapter 5 Montreuill Glycoproteins pages 175 177 IRL Press Practical approach series ISBN 0 947946 44 3 .

However it is also included within the present invention that the carbohydrate moiety to which the modified HAS is to be attached is attached to the polypeptide within step a . In the case it is desired to attach galactose this can be achieved by the means of galactose transferase. The methods are known in the art Berger Greber Mosbach 1986 Galactosyltransferase dependent sialylation of complex and endo N acetylglucosaminidase H treated core N glycans in vitro FEBS Lett. 203 1 64 8 .

In a most preferred embodiment in step a the polypeptide is modified by oxidizing at least one terminal saccharide unit preferably galactose of the one or more carbohydrate side chains of the polypeptide preferably after partial or complete enzymatic and or chemical removal of the terminal sialic acid if necessary see above .

Consequently preferably the modified HAS is conjugated to the oxidized terminal saccharide unit of the carbohydrate chain preferably galactose.

In a further preferred embodiment see point 3 above the polypeptide comprises at least one free SH group.

According to a preferred embodiment the free SH group is part of a naturally occurring cysteine or of an added cysteine.

Methods for the replacement of amino acids are known in the art Elliott Lorenzini Chang Barzilay Delorme 1997 Mapping of the active site of recombinant human erythropoietin Blood 89 2 493 502 Boissel Lee Presnell Cohen Bunn 1993 Erythropoietin structure function relationships. Mutant proteins that test a model of tertiary structure J Biol. Chem. 268 21 15983 93 .

In the context of the present invention by the term added cysteines it is meant that the polypeptides comprise a cysteine residue which is not present in the wild type polypeptide. This can be achieved by adding e.g. by recombinant means a cysteine residue either at the N or at the C terminus of the polypeptide or by replacing e.g. by recombinant means a naturally occurring amino acid by cysteine. The respective methods are known to the person skilled in the art see above .

Preferably the added cysteine has been added by replacing a naturally occuring amino acid by a cysteine.

In step b of the method of the invention modified HAS is provided which is capable of reacting with the polypeptide of step a .

In this context the HAS may be preferably modified at its reducing end. This has the advantage that the chemical reaction can be controlled easily and that the skilled person can be sure which group of HAS is modified during the reaction. Since only one group is introduced into the HAS crosslinking between different polypeptide molecules by multifunctional HAS molecules and other side reactions can be prevented.

With respect to point 1 above the modification of HAS will depend on the group linked to the polypeptide. The underlying mechanism are known in the art. An example is given in Example 4 2.1.

With respect to points 2 and 3 above several methods are known in the art to modify HAS. The basic principle underlying these methods is that either a reactive group of HAS is modified in order to be capable of reacting with the carbohydrate moiety or SH group or a linker molecule is conjugated to HAS which contains a reactive group being capable of reacting with the carbohydrate moiety or SH group.

In case of point 2 the modified HAS may be capable of reacting with oxidized carbohydrate moieties preferably a terminal saccharide residue more preferably galactose or with a terminal sialic acid.

Several ways are known to modify HAS such that it is capable of reacting with an oxidized preferably terminal saccharide residue. As mentioned above this modification may be introduced regioselectively at the reducing end of the HES chain. In this case in a first step the aldehyde group is oxidized to a lactone. The modifications include but are not limited to the addition of hydrazide amino also hydroxylamino semicarbazide or thiol functions to HAS either directly or via a linker. These techniques are explained in further detail in Examples 24. Furthermore the mechanisms per se are known in the art see e.g. DE 196 28 705 A1 Hpoe et al. 1981 Carbohydrate Res. 91 39 Fissekis et al. 1960 Journal of Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry 2 47 Frie 1998 diploma thesis Fach hochschule Hamburg Del. .

Within the present invention the addition of a hydrazide or hydroxylamino function is preferred. In this case by preferably conducting the reaction of step c of the method of the present invention at a pH of 5.5 it is ensured that the modified HAS reacts selectively with the oxidized carbohydrate moiety of the polypeptide without inter or intramolecular polypeptide cross linking by imine formation of lysine side chains with the oxidized saccharide residue.

In the case of point 3 also several ways are known to modify HAS such that it is capable of reacting with a free SH group. Preferentially this modification is introduced regioselectively at the reducing end of the HES chain. The methods include but are not limited to the addition of maleimide disulfide or halogen acetamide functions to HAS. These techniques are explained in further detail in Examples 2 4.

Further details about these techniques can be obtained from Chamov et al. 1992 J. Biol. Chem. 267 15916 Thorpe et al. 1984 Eur. J. Biochem. 140 63 Greenfield et al. 1990 Cancer Research 50 6600 as well as from the literature cited in Example 2 1.3.

Further possible functions are listed in Table 1 providing a systematic overview over possible linker molecules. Furthermore the mechanisms per se are known in the art.

Several linker molecules which are useful in the context of the present invention are known in the art or commercially available e.g. from Pierce available from Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany .

In step c of the method of the present invention the polypeptide of step a with the HAS of step b is reacted whereby an HAS polypeptide is produced comprising one or more HAS molecules wherein the HAS is conjugated to the polypeptide via a carbohydrate moiety or via a thioether.

In principle the detailed methods how to react the polypeptide with the modified HAS depend on the individual modification of the polypeptide and or the HAS and are known in the art see e.g. Rose 1994 J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116 30 O Shannessay and Wichek 1990 Analytical Biochemistry 191 1 Thorpe et al. 1984 Eur. J. Biochem. 140 63 Chamov et al. 1992 J. Biol. Chem. 267 15916 .

For the methods exemplified in the present invention the details are given in Examples 2 4 especially 4.

The reaction medium in this preferred embodiment of the method of the invention comprises at least 10 per weight water preferred at least 50 more preferred at least 80 e.g. 90 or up to 100 . The degree of organic solvents is calculated respectively. Consequently the reaction takes place in an aqueous phase. The preferred reaction medium is water.

One advantage of this embodiment of the method of the invention is that it is not necessary to use toxicologically critical solvents and that therefore it is not necessary to remove these solvents after the production process in order to avoid the contamination with the solvent. Furthermore it is not necessary to perform additional quality controls with respect to residual toxicologically critical solvents. It is preferred to use as organic solvents toxicologically not critical solvents like ethanol or propylenglycol.

Another advantage of the method of the invention is that irreversible or reversible structural changes are avoided which are induced by organic solvents. Consequently polypeptides obtained according to the method of the invention are different from those prepared in organic solvents such as DMSO.

Furthermore it has been surprisingly observed that the conjugation of HAS to drugs in an aqueous solution avoids side reactions. Consequently this embodiment of the method of the invention leads to improved products with great purity.

In the context of the present invention the term hydroxyalkylstarch is used to indicate starch derivatives which have been substituted by hydroxyalkylgroups. In this context the alkyl group may be substituted. Preferably the hydroxyalkyl contains 2 10 carbon atoms more preferably 24 carbon atoms. Hydroxyalkylstarch therefore preferably comprises hydroxyethylstarch hydroxypropylstarch and hydroxybutylstarch wherein hydroxyethylstarch and hydroxypropylstarch are preferred.

The expression hydroxyalkylstarch also includes derivatives wherein the alkyl group is mono or polysubstituted. In this context it is preferred that the alkyl group is substituted with an halogen especially flourine or with an aryl group provided that the HAS remains water soluble. Furthermore the terminal hydroxy group of hydroxyalkyl may be esterified or etherified. In addition the alkyl group of the hydroxyalkylstarch may be linear or branched.

Furthermore instead of alkyl also linear or branched substituted or unsubstituted alkylene groups may be used.

In the context of the present invention hydroxyethylstarch may have a mean molecular weight weight mean of 1 300 kDa wherein a mean molecular weight of 5 100 kDa is more preferred. Hydroxyethylstarch may further exhibit a molar degree of substitution of 0.1 to 0.8 and a ratio between C C substitution in the range of 2 20 with respect to the hydroxyethylgroups.

The HAS polypeptide produced by the method of the invention can be purified and characterized as follows 

Isolation of the HAS polypeptide can be performed by using known procedures for the purification of natural and recombinant polypeptides e.g. size exclusion chromatography ion exchange chromatography RP HPLC hydroxyapatite chromatography hydrophobic interaction chromatography the procedure described in Example 20.8 or combinations thereof .

The covalent attachment of HAS to the polypetide can be verified by carbohydrate compositional analysis after hydrolysis of the modified protein.

Demonstration of HAS modification at N linked oligosaccharides of the polypeptide can be accomplished by removal of the HAS modified N glycans and observation of the predicted shift to higher mobility in SDS PAGE Western Blotting analysis.

HAS modification of the polypeptide at cysteine residues can be demonstrated by the failure to detect the corresponding proteolytic Cys peptide in RP HPLC and MALDI TOF MS in the proteolytic fragments of the HAS modified product Zhou et al. 1998 Application of capillary electrophoresis liquid chromatography electrospray mass spectrometry and matrix assisted laserdesorption ionization time of flight mass spectrometry to the characterization of recombinant human erythropoietin Electrophoresis 19 13 2348 55 . The isolation of the HAS containing fraction after proteolytic digestion of the Cys modified polypeptide enables the verification in this fraction of the corresponding peptide by conventional amino acid compositional analysis.

All embodiments disclosed above with respect of the HAS polypeptide of the invention concerning properties of the polypeptide or HAS apply also to the method of the invention for the production of a HAS polypeptide conjugate. Furthermore all embodiments disclosed above with respect to HAS EPO or the preparation thereof which relate to peptides in general or to HAS apply also to the method of the invention for the production of a HAS polypeptide conjugate.

The invention further relates to a HAS polypeptide obtainable by the method of the invention. Preferably this HAS polypeptide has the features as defined for the above HAS polypeptide of the invention.

According to a preferred embodiment of the present invention the HAS used has the following formula I 

HAS and preferably HES may be reacted with a crosslinking compound which reacts with HAS preferably HES and the polypeptide such as the polypeptides described above.

The reaction between HAS and the crosslinking compound may take place at the reducing end of HAS or at the oxidised reducing end of HAS. Therefore HAS may be reacted having a structure according to formula I 

If HAS according to formula I is reacted with a crosslinking compound the reaction preferably takes place in an aqueous medium. If HAS according to formula IIa and or IIb is reacted with a crosslinking compound the reaction preferably takes place in a non aqueous medium such as in a polar aprotic solvent or solvent mixture such as DMSO and or in DMF.

If the HAS polypeptide conjugate of the present invention is produced via reaction of a HAS derivative comprising HAS and a crosslinking compound with the oxidised carbohydrate moiety of the polypeptide the crosslinking compound is preferably a compound

If the HAS polypeptide conjugate of the present invention is produced via reaction of a HAS derivative comprising HAS and at least one crosslinking compound with the thio group of the polypeptide it is preferred to react HAS at its optionally oxidized reducing end with a first crosslinking compound which is preferably a compound

Depending on the respective reaction conditions the solvent or solvent mixture used and or the residues R and or R of a compound R NH R the HAS is reacted with in an aqueous medium it is possible that the hydroxyalkyl starch derivate obtainable by the method or methods described above may have the following constitutions IIIa 

Therefore the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative as described above having a constitution according to formula IIIa .

It is also possible that e.g. in the case where R is hydrogen that the hydroxyalkyl starch derivate obtainable by the method or methods described above may have the following constitutions IIIa or IIIb where IIIa and IIIb may be both present in the reaction mixture having a certain equilibrium distribution 

Therefore the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative as described above having a constitution according to formula IIIb .

Moreover the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivative as described above being present in a mixture of constitutions according to formulae IIIa and IIIb .

Depending on the reaction conditions and or the chemical nature of the compound R NH R used for the reaction the compounds according to formula IIIa may be present with the N atom in equatorial or axial position where also a mixture of both forms may be present having a certain equilibrium distribution.

Depending on the reaction conditions and or the chemical nature of compound R NH R used for the reaction the compounds according to formula IIIb may be present with the C N double bond in E or Z conformation where also a mixture of both forms may be present having a certain equilibrium distribution.

In some cases it may be desirable to stabilize the compound according to formula IIIa . This is especially the case where the compound according to formula IIIa is produced and or used in an aqueous solution. As stabilizing method acylation of the compound according to formula IIIa is particularly preferred especially in the case where R is hydrogen. As acylation reagent all suitable reagents may be used which result in the desired hydroxyalkyl starch derivative according to formula IVa 

According to especially preferred embodiments of the present invention the residue Ra being part of the acylation reagent is methyl. As acylation reagents carboxylic acid anhydrides carboxylic acid halides and carboxylic acid activated esters are preferably used.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivate obtainable by a method as described above wherein said derivative has a constitution according to formula IVa .

The acylation is carried at a temperature in the range of from 0 to 30 C. preferably in the range of from 2 to 20 C. and especially preferably in the range of from 4 to 10 C.

In other cases it may be desirable to stabilize the compound according to formula IIIb . This is especially the case where the compound according to formula IIIb is produced and or used in an aqueous solution. As stabilizing method reduction of the compound according to formula IIIb is particularly preferred especially in the case where R is hydrogen. As reduction reagent all suitable reagents may be used which result in the desired hydroxyalkyl starch derivative according to formula IVb 

According to especially preferred embodiments of the present invention as reduction reagents boro hydrides such as NaCNBHor NaBHare used.

Therefore the present invention also relates to a hydroxyalkyl starch derivate obtainable by a method as described above wherein said derivative has a constitution according to formula IVb .

The reduction is carried at a temperature in the range of from 4 to 100 C. preferably in the range of from 10 to 90 C. and especially preferably in the range of from 25 to 80 C.

The present invention further relates to mixtures of compounds IIIa and IIIb IVa and IVb IIIa and IVa IIIa and IVb IIIb and IVa IIIb and IVb IIIa and IIIb and IVa IIIa and IIIb and IVb IVa and IVb and IIIa and IVa and IVb and IIIb wherein IIIa and or IVa may be independently present in a conformation where the N atom in equatorial or axial position and or wherein IIIb may be present with the C N double bond in E or Z conformation.

The invention further relates to a HAS polypeptide according to the invention for use in a method for treatment of the human or animal body.

Furthermore the present invention relates to a pharmaceutical composition comprising the HAS polypeptide of the invention. In a preferred embodiment the pharmaceutical composition comprises further at least one pharmaceutically acceptable diluent adjuvant and or carrier useful in erythropoietin therapy.

The invention further relates to the use of a HAS polypeptide of the invention for the preparation of a medicament for the treatment of anemic disorders or hematopoietic dysfunction disorders or diseases related hereto.

The invention is further illustrated by the following figures tables and examples which are in no way intended to restrict the scope of the present invention.

A plasmid harbouring the human EPO cDNA was cloned into the eukaryotic expression vector pCR3 and named afterwards pCREPO . Site directed mutagenesis was performed using standard procedures as described Grabenhorst Nimtz Costa et al. 1998 In vivo specificity of human alpha 1 3 4 fucosyltransferases III VII in the biosynthesis of Lewis x and sialyl Lewis x motifs on complex type N glycans Coexpression studies from BHK 21 cells together with human beta trace protein J. Biol. Chem. 273 47 30985 30994 .

CHO cells stably expressing human EPO or amino acid variants e.g. Cys 29 Ser Ala or Cys 33 Ser Ala Ser 126 Ala etc. thereof were generated with the calcium phosphate precipitation method and selected with G418 sulfate as described Grabenhorst et al. . Three days after transfection the cells were subcultivated 1 5 and selected in DMEM containing 10 FBS and 1.5 g liter G418 sulfate.

Using this selection procedure usually 100 500 clones survived and where propagated in selection medium for a further time period of 2 3 weeks. Cell culture supernatants of confluently growing monolayers were then analyzed for EPO expression levels by Western blot analysis and by IEF Western Blot analysis.

EPO was produced from stable subclones in spinner flasks or in 21 perfusion reactors. Different glycoforms of EPO with different amounts of NeuAc e.g. 2 8 4 10 8 12 NeuAc residues were isolated according to published protocols using combinations various chromatographic procedures as described below.

Grabenhorst Conradt 1999 The cytoplasmic transmembrane and stem regions of glycosyltransferases specify their in vivo functional sublocalization and stability in the Golgi. J Biol. Chem. 274 51 36107 16 Grabenhorst Schlenke Pohl Nimtz Conradt 1999 Genetic engineering of recombinant glycoproteins and the glycosylation pathway in mammalian host cells Glycoconj J. 16 2 81 97 Mueller Schlenke Nimtz Conradt Hauser 1999 Recombinant glycoprotein product quality in proliferation controlled BHK 21 cells Biotechnology and bioengineering 65 5 529 536 Schlenke Grabenhorst Nimtz Conradt 1999 Construction and characterization of stably transfected BHK 21 cells with human type sialylation characteristic Cytotechnology 30 1 3 17 25.

Recombinant human EPO is produced from insect cell lines SF9 and SF 21 after infection of cells with recombinant baculovirus vector containing the human EPO cDNA under control of the polyhedrin promoter as described in the literature.

Cells grown in serum free culture medium are infected at cell density of 2 10or 10cells per mL and EPO titers are determined every day in the cell culture supernatants. EPO is purified by Blue sepharose chromatography ion exchange chromatography on Q Sepharose and finally RP HPLC on C Phase.

Purity of the product is checked by SDS PAGE and N terminal sequencing. Detailed carbohydrate structural analysis N and O glycosylation may be performed according to published procedures.

Grabenhorst Hofer Nimtz Jager Conradt 1993 Biosynthesis and secretion of human interleukin 2 glycoprotein variants from baculovirus infected Sf21 cells. Characterization of polypeptides and posttranslational modifications Eur J. Biochem. 215 1 189 97 Quelle Caslake Burkert Wojchowski 1989 High level expression and purification of a recombinant human erythropoietin produced using a baculovirus vector Blood 74 2 652 7

In this reaction all cross linkers can be used which exhibit a hydrazide and a maleimide function separated by a spacer. Further examples for molecules of that group available from Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany are shown in table 2 marked with an A . Furthermore another group of cross linkers exhibiting an activated disulfide function instead of a maleimide function could also be used.

a Glycosylamine Formation 1 Manger Wong Rademacher Dwek 1992 Biochemistry 31 10733 10740 Manger Rademacher Dwek 1992 Biochemistry 31 10724 10732

A 1 mg sample of HES12KD is dissolved in 3 mL of saturated ammonium bicarbonate. Additional solid ammonium bicarbonate is then added to maintain saturation of the solution during incubation for 120 h at 30 C. The Amino HES12KD C is desalted by direct lyophilization of the reaction mixture.

A 1 mg sample of Amino HES12KD C is dissolved in 1 mL of 1 M sodium bicarbonate and cooled on ice. To this is added a crystal of solid chloroacetic acid anhydride 5 mg and the reaction mixture is allowed to warm to room temperature. The pH is monitored and additional base is added if the pH dropped below 7.0. After two hours at room temperature a second aliquot of base and anhydride is added. After six hours the product Chloroacetamide HES D1 X Cl is desalted by passage over a mixed bed Amberlite MB 3 H OH ion exchange resins.

Bromoacetic anhydride is prepared as described by Thomas.A 1 mg sample of amino HES12KD C is dissolved in 0.1 mL of dry DMF and cooled on ice and 5 mg bromoacetic anhydride is added. The reaction mixture is brought slowly to room temperature and the solution is stirred for 3 h. The reaction mixture is added to 1 mL of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone with 20 C. The precipitate is collected by centrifugation redissolved in 0.1 mL DMF and again precipitated as described. The Bromoacetamide HES D2 X Br is obtained by centrifugation and drying in vaccuo. The conjugation reaction with Thio EPO is described in Example 3 1.2. Thomas 1977 46 362

Instead bromoacetic anhydride N succinimidyl iodoacetate is used and all steps are performed in the dark.

Furthermore all cross linkers having an amino reactive group and a halogen acetyl function separated by a spacer could be used. An example thereof is SBAP. This molecule and others are available from Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany. They are marked in table 2 with an D . For the use as cross linkers for the ligation of amino HES with thio EPO without isolation of the halogenacetamide HES derivatives see remarks in example 3 1.2.

a Reaction of 1 4 diaminobutane with Oxo HES12KD to amino HES12KD ES. Frie Diplomarbeit Fachhochschule Hamburg 1998

1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES12KD are dissolved in 3 mL dry dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and are added dropwise under nitrogen to a mixture of 1.51 mL 15 mmol 1 4 diaminobutane in 15 mL DMSO. After stirring for 19 h at 40 C. the reaction mixture is added to 160 mL of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone. The precipitate Amino HES12KD E is collected by centrifugation redissolved in 40 mL of water an dialysed for 4 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized.

1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES12KD are dissolved in 3 mL absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and are added dropwise under nitrogen to a mixture of 0.47 mL 15 mmol hydrazine in 15 mL DMSO. After stirring for 19 h at 40 C. the reaction mixture is added to 160 mL of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone. The precipitated product J is collected by centrifugation redissolved in 40 mL of water and dialysed for 2 days against a 0.5 v v triethylamine in water solution and for 2 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized. The conjugation reaction with oxidised Glyco EPO is described in Example 4 2.2.

1.74 g 15 mmol adipic dihydrazide are dissolved in 20 mL absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO at 65 C. and 1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES12KD dissolved in 3 mL absolute DMSO are added dropwise under nitrogen. After stirring for 68 h at 60 C. the reaction mixture is added to 200 mL of water The solution containing L is dialysed for 2 days against a 0.5 v v triethylamine in water solution and for 2 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized. The conjugation reaction with oxidised Glyco EPO is described in Example 4 2.2.

Ammonolysis of D or F is performed separately by dissolving a 1 mg sample of each halogenacetamide in 0.1 mL of saturated ammonium carbonate. Additional solid ammonium carbonate is then added to maintain saturation of the solution during incubation of 120 h at 30 C. The reaction mixture is added to 1 mL of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone with 20 C. The precipitate is collected by centrifugation redissolved in 0.05 mL water and again precipitated as described. The product amino HES H or I is obtained by centrifugation and drying in vaccuo. The conjugation reaction with oxidised Glyco EPO is described in Example 4 4.1.

O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine is synthesized as described by Boturyn et al in 2 steps from commercially available materials.1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES12KD are dissolved in 3 mL absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and are added dropwise under nitrogen to a mixture of 2.04 g 15 mmol O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine in 15 mL DMSO. After stirring for 48 h at 65 C. the reaction mixture is added to 160 mL of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone. The precipitated product K is collected by centrifugation redissolved in 40 mL of water and dialysed for 4 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized. The conjugation reaction with oxidised Glyco EPO is described in Example 4 3.1. Boturyn Boudali Constant Defrancq Lhomme 1997 53 5485

Furthermore derivatives could be used wherein the two hydroxylamine groups are separated by any spacer.

Derivatives could be used wherein the amino group and the thio function are separated by any spacer. Furthermore the amino group in the derivatives could be replaced by a hydrazine a hydrazide or a hydroxylamine. The thio function could be protected in the form of e.g. a disulfide or a trityl derivative. However in this case a further deprotection step must be preformed before the conjugation which would release a component being analogous to M.

1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Amino HES12KD E H or I are dissolved in 3 mL absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and are added to a mixture of 139 mg 0.6 mmol SATA in 5 mL DMSO under nitrogen dropwise. After stirring for 24 h at room temperature the reaction mixture is added to 160 mL of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone. The precipitated product N is collected by centrifugation redissolved in 40 mL of water and dialysed for 2 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized.

The deprotection is performed in a 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer containing 25 mM EDTA and 0.5M hydroxylamine pH7.5 for 2 hours at room temperature and the product O is purified by dialysis against a 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.5 containing 1 mM EDTA. The deprotection reaction is performed immediately before the conjugation reaction which is described in Example 4 2.1.

1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Amino HES12KD E H or I are dissolved in 3 mL absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and are dropwise added to a mixture of 187 mg 0.6 mmol SPDP in 5 mL DMSO under nitrogen. After stirring for 24 h at room temperature the reaction mixture is added to 160 mL of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone. The precipitated product P is collected by centrifugation redissolved in 40 mL of water and dialysed for 2 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized.

The deprotection is performed in a solution of 12 mg dithiothreitol DTT per 0.5 mL 100 mM sodium acetate buffer containing 100 mM sodium chloride at pH 4.5 for 30 min at room temperature and the product Q was purified by dialysis against a 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.5 containing 1 mM EDTA. The deprotection reaction is performed immediately before the conjugation reaction which is described in Example 4 2.1.

For the conversion of amino to thiol groups either in free form or protected several reagents are available. After the modification the products could be isolated. Alternatively as accepted for the use of cross linkers they could be directly used for the conjugation reaction preferably after a purification step. For the isolation and storage of thio HES derivatives the synthesis of thio HES derivatives in a protected form may be useful. For this all derivatives being analogous to SATA could be used which have an active ester function and a thioester function separated by any spacer. SATP being a further member of this group is found in table 2 marked with an H . The derivatives being analogous to SPDP could have an active ester function and a disulfide function separated by any spacer. Further members of these groups are found in table 2 marked with an F . Further analogous derivatives could have an active ester function and a thiol function protected as a trityl derivative separated by any spacer.

Reaction of 1 4 diaminobutane with Oxo HES18KD to amino HES18KD ES. Frie Diplomarbeit Fachhochschule Hamburg 1998

1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES18KD were dissolved in 3 mL dry dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and were added dropwise under nitrogen to a mixture of 1.51 mL 15 mmol 1 4 diaminobutane in 15 mL DMSO. After stirring for 19 h at 40 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 mL of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone. The precipitate Amino HES18KD E was collected by centrifugation redissolved in 40 mL of water an dialysed for 4 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized.

1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES18KD were dissolved in 3 mL absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and were added dropwise under nitrogen to a mixture of 0.47 mL 15 mmol hydrazine in 15 mL DMSO. After stirring for 19 h at 40 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 mL of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone. The precipitated product J was collected by centrifugation redissolved in 40 mL of water and dialysed for 2 days against a 0.5 v v triethylamine in water solution and for 2 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized. The conjugation reaction with oxidised Glyco EPO is described in Example 4 2.2.

1.74 g 15 mmol adipic dihydrazide were dissolved in 20 mL absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO at 65 C. and 1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES18KD dissolved in 3 mL absolute DMSO were added dropwise under nitrogen. After stirring for 68 h at 60 C. the reaction mixture was added to 200 mL of water The solution containing L was dialysed for 2 days against a 0.5 v v triethylamine in water solution and for 2 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized. The conjugation reaction with oxidised Glyco EPO is described in Example 4 2.2.

O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine was synthesized as described by Boturyn et al in 2 steps from commercially available materials.1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES18KD were dissolved in 3 mL absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and were added dropwise under nitrogen to a mixture of 2.04 g 15 mmol O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine in 15 mL DMSO. After stirring for 48 h at 65 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 mL of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone. The precipitated product K was collected by centrifugation redissolved in 40 mL of water and dialysed for 4 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized. The conjugation reaction with oxidised Glyco EPO is described in Example 4 3.1. Boturyn Boudali Constant Defrancq Lhomme 1997 53 5485

1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES18KD were dissolved in 3 mL absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and were added to a mixture of 1.16 g 15 mmol cysteamine in 15 mL DMSO under nitrogen dropwise. After stirring for 24 h at 40 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 mL of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone. The precipitated product M was collected by centrifugation redissolved in 40 mL of water and dialysed for 2 days against a 0.5 v v triethylamine in water solution and for 2 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized. The conjugation reaction with oxidised Glyco EPO is described in Example 4 2.1.

Conjugation of ThioEPO to Amino HES12KD E H or I with a Cross Linker Containing a NHS Active Ester and an Iodoacetamide Group e.g. SIA.Cumber Forrester Foxwell Ross Thorpe 1985 112 207

100 L SIA solution is added to 400 L of the aminoHES12KD E solution and is allowed to react with agitation for 0.5 hours at room temperature. The excess crosslinker is removed by centrifuging the sample at 14000 g for 60 minutes using a microconcentrator. After centrifuging the sample is brought up to its original volume in borate buffer and this process is repeated two more times. The residual solution is added to 1 mL of ThioEPO solution and the reaction mixture is incubated for 16 hour at room temperature. Reactivity of the excess iodoacetamide is quenched at the end of the incubation period by the addition of cysteine to a final concentration of 10 mM. The reaction mixture is applied to a desalting column equilibrated with PBS buffer and the protein content of the fractions are monitored with a Coomassie protein assay reagent. All fractions containing the protein conjugate are pooled and the conjugate was obtained by lyophylisation after dialysis against water over night.

In this reaction all cross linkers could be used which have a succinimide or a sulfosuccinimide function and a iodoacetamide function separated by a spacer. Further examples are found in table 2. They are marked with a C and are available from Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany.

Conjugation of ThioEPO 1 to SH reactiveHES12KD Bromoacetamide D2 F2 or Iodoacetamide D3.de Valasco Merkus Anderton Verheul Lizzio Van der Zee van Eden Hoffmann Verhoef Snippe 1995 63 961

1 mL SH reactiveHES12KD bromoacetamide D2 solution and 1 mL of ThioEPO solution are combined and the reaction mixture is incubated for 48 hours at room temperature. Reactivity of the excess bromoacetamide is quenched at the end of the incubation period by the addition of cysteine to a final concentration of 10 mM. The reaction mixture is applied to a desalting column equilibrated with PBS buffer. The protein content of the fractions are monitored with a Coomassie protein assay reagent all fractions containing the protein conjugate are pooled and the conjugate is obtained by lyophylisation after dialysis against water over night.

Instead of the isolation of the SH reactive HES12KD bromoacetamid D2 amino HES12KD E H I could be linked with a cross linker via a succinimide and a bromoacetamide function see 1.1 above . SBAP is a member of this group of cross linkers and is found in table 2 marked with a D .

Conjugation of ThioEPO to HES12KD with a Cross Linker Containing a Hydrazide and a Maleimide Functional Group e.g. MCH.

MCH solution is added to 400 L of the HES12KD solution to a final concentration of 1 mM and is allowed to react with agitation for 2 hours at room temperature. The excess cross linker is removed by centrifuging the sample at 14000 g for 60 minutes using a microconcentrator. After centrifuging the sample is brought up to its original volume in phosphate NaCl buffer and this process is repeated two more times. To the MCH modified HES12KD 0.5 mL of ThioEPO solution is added and the reaction mixture is incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. Reactivity of the excess maleimides is quenched at the end of the incubation period by the addition of cysteine to a final concentration of 10 mM. The reaction mixture is applied to Sephadex G 200 1.5 45 cm equilibrated with PBS buffer and 1 mL fractions are collected. The protein content of the fractions is monitored with a Coomassie protein assay reagent. All fractions containing the protein conjugate are pooled and the conjugate was obtained by lyophylisation after dialysis against water over night.

The hydrazone adduct is slightly less stable at extremes of pH. For applications that may involve treatment at low pH we reduced the hydrazone by treatment with 30 mM sodium cyanoborohydride in PBS buffer to a hydrazine. For most applications this extra step is unnecessary.

1 mL SH reactive HES12KD B solution and 1 mL of ThioEPO 1 solution are combined and the reaction mixture is incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. Reactivity of the excess maleimides is quenched at the end of the incubation period by the addition of cysteine to a final concentration of 10 mM. The reaction mixture is applied to Sephadex G 200 1.5 45 cm equilibrated with PBS buffer and 1 mL fractions are collected. The protein content of the fractions is monitored with a Coomassie protein assay reagent. All fractions containing the protein conjugate are pooled and the conjugate is obtained by lyophylisation after dialysis against water over night.

Conjugation of ThioEPO to aminoHES12KD E H I with a Cross Linker Containing a NHS Active Ester and a Maleimide Group e.g. SMCC

To 50 L SMCC solution 400 L of the aminoHES12KD E solution is added and the reaction mixture is allowed to react with agitation for 80 min at room temperature and for 10 min at 46 C. The excess crosslinker is removed by centrifugation of the reaction mixture through a microconcentrator at 14000 g for 60 min. The volume is brought up to 450 L with PBS buffer and the process is repeated two more times. After the last centrifugation the residual solution is brought up to 450 L with PBS and is added to 1 mL of ThioEPO solution and the reaction mixture are incubated for 16 hours at room temperature. Reactivity of the excess maleimide is quenched at the end of the incubation period by the addition of cysteine to a final concentration of 10 mM. The reaction mixture is applied to a desalting column equilibrated with PBS buffer. The protein content of the fractions are monitored with a Coomassie protein assay reagent all fractions containing the protein conjugate are pooled and the conjugate is obtained by lyophylisation after dialysis against water over night.

In this reaction all cross linkers could be used which have a succinimide or a sulfosuccinimide function and a maleimide function separated by a spacer. Further examples for this group of molecules available from Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany are found in table 2 marked with an E . There is a further group of cross linkers which have instead of a maleimide function an activated disulfide function. These cross linkers could also be used for the conjugation. However the disulfide bond of the conjugate is cleavable under reductive conditions. Members of this group are marked in table 2 with a F . A third group of cross linkers uses instead of a maleimide function a vinylsulfone function as a SH reactive group. A member of this group SVSB is marked in table 2 with a G .

B. Sodium meta periodate solution 10 mM or 100 mM sodium periodate in acetate buffer prepared fresh. Keep in dark. Using these solutions the final concentration of sodium periodate in the oxidation mixture is 1 mM or 10 mM respectively.

To 1 mL of cold Glyco EPO solution 0.1 mL of cold sodium meta periodate solution were added and the oxidation reaction was allowed to proceed for 1 hour in the dark. If the Glyco EPO to be oxidized contained sialic acid residues then the oxidation conditions were 1 mM sodium periodate 0 C. Otherwise 10 mM sodium periodate at room temperature was used. To stop the oxidation glycerol was added to a final concentration of 15 mM and incubated for 5 minutes at 0 C. The excess reagents and byproducts were remove by centrifuging of the product at 14000 g for 60 minutes using a microconcentrator. After centrifuging sample was brought up to its original volume in the buffer used in the next modification step e.g. in the acetate buffer. This process was repeated two more times.

The enzymatic oxidation of EPO is described elsewhere Chamow et al. 1992 J. Biol. Chem. 267 15916 15922 .

Conjugation of oxidised Glyco EPO to Thio HES12KD M O or Q with a Cross linker containing a hydrazide and a maleimide functional group e.g. MCH Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany .

MCH stock solution is added to 1 mL of oxidized Glyco EPO to a final concentration of 1 mM and is allowed to react with agitation for 2 hours at room temperature. The excess crosslinker is removed by centrifuging the sample at 14000 g for 60 minutes using a microconcentrator. After centrifuging the sample is brought up to its original volume in phosphate NaCl buffer and this process was repeated two more times. To the MCH modified Glyco EPO 1 mL of Thio HES12KD M 0 or Q solution is added and the reaction mixture is incubated for 16 hours at room temperature. Reactivity of the excess maleimides is quenched at the end of the incubation period by the addition of cysteine. The reaction mixture is applied to Sephadex G 200 1.5 45 cm equilibrated with PBS and 1 mL fractions are collected. The protein content of the fractions is monitored with a Coomassie protein assay reagent all fractions containing the protein conjugate are pooled and the conjugate is obtained by lyophylisation after dialysis against water over night.

The hydrazone adduct is slightly less stable at extremes of pH. For applications that may involve treatment at low pH we reduced the hydrazone by treatment with 30 mM sodium cyanoborohydride in PBS buffer to a hydrazine. For most applications this extra step was unnecessary.

1 mL of Hydrazido HES12KD L or J solution and 1 mL of oxidized Glyco EPO solution are combined and the reaction mixture is allowed to react with agitation for 16 hours at room temperature. The reaction mixture is applied to Sephadex G 200 1.5 45 cm equilibrated with PBS and 1 mL fractions are collected. The protein content of the fractions are monitored with a Coomassie protein assay reagent all fractions containing the protein conjugate are pooled and the conjugate is obtained by lyophylisation after dialysis against water over night.

The hydrazone adduct is slightly less stable at extremes of pH. For applications that may involve treatment at low pH the hydrazone may be reduced by treatment with 30 mM sodium cyanoborohydride in PBS buffer to a hydrazine. For most applications this extra step is unnecessary.

To 100 l of a 0.5 mg ml solution of oxidized EPO in a buffer containing 0.1 M sodium acetate and 150 mM sodium chloride at a pH of 5.2 50 L of a 20 mg ml solution of HES18 0.5 L dissolved in a 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 synthesised corresponding to Example 2 2.1b were added and the mixture was incubated at 22 C. for 14.5 h. The crude reaction mixture was analysed by SDS gel electrophoresis and stained with Coomassie. The result of the conjugation is shown in . The observed molecular shift demonstrates that the conjugation was successful. The smear results from the heterogeneity of HES. demonstrates that HES is conjugated to a carbohydrate moiety of a carbohydrate side chain.

1 mL of Hydroxylamino HES12KD K solution and 1 mL of oxidized Glyco EPO solution are combined and the reaction mixture is allowed to react with agitation for 16 hours at room temperature. The reaction mixture is applied to Sephadex G 200 1.5 45 cm equilibrated with PBS and 1 mL fractions were collected. The protein content of the fractions are monitored with a Coomassie protein assay reagent all fractions containing the protein conjugate are pooled and the conjugate is obtained by lyophylisation after dialysis against water over night.

To 100 l of a 0.5 mg ml solution of oxidized EPO in a buffer containing 0.1 M sodium acetate and 150 mM sodium chloride at a pH of 5.2 50 L of a 20 mg ml solution of HES18 0.5 K dissolved in a 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 synthesised corresponding to Example 2. 4 were added and the mixture was incubated at 22 C. for 14.5 h. The crude reaction mixture was analysed by SDS gel electrophoresis and stained with Coomassie. The result of the conjugation is shown in . The observed molecular shift demonstrates that the conjugation was successful. The smear results from the heterogeneity of HES. demonstrates that HES is conjugated to a carbohydrate moiety of a carbohydrate side chain.

Recombinant EPO or partially desialylated EPO forms generated by limited mild acid hydrolysis were incubated with galactose oxidase in the presence of catalase at 37 C. from 30 min 4 hours at 37 C. in 0.05 M Na phosphate buffer pH 7.0. Progress of the reaction was monitored by removal of 50 g aliquots of the EPO and subsequent treatment of the protein with polypeptide N glycanase.

Liberated N linked oligosaccharides monitored by SDS PAGE detection of the de N glycosylated polypeptide were subjected to HPAEC PAD mapping as described Grabenhorst et al. 1999 Nimtz et al. 1993 1994 Schlenke et al. 1999 before and after removal of sialic acids. Quantitation of oxidised galactose residues in individual EPO oligosaccharides was performed by the typical shift observed in HPAEC PAD and was also verified by MALDI TOF MS of the oligosaccharide mixtures.

Separation of HAS modified EPO forms from nonreacted EPO and HAS precursor molecules was achieved by gel filtration using e.g. Ultrogel AcA 44 54 or similar gel filtration media. Alternatively nonreacted HAS was removed by immuno affinity isolation of EPO on a 4 mL column containing a monoclonal antibody coupled to Affigel BioRad and subsequent separation of unmodified EPO by gel filtration e.g. using a matrix enabling the separation of globular proteins of a relative molecular mass between 20 kDa and 200 kDa .

HAS modified EPOs were identified by SDS PAGE analysis using 12.5 or 10 acrylamide gels through detection of their higher molecular weight compared to unmodified EPO upon staining of gels with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The higher molecular weight of HAS modified EPO polypeptides was also identified by Western Blot analysis of samples using a polyclonal antibody raised against recombinant human EPO.

N glycan modification of EPO forms was demonstrated by their successful removal from the EPO protein with polypeptide N glycanase recombinant N glycosidase from Roche Germany employing 25 units mg EPO protein at 37 C. for 16 hours analysis by SDS PAGE resulted in a typical shift of the EPO protein to a migration position of the N glycosidase treated unmodified EPO of approximately 20 KDa.

Modification of the single desialylated and galactose oxidase treated EPO O glycan at Ser 126 was demonstrated by SDS PAGE migration of the de N glycosylated product by detection of its migration position compared to nonreacted de N glycosylated EPO. If required modified EPO was fractionated by RP HPLC on a C8 phase before SDS PAGE analysis. HAS O glycan modification of EPO was also analysed by elimination of the O glycan and detection of the de O glycosylated form of EPO in Western blots using a polyclonal antibody raised against recombinant human EPO.

EPO forms where quantitated by UV measurements as described in Ph. Eur 2000 Erythropoietini solutio concentrata 1316 780 785 and compared to the international BRP reference EPO standard. Alternatively EPO concentrations were determined by a RP HPLC assay using a RP C4 column and absorption at 254 nm employing 20 40 80 and 120 g of the BRP standard EPO reference preparation for calibration.

Purified HES modified EPO is tested for activity using the erythropoietin bioactivity assay as described by Krystal Krystal 1984 Exp. Heamatol. 11 649 660 .

Anemia is induced in NMRI mice by treatment with phenylhydrazine hydrochloride and spleen cells are collected and used as described in Fibi et al. 1991 Blood 77 1203 ff. . Dilutions of EPO are incubated with 3 10cells well in 96 well microtiter plates. After 24 hours at 37 C. in a humidified atmosphere 5 CO cells are labeled for 4 hours with 1 Ci of H thymidine per well. Incorporated radioactivity is determined by liquid scintillation counting. The International reference EPO standard BRP standard is used for comparison.

Alternatively EPO bioactivity may be measured by an in vitro assay using the EPO sensitive cell line TF 1 Kitamura et. al. J. cell Phys. 140. 323 334 . Exponentially growing cells are washed free of growth factors and are incubated in the presence of serial dilutions of the EPO for further 48 hours. Proliferation of the cells is assessed by using the MTT reduction assay as described by Mosmann Mosmann 1983 J. Immunol. Methods 65 55 63 .

In vivo activity determinations are performed in normocythemic mice by measuring the increase of reticulocytes after 4 days after animals received the foreseen dose of EPO or modified EPO forms. Assays are performed using the BRP EPO standard which is calibrated against the WHO EPO standard in the polycythemic mouse assay. EPO samples are diluted in phosphate buffered saline containing 1 mg ml of bovine serum albumin Sigma .

0.5 ml of the EPO test solution in Dulbecco s buffered saline corresponding to an EPO protein equivalent of a 100 80 40 or 20 IU ml of the BRP standard EPO are infected subcutaneously per animal. Blood samples are taken after 4 days after injection and reticulocytes are stained with acridine orange quantitation of reticulocytes is performed by flow cytometry by counting a total of 30 000 blood cells within 5 hours after the blood sample was taken see Ph. Eur 2000 Erythropoietini solutio concentrata 1316 pages 780 785 and European Pharmacopoeia 1996 2000 attachment 2002 .

Rabbits are injected intravenously with specified amounts of unmodified or HAS modified EPO forms. Blood samples are obtained at specified times and serum is prepared. Serum erythropoietin levels are determined by in vitro bioassay or by an EPO specific commercial ELISA.

In mice Each animal receive 300 IU EPO kg subcutaneously. Seven days after the post treatment hematocrit of each animal is determined. A substantial increase in hematocrit is observed in all animals treated with modified EPO.

In rabbits Rabbits are treated with a single dose of unmodified or HAS modified EPO corresponding to 200 or up to 800 ng kg body weight. After 2 6 16 24 and 48 hours blood samples are analyzed by using a commercial EPO specific ELISA for determination of plasma concentrations. Mean plasma EPO concentrations are determined and the average initial half lives phase and the terminal half lives phase are calculated from the ELISA values as described Zettlmissl et al. 1989 J. Biol. Chem. 264 21153 21159 .

Sytkowski Lunn Risinger and Davis 1999 An Erythropoietin Fusion Protein Comprised of Identical Repeating Domains Exhibits Enhanced Biological Properties J. Biol. Chem. 274 24773 24778.

Modified IL2 is recovered by gel filtration on Ultrogel AcA 54. Aliquots of corresponding fraction are sterile filtrated and IL2 bioactivity is determined by using the IL2 dependent murine CTLL 2 cell line Gillis Ferm On and Smith 1978 J. Immunol. 120 2027 2032 . Activity is related to the international reference IL2 standard preparation.

In the context of the present invention the degree of substitution denoted as DS relates to the molar substitution as described above see also Sommermeyer et al. 1987 Krankenhauspharmazie 8 8 271 278 in particular p. 273 . Throughout the invention the DS of the HES18 04 when measured according to Sommermeyer et al. 1987 Krankenhauspharmazie 8 8 271 278 was 0.5.

0.96 g of HES18 0.4 MW 18 000 D DS 0.4 were dissolved in 8 ml aqueous 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 and 8 mmol carbohydrazide Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D were added. After stirring for 18 h at 25 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 ml of a cold 1 1 mixture of acetone and ethanol v v . The precipitated product was collected by centrifugation re dissolved in 40 ml water and dialysed for 3 d against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn D and lyophilized.

0.96 g of HES18 0.4 MW 18 000 D DS 0.4 were dissolved in 8 ml aqueous 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 and 8 mmol adepic dihydrazide Lancaster Synthesis Frankfurt Main D were added. After stirring for 18 h at 25 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 ml of a cold 1 1 mixture of acetone and ethanol v v . The precipitated product was collected by centrifugation re dissolved in 40 ml water and dialysed for 3 d against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn D and lyophilized.

0.96 g of HES18 0.4 MW 18 000 D DS 0.4 were dissolved in 8 ml aqueous 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 and 8 mmol 1 4 phenylene bis 3 thiosemicarbazide Lancaster Synthesis Frankfurt Main D were added. After stirring for 18 h at 25 C. 8 ml water was added to the reaction mixture and the suspension was centrifugated for 15 min at 4 500 rpm. The clear supernatant was decanted and subsequently added to 160 ml of a cold 1 1 mixture of acetone and ethanol v v . The precipitated product was collected by centrifugation re dissolved in 40 ml water and centrifugated for 15 min at 4 500 rpm. The clear supernatant was dialysed for 3 d against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn D and lyophilized.

O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine was synthesized as described in Boturyn et al. Tetrahedron 53 1997 p. 5485 5492 in 2 steps from commercially available materials.

0.96 g of HES18 0.4 MW 18 000 D DS 0.4 were dissolved in 8 ml aqueous 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 and 8 mmol O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine were added. After stirring for 18 h at 25 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 ml of a cold 1 1 mixture of acetone and ethanol v v . The precipitated product was collected by centrifugation re dissolved in 40 ml water and dialysed for 3 d against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn D and lyophilized.

0.12 mmol Oxo HES 10 0.4 MW 10 000 D DS 0.4 prepared according to DE 196 28 705 A1 were dissolved in 3 ml absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and added dropwise under nitrogen to a mixture of 15 mmol of carbohydrazide Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in 15 ml. DMSO. After stirring for 88 h at 65 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 ml of a cold 1 1 mixture of acetone and ethanol v v . The precipitate was collected by centrifugation and was dialysed for 4 d against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn D and lyophilized.

0.12 mmol Oxo HES 10 0.4 MW 10 000 D DS 0.4 prepared according to DE 196 28 705 A1 were dissolved in 3 ml absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and added dropwise under nitrogen to a mixture of 15 mmol of 1 4 phenylene bis 3 thiosemicarbazide Lancaster Synthesis Frankfurt Main D in 15 ml DMSO. After stirring for 88 h at 65 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 ml of a cold 1 1 mixture of acetone and ethanol v v . The precipitate was collected by centrifugation and was dialysed for 4 d against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn D and lyophilized.

1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES 10 0.4 MW 10 000 D DS 0.4 prepared according to DE 196 28 705 A1 were dissolved in 3 ml absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and were added dropwise under nitrogen to a mixture of 0.47 ml 15 mmol hydrazine in 15 ml DMSO. After stirring for 19 h at 40 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 ml of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone v v . The precipitated product was collected by centrifugation redissolved in 40 mL of water and dialysed for 2 days against a 0.5 v v triethylamine in water solution and for 2 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized.

O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine was synthesized as described by Boturyn et al in 2 steps from commercially available materials Boturyn Boudali Constant Defrancq Lhomme 1997 53 5485 .

1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES 10 0.4 MW 10 000 D DS 0.4 prepared according to DE 196 28 705 A1 were dissolved in 3 ml absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and were added dropwise under nitrogen to a mixture of 2.04 g 15 mmol O 2 2 aminooxy ethoxy ethyl hydroxylamine in 15 ml DMSO. After stirring for 48 h at 65 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 ml of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone v v . The precipitated product was collected by centrifugation redissolved in 40 ml of water and dialysed for 4 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized.

1.74 g 15 mmol adepic dihydrazide were dissolved in 20 ml absolute dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO at 65 C. and 1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES 10 0.4 MW 10 000 D DS 0.4 prepared according to DE 196 28 705 A1 dissolved in 3 ml absolute DMSO were added dropwise under nitrogen. After stirring for 68 h at 60 C. the reaction mixture was added to 200 ml of water The solution containing the reaction product was dialysed for 2 days against a 0.5 v v triethylamine in water solution and for 2 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized.

1.44 g 0.12 mmol of Oxo HES 10 0.4 MW 10 000 D DS 0.4 prepared according to DE 196 28 705 A1 were dissolved in 3 ml dry dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO and were added dropwise under nitrogen to a mixture of 1.51 ml 15 mmol 1 4 diaminobutane in 15 ml DMSO. After stirring for 19 h at 40 C. the reaction mixture was added to 160 ml of a 1 1 mixture of ethanol and acetone v v . The precipitate Amino HES10KD 0.4 was collected by centrifugation re dissolved in 40 ml of water and dialysed for 4 days against water SnakeSkin dialysis tubing 3.5 KD cut off Perbio Science Deutschland GmbH Bonn Germany and lyophilized.

Oxidized erythropoietin was produced as described in Example 20. As oxidized erythropoietin EPO GT 1 A as described in Example 20.11 c was used EPO GT 1 without acid hydroylsis treated with mild periodate oxidation .

Oxidized EPO 1.055 g l in 20 mM PBS buffer was adjusted to pH 5.3 with 5 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2. To 19 l of the EPO solution 18 l of a solution of the HES derivate as produced according to example 14.1 MW 18 kD 18.7 g l in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 was added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analyzed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

Oxidized EPO 1.055 g l in 20 mM PBS buffer was adjusted to pH 5.3 with 5 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2. To 19 l of the EPO solution 18 l of a solution of the HES derivate as produced according to example 14.3 MW 18 kD 18.7 g l in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 was added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analyzed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen.

Oxidized EPO 1.055 g l in 20 mM PBS buffer was adjusted to pH 5.3 with 5 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2. To 19 l of the EPO solution 18 l of a solution of the HES derivate as produced according to example 14.4 MW 18 kD 18.7 g l in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 was added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analyzed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

Oxidized EPO 1.055 g l in 20 mM PBS buffer was adjusted to pH 5.3 with 5 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2. To 19 l of the EPO solution 18 l of a solution of the HES derivate as produced according to example 15.1 MW 10 kD 18.7 g l in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 was added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analyzed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

Oxidized EPO 1.055 g l in 20 mM PBS buffer was adjusted to pH 5.3 with 5 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2. To 19 l of the EPO solution 18 l of a solution of the HES derivate as produced according to example 15.1 MW 10 kD 18.7 g l in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.2 was added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analyzed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

241.5 g erythropoietin EPO GT 1 see Example 20 in 500 l of a 0.1 M sodium borate buffer 5 mM EDTA 10 mM DTT Lancaster Morcambe UK pH 8.3 were incubated for 1 h at 37 C. The DTT was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 10 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm subsequent washing 3 times with the borate buffer and twice with a phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 .

To 50 nmol HES derivate as produced according to example 14.1 and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 mmol HES derivate as produced according to example 14.2 and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mm EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 nmol HES derivate as produced according to example 14.3 and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 nmol HES derivate as produced according to example 14.4 and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 nmol HES derivate as produced according to example 13.1 at incubation conditions of 80 C. and 17 h as well as of 25 C. and 3 d and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 mmol HES derivate as produced according to example 13.3 at incubation conditions of 80 C. and 17 h as well as of 25 C. and 3 d and dissolved in 200 l of a 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO were added. The clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. Remaining AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover D at 13 000 rpm washing 4 times and 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g of ThioEPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 nmol HES derivate produced according to Example 15.1 and dissolved in 200 l phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO was added and the clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. The AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover Germany at 13 000 rpm and washing 4 times for 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g Thio EPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 mmol HES derivate produced according to Example 15.2 and dissolved in 200 l phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO was added and the clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. The AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover Germany at 13 000 rpm and washing 4 times for 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g Thio EPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 mmol HES derivate produced according to Example 15.3 and dissolved in 200 l phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mmol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO was added and the clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. The AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover Germany at 13 000 rpm and washing 4 times for 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g Thio EPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 nmol HES derivate produced according to Example 15.4 and dissolved in 200 l phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO was added and the clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. The AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover Germany at 13 000 rpm and washing 4 times for 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g Thio EPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 mmol HES derivate produced according to Example 15.5 and dissolved in 200 l phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO was added and the clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. The AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover Germany at 13 000 rpm and washing 4 times for 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g Thio EPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

To 50 mmol HES derivate produced according to Example 15.6 and dissolved in 200 l phosphate buffer 0.1 M 9.15 M NaCl 50 mM EDTA pH 7.2 10 l of a solution of 2.5 mol AMAS Sigma Aldrich Taufkirchen D in DMSO was added and the clear solution was incubated for 80 min at 25 C. and 20 min at 40 C. The AMAS was removed by centrifugal filtration with a VIVASPIN 0.5 ml concentrator 5 KD MWCO VIVASCIENCE Hannover Germany at 13 000 rpm and washing 4 times for 30 min with the phosphate buffer.

To the residual solution 15 g Thio EPO as produced according to example 18 1 g l in phosphate buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 25 C. After lyophilisation the crude product was analysed by SDS Page with NuPAGE 10 Bis Tris Gels MOPS buffer Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. USA as described in the instructions given by Invitrogen. The gel is stained with Roti Blue Coomassie staining reagent Roth Karlsruhe D overnight.

The experimental result is shown in . A successful conjugation is indicated by the migration of the protein band to higher molecular weights. The increased bandwidth is due to the molecular weight distribution of the HES derivatives used and the number of HES derivatives linked to the protein.

HES EPO conjugates were synthesized by coupling of HES derivatives average mw of 18 000 Dalton hydroxyethyl substitution degree of 0.4 to the partially mild periodate oxidized sialic acid residues on the oligosaccharide chains of recombinant human EPO. Based on carbohydrate structural analysis the modifications introduced did not affect the structural integrity of the core oligosaccharide chains since MALDI TOF MS of the mild acid treated HES modified glycans revealed intact neutral N acetyllactosamine type chains which were indistinguishable from those observed in unmodified EPO product. The results obtained indicate that at least 3 modified HES residues are attached per EPO molecule in the case of the EPO preparation which was subjected to modification without prior partial sialic acid removal. An EPO variant lacking about 50 of the sialic acid residues of the former protein showed a similar apparent high molecular weight mobility in SDS PAGE 60 110 KDa vs 40 KDa for the BRP EPO standard . The HES modified EPO is stable under standard ion exchange chromatography conditions at room temperature at pH 3 10.

The EPO bioassay in the normocythaemic mouse system indicates that the HES modified EPO has 2.5 3.0 fold higher specific activity IU mg in this assay when compared to the International BRP EPO reference standard based on protein determination using the UV absorption value from the European Pharmacopeia and an RP HPLC EPO protein determination method calibrated against the BRP EPO standard preparation.

Samples were incubated with 25 units according to manufacturer s specification Roche Diagnostics Germany of recombinant PNGase F over night at 37 C. Complete digestion was monitored by the specific mobility shift of the protein in SDS PAGE. The released N glycans were separated from the polypeptide by addition of 3 volumes of cold 100 ethanol and incubation at 20 C. for at least 2 hours Schroeter S et al. 1999 . The precipitated protein was removed by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 4 C. at 13000 rpm. The pellet was then subjected to two additional washes with 500 l of ice cold 75 ethanol. The oligosaccharides in the pooled supernatants were dried in a vacuum centrifuge Speed Vac concentrator Savant Instruments Inc. USA . The glycan samples were desalted using Hypercarb cartridges 25 mg or 100 mg of HyperCarb as follows prior to use the columns were washed with 3 500 l of 80 acetonitrile v v in 0.1 TFA followed by washes with 3 500 l of water. The samples were diluted with water to a final volume of 300 l 600 l before loading onto the cartridge which then was rigorously washed with water. Oligosaccharides were eluted with 1.2 ml 25 mg cartridges 1.8 ml in the case of 100 mg cartridges 25 acetonitrile in water containing 0.1 trifluoroacetic acid v v . The eluted oligosaccharides were neutralized with 2 M NHOH and were dried in a Speed Vac concentrator. In some cases desalting of N glycosidase released oligosaccharides was performed by adsorption of the digestion mixture from samples 

 b Analysis of Oligosaccharides by Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry MALDI TOF TOF MS 

A Bruker ULTRAFLEX time of flight TOF TOF instrument was used native desialylated oligosaccharides were analyzed using 2 5 dihydroxybenzoic acid as UV absorbing material in the positive as well as in the negative ion mode using the reflectron in both cases. For MS MS analyses selected parent ions were subjected to laser induced dissociation LID and the resulting fragment ions separated by the second TOF stage LIFT of the instrument. Sample solutions of 1 l and an approximate concentration of 1 10 pmol lwere mixed with equal amounts of the respective matrix. This mixture was spotted onto a stainless steel target and dried at room temperature before analysis.

EPO was expressed from recombinant CHO cells as described Mueller P P et al. 1999 Dorner A J et al. 1984 and the preparations were characterized according to methods described in the Eur. Phar. 4 01 2002 1316 Erythropoietin concentrated solution . The final product had a sialic acid content of 12 nMol 1.5 nMol per nMol of protein. The structures of N linked oligosaccharides were determined by HPAEC PAD and by MALDI TOF MS as described Nimtz et al. 1999 Grabenhorst 1999 . The EPO preparations that were obtained contained di tri and tetrasialylated oligosaccharides 2 12 15 28 and 60 80 respectively sulphated and pentasialylated chains were present in small amounts . The overall glycosylation characteristics of EPO preparations were similar to that of the international BRP EPO standard preparation.

The isoelectric focusing pattern of the recombinant EPO was comparable to that of the international BRP Reference EPO standard preparation showing the corresponding isoforms. 25 of the EPO protein lacked O glycosylation at Serof the polypeptide chain.

EPO GT 1 protein 2.84 mg ml was heated to 80 C. in 20 mM Na phosphate buffer pH 7.0 and then 100 l of 1 N HSOwas added per 1 ml of the EPO solution incubation was continued for 5 min 10 min and 60 min respectively yielding EPO preparations of different degree of sialylation. Quantitation of oligosaccharides with 0 4 sialic acids was performed after liberation of oligosaccharides with polypeptide N glycosidase and isolation of N linked chains was performed by desalting using Hypercarb cartridges 25 mg HyperSep Hypercarb Thermo Hypersil Keystone UK . EPO preparations were neutralized by addition of 1 N NaOH and were frozen in liquid Nand were stored at 20 C. until further use.

To 10 mg of untreated or mild acid treated EPO dissolved in 3.5 ml of 20 mM Na phosphate buffer pH 7.0 was added 1.5 ml of 0.1 M Na acetate buffer pH 5.5 and the mixture was cooled to 0 C. in an ice bath 500 l of 10 mM Na periodate was added and the reaction mixture was kept in the dark for 60 min at 0 C. Then 10 l of glycerol was added and incubation was continued for further 10 min in the dark. The partially oxidized EPO forms were separated from reagents by desalting using VIVASPIN concentrators 10 000. MWCO PES Vivascience AG Hannover Germany according to manufacturer s recommendation at 3000 rpm in a laboratory centrifuge equipped with a fixed angle rotor. After freezing in liquid nitrogen the EPO preparations were stored in a final volume of 4 ml at 20 C.

100 g aliquots of the partially oxidized EPO preparation were subjected to N glycosidase treatment and oligosaccharides were isolated using Hypercarb cartridges as described. Oligosaccharides were desialylated by mild acid treatment and were analyzed by HPAEC PAD and their retention times were compared to those of authentic standard oligosaccharides as described Nimtz et al. 1990 and 1993 .

5 mg of EPO GT 1 was incubated in 5 ml of 0.1 M Tris HCl buffer pH 8.1 in the presence of 30 mM dithioerythreitol DTT at 37 C. for 60 minutes removal of DTT was achieved by using a Vivaspin concentrator at 4 C. 4 cycles of buffer exchange. The final reduced EPO preparation was frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at 20 C. in 50 mM Na acetate buffer pH 5.5.

Quantitative determination of EPO protein was performed by measuring UV absorption at 280 nm according to the Eur. Phar. European Pharmacopeia 4 Monography 01 2002 1316 erythropoietin concentrated solution in a cuvette with 1 cm path length. In addition EPO was quantitated by applying a RP HPLC method using a RP C4 column Vydac Protein C4 Cat. 214TP5410 Grace Vydac Calif. US the HPLC method was calibrated using the erythropoietin BRP 1 reference standard European Pharmacopeia Conseil de l Europe B.P. 907 F67029 Strasbourg Cedex 1 .

4.485 mg of completely desialylated EPO was incubated in 20 mM Na phosphate buffer pH 6.8 in the presence of 16 l catalase 6214 units 200 ml and 80 l of galactose oxidase 2250 units ml from Sigma Aldrich Steinheim Germany incubation at 37 C. was over night 2 times 20 l of galactose oxidase was added after 4 hours and after 8 hours after starting of the incubation.

Purification of EPO from Incubations of Periodate or Galactose Oxidase Oxidized EPO Protein Preparations with Activated HES

Purification of EPO samples removal of unreacted HES derivatives was carried out at room temperature. The EPO incubation mixtures approximately 5 mg of EPO protein were diluted 1 10 with buffer A 20 mM N morpholine propane sulfonic acid MOPS NaOH in HO bidest pH 8.0 and were applied to a column containing 3 ml Q Sepharose HP Pharmacia Code no. 17 1014 03 Lot no. 220211 equilibrated with 10 column volumes CV of buffer A by using a flow rate of 0.5 ml min. The column was washed with 6 8 CV of buffer A flow rate 0.8 ml min and elution was performed by using buffer B 20 mM morpholine ethane sulfonic acid MES NaOH 0.5 M NaCl in HO bidest pH 6.5 at a flow rate of 0.5 ml min. EPO was detected by UV absorption at 280 nm and eluted in about 6 ml. The column was regenerated by using 3 CV of buffer C 20 mM MES 1.5 M NaCl in HO adjusted to pH 6.5 and was re equilibrated by using 10 CV of buffer A flow rate 0.7 ml min .

Buffer exchange of EPO eluates obtained from the Q Sepharose step was performed using Vivaspin concentrators and phosphate buffered saline PBS with each 3 centrifugation cycles per sample samples were adjusted to 2 ml with PBS and were stored at 20 C.

Purified native and desialylated oligosaccharides were analyzed by high pH anion exchange HPAE chromatography using a Dionex BioLC system Dionex USA equipped with a CarboPac PA1 column 0.4 25 cm in combination with a pulsed amperometric detector PAD Schr ter et al. 1999 Nimtz et al. 1999 . Detector potentials E and pulse durations T were E1 50 mV T1 480 ms E2 500 mV T2 120 ms E3 500 mV T3 60 ms and the output range was 500 1500 nA. The oligosaccharides were then injected onto the CarboPac PA1 column which was equilibrated with 100 solvent A. For desialylated oligosaccharides elution flow rate 1 ml min was performed by applying a linear gradient 0 20 of solvent B over a period of 40 min followed by a linear increase from 20 100 solvent B over 5 min. Solvent A was 0.2 M NaOH in bidistilled HO solvent B consisted of 0.6 M NaOAc in solvent A. For native oligosaccharides the column was equilibrated with 100 solvent C 0.1 M NaOH in bidistilled HO and elution flow rate 1 ml min was performed by applying a linear gradient 0 35 of solvent D over a period of 48 min followed by a linear increase from 35 100 solvent D over 10 min. Solvent D consisted of 0.6 M NaAc in solvent C.

Monosaccharides were analyzed as the corresponding methyl glycosides after methanolysis N reacetylation and trimethylsilylation by GC MS Chaplin M. F. 1982 A rapid and sensitive method for the analysis of carbohydrate. 123 336 341 . The analyses were performed on a Finnigan GCQ ion trap mass spectrometer Finnigan MAT corp. San Jose Calif. running in the positive ion EI mode equipped with a 30 m DB5 capillary column. Temperature program 2 min isotherm at 80 C. then 10 degrees minto 300 C.

Monosaccharides were identified by their retention time and characteristic fragmentation pattern. The uncorrected results of electronic peak integration were used for quantification. Monosaccharides yielding more than one peak due to anomericity and or the presence of furanoid and pyranoid forms were quantified by adding all major peaks. 0.5 g of myo inositol was used as an internal standard compound.

EPO GT 1 preparations subjected to mild acid treatment for 5 10 or 60 min. were analyzed by SDS PAGE before and after liberation of N linked oligosaccharides by incubation with N glycosidase as shown in . N linked oligosaccharides were subjected to HPAEC PAD oligosaccharide mapping . The untreated EPO GT 1 contained 90 of N linked oligosaccharides with 3 or 4 sialic acid residues whereas after 5 min. of incubation in the presence of mild acid 

SDS PAGE mobility of mild periodate treated EPO forms that were previously subjected to a 5 and 10 minute treatment with acid or were not treated are compared in . The conditions used for periodate oxidation of sialic acids did not change the SDS PAGE pattern of EPO preparations compare . Oxidation of sialic acids resulted in a shift of oligosaccharides in HPAEC PAD analysis to earlier elution times compare .

 aa Time Course of HES Modification of EPO GT 1 A with Hydroxylamine Modified HES Derivative X Produced According to Example 14.4

400 g of hydroxylamine modified HES derivative X was added to 20 g of EPO GT 1 A mild periodate oxidized EPO not acid hydrolyzed prior to mild periodate oxidation in 20 L of 0.5 M NaOAc buffer pH 5.5 and the reaction was stopped after 30 min 2 4 and 17 hours respectively by freezing samples in liquid nitrogen. Subsequently samples were stored at 20 C. until further analysis.

SDS PAGE sample buffer was added and the samples were heated to 90 C. and applied onto SDS gels. As shown in increasing incubation times resulted in an increased shift towards higher molecular weight of the protein. After 17 hours of incubation in the presence of the hydroxylamine modified HES derivative X a diffuse Coomassie stained protein band was detected migrating in an area between 60 and 11 KDa based on the position of molecular weight standards see left part of . Upon treatment with N glycosidase most of the protein was shifted towards the position of de N glycosylated EPO see right gel arrow A indicates migration position of N glycosidase arrow B indicates migration position of de N glycosylated EPO the diffuse protein band visible in the region between the 28 KDa and 36 KDa molecular weight standards presumably represents EPO forms which are modified by HES and the O glycosylation site of the molecule. In view of the specificity of N glycosidase we conclude from this result that in fact HES modification occurs at the periodate oxidized sialic acid residues of glycans of the EPO protein.

HES EPO conjugates I originating from EPO GT 1 after mild periodate oxidation i.e. from EPO GT 1 A II resulting from EPO GT 1 subjected to 5 min acid hydrolysis and mild periodate oxidation III resulting from EPO GT 1 subjected to 10 min acid hydrolysis and mild periodate oxidation were synthesized as described before. A control incubation K was included containing unmodified EPO GT 1 under the same buffer conditions to which an equivalent amount of unmodified HES was added. The incubation mixtures were subjected to further purification for subsequent biochemical analysis of the HES EPO derivatives.

Incubations HES EPO conjugates I II and III as well as the control incubation K were subjected to a Q Sepharose purification step as described under Material and Methods Example 20.8 in order to remove the excess of nonreacted HES reagent which was expected in flow through of the ion exchange column. Due to the high amounts of basic EPO forms contained in previously acid treated samples II and III we expected considerable amounts of modified EPO product from these incubations in the flow through. As is shown in almost all of the EPO material from samples I was retained by Q Sepharose column whereas only approximately 20 30 of the samples III and II was recovered in the fraction eluting with high salt concentration. All of the protein material from the incubations with HES derivative X both in the flow through and the fractions eluting with high salt had apparent higher molecular weight in SDS PAGE when compared to the control EPO.

In order to characterize in more detail the HES modified EPO sample A and K see were compared to periodate oxidized form EPO GT 1 A. The samples were subjected to N glycosidase treatment and as is depicted in and the release of N glycans resulted in the two low molecular weight bands at the position of the O glycosylated and nonglycosylated EPO forms of the standard EPO preparation. In the case of sample A a further band migrating at the position of the 28 KDa mw standard was detected suggesting HES modification at the O glycan of this EPO variant cf. Example 20.11 c aa . This band and also the heavily HES modified high mw form of N glycosylated EPO see and disappeared after subjecting the samples to mild hydrolysis which is in agreement with the view that HES modification was achieved at the periodate oxidised sialic acid residues of erythropoietin.

Aliquots of the N glycosidase incubation mixtures were hydrolyzed using conditions enabling the complete removal of sialic acids residues and also the sialic acid linked HES derivative from oligosaccharides after neutralization the mixtures were then absorbed onto small Hypercarb columns for their desalting. The columns were washed rigorously with water followed by elution of bound neutral oligosaccharides with 40 acetonitrile in HO containing 0.1 of trifuloacetic acid. The resulting oligosaccharides were subjected to MALDI TOF MS. The spectra of the desialylated oligosaccharide fractions from sample A EPO GT 1 A and sample K showed identical masses for complex type oligosaccharides at m z 1810 Da diantennary 2175 triantennary 2540 tetraantennary 2906 tetraantennary plus 1 N acetyllactosamine repeat and 3271 tetraantennary plus 2 N acetyllactosamine repeats small signals corresponding to lack of fucose 146 and galactose minus 162 were detected which are attributable to the acid hydrolysis conditions applied for sialic acid removal see MALDI and .

In a parallel experiment the N glycosidase digestion mixture was absorbed onto 1 ml RP C18 cartridge without prior acid hydrolysis of oligosaccharides and elution was performed with 5 acetonitrile in water containing 0.1 TFA under these conditions the EPO protein was completely retained onto the RP material and oligosaccharides were washed off from the column with 5 acetonitrile in HO containing 0.1 TFA. The de N glycosylated EPO protein was eluted with 70 acetonitrile in HO containing 0.1 TFA. The oligosaccharide fractions from the RP C18 step of N glycosidase treated sample A EPO GT 1 A and sample K were neutralized and subjected to desalting using Hypercarb cartridges as described before. The isolated oligosaccharides were subjected to HPAEC PAD mapping before see and after mild acid treatment under conditions which enabled quantitative removal of sialic acids from glycans see .

The HPAEC PAD profile for the native material obtained from the HES modified sample A showed only neglectable signals for oligosaccharides whereas EPO GT 1 A derived oligosaccharides exhibited the same glycan profile as the one shown in sample named EPO GT 1 after mild periodate treatment . The elution profile of oligosaccharides obtained from the control EPO sample K yielded the expected pattern compare profile in . For comparison the native oligosaccharide profile of the international BRP EPO standard is included for comparison and as reference standard.

After mild acid hydrolysis all oligosaccharide preparations showed an identical elution profile of neutral oligosaccharide structures see with the expected qualitative and quantitative composition of di tri and tetraantennary complex type carbohydrate chains as described in the methods section for the EPO preparation which was used as a starting material in the present study. This result demonstrates that the HES modification of the EPO sample results in a covalent linkage of the HES derivative which is detached from the EPO protein by N glycosidase and is acid labile since it is removed from the N glycans using mild acid treatment conditions known to desialylate carbohydrates see .

In order to further confirm HES modification of EPO at the N glycans of the molecule EPO samples were digested with N glycosidase and the EPO protein was adsorbed onto RP C18 cartridges whereas oligosaccharide material was washed off as described above. As shown in Table 3 glucose and hydroxyethylated glucose derivatives were detected only in the EPO protein which was subjected to HES modification at cysteine residues and in oligosaccharide fractions of EPO sample A2.

The EPO bioassay in the normocythaemic mouse system indicates was performed according to the procedures described in the European Pharmacopeia the laboratory that carried out the EPO assay was using the International BRP EPO reference standard preparation. For the HES modified EPO A2 preparation a mean value for the specific activity of 294 600 units per mg EPO of protein was determined indicating an approximately 3 fold higher specific activity when compared to the International BRP EPO reference standard preparation that was included in the samples sent for activity assays.

