---

title: Electronic message management
abstract: In accordance with embodiments of the invention, message management services are provided for creating and/or adapting electronic messages with digital content items.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07634556&OS=07634556&RS=07634556
owner: Prolifiq Software Inc.
number: 07634556
owner_city: Beaverton
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051206
---
This non provisional patent application claims priority to U.S. provisional patent application No. 60 633 832 filed Dec. 6 2004 and to co pending U.S. non provisional patent application Ser. No. 10 976 057 filed Oct. 27 2004 and Ser. No. 10 611 698 filed Jun. 30 2003 which in turn claims priority to U.S. provisional patent application No. 60 393 176 filed on Jul. 1 2002 all of which are hereby fully incorporated by reference. If any portion of this application should be determined to contradict any portion of application Nos. 60 633 832 60 393 176 Ser. No. 10 611 698 or 10 976 057 for the purpose of this application the description provided herein shall control.

This present invention is directed to the field of electronic messaging and in particular to management and distribution of electronic messages.

Electronic communications provide a powerful means of communicating content to a targeted audience. Traditional efforts utilizing electronic communications involve a user assembling content and distributing content to selected recipients. While this may provide an effective strategy in many circumstances it requires significant computational resources to provide access and control of the content to be incorporated into the message as well as human resources to direct the creation of the message.

In the description to follow various aspects of the present invention will be described and specific configurations will be set forth. However embodiments of the present invention may be practiced with only some or all aspects and or without some of these specific details. In other instances well known features may be omitted or simplified in order not to obscure the description.

The description will be presented in terms of operations performed by a processor based device using terms such as receiving transmitting determining identifying displaying and the like consistent with the manner commonly employed by those skilled in the art to convey the substance of their work to others skilled in the art. As is well understood by those skilled in the art the quantities take the form of electrical magnetic or optical signals capable of being stored transferred combined and otherwise manipulated through mechanical electrical and or optical components of the processor based device.

Various operations will be described as multiple discrete steps in turn in a manner that is most helpful in understanding embodiment of the present invention however the order of description should not be construed as to imply that these operations are necessarily order dependent. In particular these operations need not be performed in the order of presentation.

The description repeatedly uses the phrase in one embodiment which does not necessarily refer to the same embodiment although it may. Furthermore the terms comprising including having and the like as used in the present application are synonymous.

The phrase A and or B means A B or A and B . The phrase at least one of A B and C means A B C A and B A and C B and C or A B and C . 

In accordance with embodiments of the present invention message management services may be provided for generating and transmitting electronic messages having digital content items to one or more designated recipients at the receipt of a message construct. Additionally embodiments of the present invention may provide for the adaptation of the form and or content of the electronic message based on capabilities and or preferences associated with the message recipient.

The sending device may transmit an electronic message e.g. message construct to the message manager including construct information for construction and or delivery of an electronic message to a recipient. The construct information may include recipient information e.g. information about a recipient associated with the receiving device and or requested content information e.g. information that is directly and or indirectly related to content that the recipient is or may be interested in. As used herein content that the recipient is or may be interested in may be also be referred to as requested content. It may be noted that requested content need not be explicitly requested by the recipient in all embodiments. Requested content information directly related to the requested content could include e.g. a request for information on a particular product and or service hereinafter collectively referred to as core content . Requested content information indirectly related to requested content could include e.g. information on recipient s occupation interests hobbies work address home address timeframe for making a purchase of products services etc. hereinafter collectively referred to a peripheral content . In one embodiment the message manager may derive the requested content in whole or in part from this peripheral content.

Briefly the message manager may receive the message construct from the sending device including identification of the recipient and requested content information and generate an electronic message according to a message generation specification. The message generation specification may direct the generation of the electronic message through providing associations between requested content information received from the sending device and message templates and content controlled and accessible by the message manager to be described in further detail below. As used herein the electronic message may also be referred to as derived message as its formation is at least partly derived from the message construct .

In various embodiments the content may include any number of digital content elements such as but not limited to text data image audio video web executable elements and the like. Digital content elements may also refer to links or other user interface controls designed to enable recipients to obtain further information about a message to forward the message to another recipient to request to not receive similar messages in the future and so forth.

As used herein electronic messages including the derived message may be of a variety of message types including but not limited to a text message a multimedia message an electronic mail e mail a file either coupled to one of the earlier described message types or transferred independently e.g. a extensible markup language XML file and the like delivered over appropriate channel delivery services including but not limited to simple messaging service SMS multimedia messaging service MMS the Internet and the like. Electronic messages may be delivered according to a variety of message transfer protocols including but not limited to transmission control protocol Internet protocol TCP IP simple mail transfer protocol SMTP hyper text transfer protocol HTTP Global System for Mobile Communications GSM file transfer protocol FTP and protocols directed toward communication of markup language files e.g. XML such as simple object access protocol SOAP XML remote procedure call RPC Global XML Web Services Architecture GXA Representational State Transfer REST and the like. As used herein the particular message type and corresponding services protocols structures etc. to communicate that particular message type from one device to another over the network may be referred to as a delivery channel.

The device message manager device and or device may include user devices and or server devices such as a host server equipped with the device or communicatively coupled thereto to facilitate creation and or transmission of the various electronic messages. For example in an embodiment a host server may be a mail server designed to deliver and or receive e mail. Such a mail server may be a hardware based device or a software service that executes on the sending device message manager receiving device and or third party device .

Sending device message manager receiving device and third party device may each represent a broad range of digital systems known in the art including but not limited to devices such as wireless mobile phones palm sized personal digital assistants notebook computers desktop computers servers set top boxes game consoles and the like.

Following creation of the derived message the message manager may then forward it to the receiving device via a selected delivery channel. In various embodiments the message manager may also generate and transmit a notification message to a third party device to e.g. notify an interested party of selected details of the transaction including but not limited to information on the sender the receiver the requested content information and or the one or more digital content elements provided in the derived message. This third party notification may for example provide a local sales representative with information that a prospective customer has inquired about one or more products and or services.

In one embodiment a message manager may delay the transmission of the derived message pending indication from a third party user that the derived message should be sent. Such an indication could be a reply or specified interaction with the notification message . This may provide notice to the third party user prior to actual transmission of the derived message . This pre notification coupled with the inclusion of content related to the third party user e.g. a digital business card may provide the perception to the recipient that the third party user has generated the derived message with little actual effort expended on behalf of the third party user.

In an embodiment various acknowledgement messages e.g. messages and may be transmitted to communicate various activities such as but not limited to receipt and or read activities.

Embodiments of the present invention may provide teachings to leverage a relatively simple message construct into a potentially more sophisticated derived message delivering content in a manner that may be tailored to aspects of the receiving environment. Transmission of the message construct may be accomplished without the need for significant processing power bandwidth memory and or authoring involvement at the sending device that would otherwise be necessary for control of all aspects of the message construction. Thus embodiments of the present invention present the option of employing thin client devices for the sending device however embodiments are not so limited.

In various embodiments the memory may include a variety of storage mediums such as but not limited to volatile memory e.g. random access memory RAM dynamic RAM DRAM static RAM SRAM and the like non volatile memory e.g. read only memory ROM electrically erasable programmable ROM EEPROM Flash and the like and removable memory e.g. compact disk CD digital versatile disk DVD Flash and the like.

In an embodiment a persistent copy of the MCC may be downloaded from a distribution server through a data network installed in the factory or in the field. For field installation the persistent copy may be distributed using one or more articles of manufacture such as diskettes CDROM DVD Flash and the like having a recordable medium including but not limited to magnetic optical and other mediums of the like.

In various embodiments the processor may include one or more of a microprocessor having one or more processing cores a controller an application specific integrated circuit and the like. The processor may perform the function of executing programming instructions of OS and MCC to enable the operations of the various elements as described herein.

In various embodiments the input output device s may include a display device including but not limited to a CRT and an active or passive matrix LCD display to output a user interface the creation of which may be controlled by instructions of the MCC . The input output device s may also include input mechanisms including but not limited to a mouse a touch pad a track ball a keyboard a bar code scanner a Bluetooth transceiver an infrared transceiver radio frequency identification transceiver and the like to facilitate user input into the system .

Lastly in various embodiments the networking interface may represent a wireless network interface an integrated services digital network ISDN adapter a digital subscriber line DSL interface an Ethernet or Token ring network interface and the like.

The requested content information field may provide a user with a selection of core content candidates . The core content candidates may be selected from a list of for example products and or services for which the message manager may have access to the associated content. The core content candidates may be presented to the user in a variety of ways such as but not limited to a check the box selection or through a pull down menu.

In an embodiment the requested content information field may additionally alternatively provide for peripheral content queries directed to solicit information on peripheral content that may be of relevance. In some embodiments the peripheral content queries may be dependent upon which of the core content candidates is selected.

In some embodiments the MCC may query the message manager for population of the requested content information field including for example the current core content candidates . The requested content information field may be customized based at least in part on user credentials device configuration and or device operational capabilities. For example in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention the message manager may populate the requested content information field based upon an identification of the operational capabilities of the sending device . For example traditional wireless devices such as mobile phones and personal digital assistants may be equipped with less powerful hardware including displays processors and memory and software components than their wireline counterparts. Therefore if the sending device is identified as such a device it may be advantageous to adapt the requested content information field to account for such potential limitations. This may be done for example by providing a reduced set of peripheral content queries . On the other hand in an embodiment where the sending device has significant resources e.g. is a desktop computing device the set of peripheral content queries may be more comprehensive. The identification of the operational capabilities of the sending device may be done through e.g. association with user credentials transmission of capability information from the sending device to the message manager at a handshake operation resulting from a query an unprompted transmission etc.

Once the appropriate information has been added to the appropriate fields the user may transmit the message construct to the message manager using a send function . The activation of the send function may cause the MCC to create a file including the values given for the various fields which may be transmitted as the message construct . In some embodiments the file created by the MCC may be but is not limited to a general purpose markup language e.g. ASN.1 Abstract Syntax Notation One EBML XML YAML etc.

While the illustrated embodiment shows the core content candidates and the peripheral content queries depicted side by side on the same screen other embodiments may provide a series of screenshots including the various fields.

The administration console may provide authoring services for an authorized administrator. The authoring services may include services to facilitate creation and or editing of the message creation specification locally stored content rules and other administrative tasks. Additionally the authoring services may provide a message template editing environment through which an administrator may compose edit message templates including for example format definitions and or content definitions for one or more of the cells within the template. In one embodiment the authoring services may provide graphical or text based tools.

In some embodiments if the appropriate digital content to be associated with the requested content information may not be locally accessible the message management node may cooperate with integration resources in order to acquire such content. In various embodiments the integration resources may include for example external content management systems database management systems etc.

The message tracker may include a database to track various activities and or events. These activities and or events could include information on the sender the recipient the message construct the derived message acknowledgement message which may include information on recipient interaction with derived message for example which digital content elements are activated by recipient etc. In some embodiments a message record of these activities and or events may be transmitted notification message .

As used herein the term component is intended to refer to programming logic that may be employed to obtain a desired outcome. The term component may be synonymous with module and may refer to programming logic that may be embodied in hardware or firmware or in a collection of software instructions possibly having entry and exit points written in a programming language such as for example C . In various embodiments components may be co located in the same device e.g. a server may be located in a device dedicated to the particular component s function or may distributed over a collection of devices cooperatively interacting to obtain the outcome described.

A software component may be compiled and linked into an executable program or installed in a dynamic link library or may be written in an interpretive language such as BASIC. It will be appreciated that software components may be callable from other components modules or from themselves and or may be invoked in response to detected events or interrupts. Software instructions may be embedded in firmware such as an EEPROM or may be stored on a readable medium such as a magnetic or optical storage device. It will be further appreciated that hardware components may be comprised of connected logic units such as gates and flip flops and or may be comprised of programmable units such as programmable gate arrays or processors. In one embodiment the components described herein are implemented as software modules but nonetheless may be represented in hardware or firmware. Furthermore although only a given number of discrete software hardware components may be illustrated and or described such components may nonetheless be represented by additional components or fewer components without departing from the spirit and scope of embodiments of the invention.

Interaction of the components of the message manager may now be described with additional reference to operational phases illustrated in in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. Operational phases may be referenced by numerals in parentheses. In an embodiment an operation may begin by the interface component receiving the message construct . The interface component may be any type of interface to facilitate reception transmission of electronic messages over a network from to networked devices e.g. devices and . The interface component may support various application interfaces for message composition and delivery triggers as well as reporting interfaces. The interface component may include an implementation of an API having a common set of definitions as the MCC described above to facilitate interpretation of the message construct . In various embodiments the interface component may be compatible with a variety of web services protocols including but not limited to those directed toward communication of markup language files.

The message creation component may receive the message construct or portions thereof from the interface component . The message creation component may identify the values of the message construct and may operate to generate the derived message according to the message creation specification . To generate the derived message the message creation component may access a message template database having a plurality of message template candidates stored therein in order to select a message template that is suitable for delivery of the digital content element deemed to satisfy the requested content information .

In the generation of the derived message the message creation component may also select the delivery channel which may influence the selection of the message template and or the digital content. In some embodiments the selection of the delivery channel may be determined through rules provided by rules component and or through the message creation specification . Furthermore embodiments of the present invention may allow for the dynamic determination of the delivery channel based upon network conditions e.g. available bandwidth in alternative communication links device capabilities device preferences etc. This may be further incorporated with teachings of the message adaptation operations below.

The message creation component may also activate the content by accessing the content component to select the one or more digital content elements . The content component may include a document repository having e.g. text and or binary elements a media repository having e.g. audio and or video elements suitable to provide accessible storage of the various types of digital content elements. As discussed above if the digital content associated with the requested content information value is not found in the content component it may be accessed through integration resources .

In various embodiments the message creation component may link and or embed the selected digital content elements with the selected message template. During formation of the derived message digital content elements may be linked to the message template or may be embedded within message template through techniques such as object linking and embedding OLE or the use of uniform resource identifiers URIs or uniform resource locators URLs for example. Other methods of linking and or embedding digital content elements to a message template may similarly be employed without departing from the spirit and scope of the embodiments of the present invention.

In some embodiments the message creation component may also generate the derived message with reference to a message adaptation specification to provide a flexible and extensible adaptation of the derived message for delivery to the intended recipient.

In one embodiment message adaptation specification may include a message layer definition to define alternative presentations or layers for a given derivative electronic message where each presentation may represent a different combination of digital content element candidates. In one embodiment the derived message may include one or more content cells that may be adapted to include a version of one or more digital content elements selected from the digital content element candidates as may be appropriate for a given message presentation. As such it may be possible to generate an electronic message that may be adapted to take advantage of particular configurations and or preferences.

In one embodiment message adaptation specification may be device specific or user specific. For example message adaptation specification may indicate one or more operational capabilities of one or more devices such as receiving device associated with the intended recipient. Such operational capabilities may include multimedia presentation capabilities of a device content rendering capabilities of a device data throughput bandwidth capabilities of a device and may identify whether a device is configured as a wireless device or traditional non wireless or wireline device and so forth. Additionally message adaptation specification may further represent user specific or company entity specific preferences such as a message filtering level indicating e.g. a preferred message delivery policy with respect to one or more recipients. In one embodiment message adaptation specification may represent a collection of user specific or device specific message adaptation specifications that may be selectively employed based upon identification of an intended recipient of the derived message .

In embodiments utilizing adaptive configuration of the derived message the delivery component may cooperate with the message creation component to dynamically determine the capabilities and or preferences of a recipient and or receiving device through execution of one or more client side or server side components or scripts. Accordingly a recipient may receive the derived message including one or more scripts or components or links to one or more remotely located scripts or components which when executed may determine various capabilities of the receiving device and request supplemental digital content elements accordingly. Alternatively device capabilities may be predetermined and stored e.g. in the rules component for access via a lookup table file or database by message adaptation specification . As such electronic messages may be remotely adapted with one or more content element candidates prior to transmission of the message to a recipient. Of course electronic message adaptation may be conditioned on other factors besides device capabilities.

In some embodiments the derived message may be dynamically adapted after transmission to the receiving device . For example the derived message may be transmitted with alternatively versioned content element candidates programmed to respond by activating the appropriate version based on capabilities preferences at the receiving device .

In some embodiments the base electronic message may include an initial content layer to which client side scripts and recipient specific customization information may be added through the adaptation process. The added client side scripts may perform such functions as reporting on the opening of the email message reporting on the activation of digital content elements testing the digital content capabilities of the receiving device selecting the most appropriate layer of the derived message to be exposed to the user based upon the results of the tests and supplementing including possibly replacing the contents of the derived message with those of the selected layer.

While illustrates the message creation specification and the message adaptation specification as two separate entities in other embodiments they may be integrated.

Adaptive configuration of the derived message may be based on the teachings of the above mentioned and fully incorporated U.S. patent application No. 60 393 176 Ser. Nos. 10 611 698 and or 10 976 057.

Upon creation of the derived message the message creation component may cooperate with a delivery component to transmit the derived message to the receiving device .

In some embodiments the rules component may maintain and manage business rules associated with the composition and delivery of the derived message and or the notification message . These rules may be created manually through e.g. the administration console or automatically based on e.g. message delivery and performance. In various embodiments the rules component may ensure that messages comply with legal statutes and or corporate branding policies may facilitate the maintenance of privacy of sender data recipient data and or content may ensure appropriate deliverability e.g. through execution of spam filter analysis before the derived message is transmitted. The rules component may additionally alternatively provide rules adapted to ensure that the derived message contains proper content based on sender identification sender locale recipient domain date etc. In various embodiments some all of these rule check operations may be incorporated within the message creation specification . Additionally in various embodiments the message creation specification may be more directly coupled to the rules component rather than to the message creation component .

In some embodiments the cells may be customized based at least in part on operational capabilities and or preferences at the receiving device . For example in an embodiment the cell may be suitable for delivery of video element while the cell may be suitable for an image element. If in an embodiment it is determined that the receiving device is not to receive video messages the cell may be deactivated and a like topic but differently versioned content element may alternatively be displayed in cell .

In various embodiments a variety of customization options relating to the message templates may be employed.

In various embodiments the processor may be for example a microprocessor having one or more processing cores a controller an application specific integrated circuit and the like. The processor may perform the function of executing programming instructions of OS and the message creation component to enable the operations of the various elements as described herein.

In various embodiments the memory may include a variety of storage mediums such as but not limited to volatile memory e.g. RAM DRAM SRAM and the like non volatile memory e.g. ROM EEPROM Flash and the like and removable memory e.g. CD DVD Flash and the like.

Lastly in various embodiments networking interface may represent a wireless network interface an ISDN adapter a DSL interface an Ethernet or Token ring network interface and the like.

Although specific embodiments have been illustrated and described herein it will be appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art that a wide variety of alternate and or equivalent implementations calculated to achieve the same purposes may be substituted for the specific embodiment shown. This application is intended to cover any adaptations or variations of the embodiments discussed herein.

