---

title: Modular sensor platform robotic vehicle
abstract: The present invention provides a new and unique manner of overcoming these problems by providing a platform system that is placed upon existing robots without requiring adjustments to these devices. The platform effectuates easy installation of a plurality of sensors and apparatus on its top surface while providing internal housing for its wires and components, thereby providing a water, dirt and dust resistant environment which leads to better equipment function and ease of maintenance and repair.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07144057&OS=07144057&RS=07144057
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07144057
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050218
---
This Application is a Division of prior application Ser. No. 10 058 325 filed Jan. 30 2002 which issued as U.S. Pat. No. 6 859 359 on 22 Feb. 2005.

The invention described herein may be manufactured used and or licensed by or for the United States Government.

Robotic agents will be ubiquitous on future battlefields principally to lower the exposure of harm to ground forces. Teams of small collaborating robotic agents having advanced sensor and mobility characteristics can be utilized to conduct tasks such as reconnaissance and surveillance chemical and biological agent detection logistics and communications relay. These robotic agents can also be utilized to operate in hostile environments or adverse weather conditions outside of armed forces applications.

Present robotic agents are generally not designed to be used in harsh environments. Current robotic endeavors utilize state of the art components attached to the top of a base with component interfaces and connections wires exposed. Additionally these components are permanently affixed to the base or embedded into the system requiring a great deal of time and effort to remove and replace in case of equipment malfunction or system upgrade.

The overall configuration of these robotic agents is not designed to be modular thereby precluding the use of rapid change components due to replacement due to failure or task changes. Specifically prior art robotic agents are not water resistant thermally protected or protected from dust or dirt. Since these agents typically carry sensitive sensors and devices their lack of protective elements limit their application.

The present invention overcomes the difficulties of known robotic agents by providing a system which allows the robotic agents unlimited applications in all types of weather and environmental conditions. Furthermore the present invention provides multiple changes of modular components thereby providing quick removal of inoperative or damaged parts as well as allowing for customizing a basic agent for particular use.

It is therefore an objective of the present invention to provide a platform system that is quickly attached to vehicular device having a drive train and power supply where the platform system provides remote data acquisition and transmission.

It is also an objective of the present invention to provide a system for rapid removal reconfiguration and exchange of components that is easily manipulated and capable of housing a variety of components necessary for information gathering and transmission applications in a wide variety of environmental and weather conditions.

It is also an objective of the present invention to provide a platform system that is capable of being quickly opened so as to allow quick repair removal maintenance or upgrade of all apparatus and sensors all components housed within the platform interior and track all wires connected to each of the apparatus sensors and components.

It is also an objective of the present invention to provide a platform system that is capable of being opened in a second position to allow direct access to all portions of the robotic components.

It is also an objective of the present invention to provide removable side panels that allow an alternative means of accessing the interiorly housed components and wires as well as effectuating rapid removal of all apparatus sensors components and wires.

The present invention is directed to a platform system that provides a new and unique manner for housing a plurality of apparatus and sensors storing their respective components and related hardware such that they are rapidly exchangeable water resistant and capable of operating in a wide range of environmental and weather conditions. The platform system of the present invention is capable of operating as a stationary unit or may be placed upon vehicles having existing robotic units. The modular platform system is capable of accommodating a wide variety of sensors and apparatus for remote data recording imaging and transmission.

As shown in the platform system includes an upper portion a first side a second side a front portion and a back portion . The upper portion also includes an outer top surface .

The outer top surface of the platform system includes a plurality of plates and that are screwed onto the top surface with screws S. The plurality of plates and are capable of housing several apparatus and sensors including but not limited to an 8 microphone acoustic array a visible camera an infrared camera a scanning laser rangefinder LADAR a point laser rangefinder 12 sonar sensors 3 CPUs 2 wireless LANS a video transmitter a GPS sensor a digital compass a weather sensor a stereo camera pair and a driving camera. Additional or alternate plates may be added to the top surface depending upon the number and type of apparatus utilized. Top surface also includes rapid release latch mechanisms and that effectuate quick release and closure of upper portion .

The left side view of the platform system as shown in shows a first side having air flow apparatus and front portion and back portion . Air flow apparatus and include filters fans and vents that provide necessary air flow to prevent components and wiring of apparatus and sensors positioned on surface from overheating. The platform system also includes a base portion with sonar sensors and . Similarly second side includes vents and and sonar sensors and not shown .

As shown in the hinges allow the interior portion to be accessed. The interior portion of upper portion serves as a housing for wires connecting the devices to their respective power sources and the like. In particular interior portion provides a wire housing system W that is used to maintain wire integrity between each apparatus and sensor and their respective components. The wire housing system W effectuates an efficient and rapid manner by which each apparatus wiring can be easily tracked and identified for rapid maintenance and or removal. Additionally wire housing system W also insulates the wiring from sudden jolts and vibrations when the system is in motion. Interior portion also includes a plurality of brackets B for holding individual components of the devices positioned on surface the interior portions of panels and as shown . The brackets B provide additional stability shock and vibration isolation that prevent sudden jolts and vibration from reaching the components when system is in motion. Note that the positions of the wire housing system W and the brackets B are generally shown in . Exact positioning of these elements will be dependant upon design and functional parameters as understood by one of ordinary skill in the art.

As shown in when both upper portion and base are raised a support mechanism having a catch and a rod maintains the upper portion and base in the raised position. A safety cable will prevent the upper portion and base from opening too far in the ascending direction before and can be attached. Quick release latching mechanisms proximate to side and proximate to side and not shown allow for rapidly opening and closing upper portion and base .

Outer top surface includes at least two plates and that are attached to the surface via screws S. The plates and are used to hold a plurality of apparatus and sensors A including but not limited to an 8 microphone acoustic array a visible camera an infrared camera a scanning laser rangefinder LADAR a point laser rangefinder 12 sonar sensors 3 CPUs 2 wireless LANS a video transmitter a GPS sensor a digital compass a weather sensor a stereo camera pair and a driving camera. Additional and or alternate plates may be added to the top surface depending upon the number and type of apparatus utilized.

Side portion includes a side panel and side portion includes a side panel . Panels and are attached to their respective panels via screws S. Additionally panels and may be hinged utilizing quick release hinges along the bottom edges not shown and fastened using known fastening apparatus. Side panels and as shown in also includes air flow apparatus . Air flow apparatus include filters fans and vents to provide necessary air flow to prevent components and wiring from overheating not shown .

Front portion includes an aperture for positioning a LADAR within. Additionally front portion includes front side panels and which are attached to front portion via screws S. Back portion includes a panel which is attached to back portion via screws S and a back dock . The back dock provides easy access to other robotic apparatus to board and integrate with system . Alternatively the back dock may be replaced with a dispenser for ground sensors an arm mechanism for retrieving objects placing objects or performing functions with various arm attachments as will be understood by one of ordinary skill in the art. Alternatively back dock may be replaced with a spool for tethering in bad radio frequency environments. Additionally all of the panels plates and are removable from system .

Similar to system as shown in and therefore not shown interior portion provides a wire housing system that is used to maintain wire integrity between each device and their respective components. The wire housing system effectuates an efficient and rapid manner by which each apparatus wiring can be easily tracked and identified for rapid maintenance and or removal. Additionally the wire housing system also insulates the wiring from sudden jolts and vibrations when the system is in motion. Interior portion also includes a plurality of brackets for holding individual components of the devices positioned on surface . The brackets provide additional stability shock and vibration isolation that prevent sudden jolts and vibration from reaching the components when system is in motion. Note that the positions of the wire housing system and the brackets are dependant upon design and functional parameters as understood by one of ordinary skill in the art.

As shown in when the upper portion and base are raised a fastener mechanism having a catch and a rod maintains the upper portion and base in the raised position. A safety cable prevents the upper portion and base from opening too far in the ascending direction before catch and rod are attached. Quick release latching mechanisms proximate to side and proximate to side and not shown allow for rapidly opening and closing upper portion and base .

