---

title: Process for manufacturing an image recording body and apparatus for manufacturing the same
abstract: The present invention provides a method for manufacturing an image recording body comprising: image-forming, to form an image on a surface of a film by an electrophotographic method; positioning, by overlaying the film onto a support so that at least one side of the support and a side of the film on which the image is formed are opposed to each other so as to obtain a laminate body; and heating and pressing the laminate body, wherein cleaning at least one of a surface of the laminate, a surface of the film and a surface of the support is conducted during at least one of a timing between the positioning and the heating and pressing and a timing between the image-forming and the positioning. The present invention further provides an apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body in accordance with the method.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07389081&OS=07389081&RS=07389081
owner: Fuji Xerox Co., Ltd.
number: 07389081
owner_city: Tokyo
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050613
---
This application claims priority under 35 USC 119 from Japanese Patent Application No. 2005 80562 the disclosure of which is incorporated by reference herein.

The present invention relates to a process for manufacturing an image recording body such as a plastic sheet using an image formed by an electrophotographic method image forming apparatus and an apparatus for manufacturing the same. More particularly the invention relates to a process for manufacturing image recording bodies used in an information medium of non contact or contact type containing personal information and or image information recorded. Examples of such an information medium are a photograph containing cash card a staff identity card a student identity card a membership identity card a residents identity card various licenses and various qualification certificates. Further examples of image recording bodies the invention relates to are identity verification image sheets and image display boards used for example in medical areas and display labels. The information also relates to an apparatus for manufacturing the same.

In recent years accompanied with developments in image formation techniques means to form images of the uniform quality in large quantities and at low cost by various printing methods are know. Examples are intaglio printing letterpress printing lithography printing gravure printing and screen printing. Such printing methods are also used in many cases for surface printing of an information medium which holds prescribed information and can communicate with an external apparatus in a contact or non contact manner such as an IC card a magnetic card an optical card and combinations thereof.

However for example in screen printing many printing plates corresponding to the number of images to be printed are necessary and in the case of color printing further printing plates becomes necessary with the number of colors. For this reason these printing methods are unsuitable for application singly to discrete personal information such as photographs name address date of birth and various licenses .

In response to the aforementioned problems an image forming device which is most popular currently is an image forming method with a printer which adopts sublimation type or melt type thermal transfer using an ink ribbon. These can easily print personal discrimination information. However there is still a problem that when a printing rate is increased resolution is decreased and when the resolution is increased the printing rate is reduced.

In contrast image formation printing by electrophotographic methods is performed by a method of forming a visible image toner image on an image carrying body surface. This is done by uniformly electrifying an image carrying body surface irradiating this with light in response to an image signal to form an electrostatic latent image due to a potential difference between an exposed part and a non exposed part and thereafter electrostatically developing a color powder image forming material called toner having a polarity opposite to or the same as the electrification. In the case of a color image color visible images are formed by repeating these processes a number of times or aligning plural image formers. These color images are transferred onto an image recording body and this is fixed fixation is solidification due to melting and cooling of a color powder mainly by heat thereby obtaining a color image.

As described above in an electrophotographic method since electrostatic latent image on an image carrying body surface are electrically formed by image signals not only can the same image be formed many times but also different images can be easily handled thereby images can be formed. In addition since a toner image on an image carrying body surface can be almost completely transferred onto an image recording body surface and a toner image slightly remaining on an image carrying body surface can be easily removed by a resin blade or brush it is a printing method which can easily be prepared for small batch production of various article.

The toner is usually formed by melting and mixing a heat meltable resin and a pigment and optionally an additive such as an electrification controlling agent. This kneaded product is then ground and finely divided. Further the electrostatic latent images in the aforementioned electrophotographic method have considerably higher resolution than that of the finely divided toner and sufficient resolution can be expected compared to the resolution of the screen printing or thermal transfer using an ink ribbon.

Regarding a color image by using four primary colors of cyan magenta yellow and black as color toners and mixing them theoretically the same colors as that of printing can be reproduced. In addition in a color toner since a toner resin and a pigment can be blended relatively freely it is easy to increase image masking properties with toner.

For using the aforementioned electrophotographic apparatus to manufacture various cards there have already been several proposals for example see Japanese Patent Application Laid Open JP A Nos.2004 188603 and 2004 195973 .

In the apparatuses disclosed in them a plastic sheet of high resolution can be produced at high productivity. However the following problems are present.

That is a light transmissible film on which an image has been formed by an electrophotographic method is charged up and the film tends to adsorb dust in the air unless the charge is removed. Therefore although a plastic sheet is manufactured inside a portion of a plastic sheet manufacturing apparatus there is a very high possibility that dirt or dust is adhered to the light transmissible film during positioning heat pressing or conveying. This dirt or dust made apparent as defects of the plastic sheet and the quality of manufactured plastic sheet is thus deteriorated.

The invention is provided in consideration of the aforementioned problems of conventional technology. That is the invention relates to the process for manufacturing an image recording body using an electrophotographic apparatus as a means to form an image on a plastic film and an apparatus for manufacturing the same. The invention provides a process for manufacturing an image recording body which can manufacture an image recording body with no foreign matter mixed therein and at high productivity and an apparatus for manufacturing the same.

Namely a first aspect of the invention is a method for manufacturing an image recording body comprising image forming to form an image on a surface of a film by an electrophotographic method positioning by overlaying the film onto a support so that at least one side of the support and a side of the film on which the image is formed are opposed to each other so as to obtain a laminate body and heating and pressing the laminate body wherein cleaning at least one of a surface of the laminate a surface of the film and a surface of the support is conducted during at least one of a timing between the positioning and the heating and pressing and a timing between the image forming and the positioning.

In the first aspect of the invention since before heating and pressing it becomes possible to remove the dirt or dust on a surface of one or more of the laminate the film and or the support a process for manufacturing an image recording body having a high good product ratio can be obtained.

One embodiment of the first aspect of invention is characterized in that the film is a laminate film for electrophotography the positioning comprises forming the laminate body by overlaying two laminate films for electrophotography so that sides on which images of each of the laminate films are formed oppose each other via the support and the heating and pressing causes laminating of the support to the two laminate films.

In the above embodiment in the case of an image recording body obtained by laminating a support using a lamination film for electrophotography as a film since the influence of dirt on the laminate surface or between film support can be eliminated the effect is particularly exerted.

Another embodiment of the first aspect of invention is characterized in that the film is an electrophotographic image forming material transferring sheet a mirror image that is formed by image forming material is formed in the image forming and further comprising after the heating and pressing then cooling the image forming material then peeling the electrophotographic image forming material transferring sheet from the support so as to transfer the image forming material onto the support so as to record the image.

In the above embodiment in the case of an image recording body obtained by transferring an image onto a support using as a film an electrophotographic image forming material transfer sheet since the influence of dirt on a pressing surface or between film support can be eliminated the effect is particularly exerted.

A second aspect of the invention is an apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body comprising an image forming device which forms an image on a surface of a film by an electrophotographic method a positioning device which overlays the film onto a support so that at least one side of the support and a side of the film on which the image is formed are opposed to each other so as to obtain a laminate body and a heating and pressing device which heats and presses the laminate body wherein a cleaning device which cleans at least one of a surface of the laminate a surface of the film and a surface of the support is provided in a direction of conveyance of the film in at least one of a position between the positioning device and the heating and pressing device and a position between the image forming device and the positioning device.

In the second aspect of the invention since before heat pressing a cleaning apparatus for removing dirt or dust on a surface of one or more of the laminate the film and or the support is provided an apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body having a high good product ratio can be provided.

One embodiment of the second aspect of invention is characterized in that the film is a laminate film for electrophotography the positioning device forms the laminate body by overlaying two laminate films for electrophotography so that sides on which images of each of the laminate films are formed oppose each other via the support and the heating and pressing device causes laminating of the support to the two laminate films.

In the above embodiment when manufacturing an image recording body obtained by laminating a support using as a film a lamination film for electrophotography since the influence of dirt on a laminate surface or between film support can be eliminated the effect is particularly exerted.

Another embodiment of the second aspect of invention is characterized in that the film is an electrophotographic image forming material transferring sheet a mirror image that is formed by image forming material is formed by the image forming device and further comprising a peeling device which after heating and pressing then cooling the electrophotographic image forming material transferring sheet peels the electrophotographic image forming material transferring sheet from the support so as to transfer the image forming material onto the support so as to record the image and which is provided after the heating and pressing device in a direction of conveyance of the film.

In the above embodiment when an image recording body obtained by transferring an image onto a support using an electrophotography image forming material transferring sheet as a film is manufactured since influence of a dirt on a pressing surface or between film support can be eliminated the effect is particularly exerted.

Still another embodiment of the second aspect of invention is characterized in that the cleaning device comprises at least one pair of cleaning rolls.

In the above embodiment by passing the laminate between a pair of cleaning rolls as a cleaning device it becomes possible to assuredly remove dirt or dust on a surface of the laminate.

Still another embodiment of the second aspect of invention is characterized in that the cleaning device comprises a charge removing member for removing charge on a surface of the laminate body and a pair of cleaning rolls.

In the above embodiment since the laminate is passed between a pair of cleaning rolls after the charge of the laminate is removed by a charge removing member an apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body having an even higher good product ratio than that of the above apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body is obtained.

Hereinafter entities having substantially the same function will be explained by using the same symbol throughout all the drawings and occasionally the explanation will be omitted in some cases. In addition hereinafter the process for manufacturing an image recording body of the invention and the apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body of the invention will be explained together.

The process for manufacturing an image recording body of the invention is characterized by having image forming to form an image on a surface of a film by an electrophotographic method positioning by overlaying the film onto a support so that at least one side of the support and a side of the film on which the image is formed are opposed to each other so as to obtain a laminate body and heating and pressing the laminate body wherein cleaning at least one of a surface of the laminate a surface of the film and a surface of the support is conducted during at least one of a timing between the positioning and the heating and pressing and a timing between the image forming and the positioning.

In the invention as described later an image recording body is manufactured by forming a so called toner image on a surface of a plastic film film and heating and pressing this plastic film and a support so that the support is laminated onto the plastic film or the toner image is transferred onto the support.

At this time after manufacturing as described above in some cases dirt or dust gets mixed into an image recording body. When the image recording body is used by such as utilization by direct possession by a person as in a card these foreign matters are particularly given an attention as an image quality defect and quality as an information recording medium is greatly deteriorated.

In order to reduce occurrences of image quality defects in the image recording body the present inventors studied how effectively to remove dirt or dust adhered to the film. As a result the present invention inventors found out that in particular in an apparatus as in the invention for performing image formation to heat pressing in a continuous manner it is effective to remove dirt or dust between image formation and heat pressing and in particular immediately before heat pressing. Thus the invention was completed.

That is the level at which when a person holds a card image recording body in their hand and feels no image quality defect is a level at which little foreign matter is present in particular near the face surface of the image recording body. It was seen that in order to attain such a level it is more effective to clean a film after image formation or a laminate immediately before heat pressing rather than clean a film surface before image formation.

Before describing the process for manufacturing an image recording body of the invention which can obtain the above effect an image recording body manufactured by the invention will be briefly explained.

As shown in an image recording body is constructed such that a core sheet and a surface film and a back film both are laminate films for electrophotography on which images are formed respectively are overlaid and laminated so that the surfaces oon the sides with images formed thereon face the core sheet .

The construction of an image recording body is not limited to the example shown in . For example any one of a surface film and a back film may be a non light transmissible film and any one image among the formed images may be omitted. Alternatively an image is formed on one side of a surface film and or a back film e.g. non light permeable films and lamination is performed by opposing the non image surface. In this case an image forming surface of the film s may be further laminated with a protecting film. Therefore an image formed on a surface of a laminate film for electrophotography may be an original image or a mirror image.

On the other hand as shown in after heating pressing and peeling image forming material is in the state where it is almost completely embedded in surfaces of the material to be transferred onto and protecting layers are present on an upper layer of an image forming material . Therefore the manufactured image recording body has the same feel as that of an image recording body which has simply been printed and an image forming material is not easily peeled off. Since there are protecting layers image defects due to abrasion do not occur.

Next a process for manufacturing an image recording body of the invention which can provide the image recording body and an apparatus for manufacturing the same will be explained using the drawings.

The apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body shown in is constructed of an image forming apparatus image forming device a collating apparatus a cleaning apparatus cleaning device and a heating pressing apparatus heating and pressing device .

An image forming apparatus is constructed for example of a film stacker film storage unit an image forming part a conveying path for conveying a light transmissible film from film stacker to image forming part and a conveying path for conveying a light transmissible film after image formation from an image forming part to a discharge port . Other constructions are omitted.

An image forming part not shown is constructed of a known electrophotographic method color image forming apparatus. It includes a latent image carrying body for forming a latent image developing equipment for developing the latent image using a developer containing at least a toner to obtain a toner image a transferring equipment for transferring a developed toner image onto a light transmissible film and a fixing equipment for fixing the toner image transferred onto a light transmissible film by heating and pressing. By this construction an image forming step in a process for manufacturing an image recording body of the invention can be performed.

Conveying paths and are constructed of plural roller pairs including a driving roller pair and guides not shown and in conveying path an inverting path for inverting a conveying direction of a light transmissible film by 180 is further provided. A cam for changing a guiding direction of a light transmissible film is provided near a branch of conveying path and inverting path . When a light transmissible film is reciprocated by this inverting path and is returned to conveying path the conveying path of the light transmissible film is inverted by 180 and at the same time a light transmissible film is conveyed with the back and front surfaces inverted.

A collating apparatus is constructed of a core sheet stacker a support stacker a collating tray positioning device a conveying path for supplying a core sheet form a core sheet stacker to collating tray and a conveying path for supplying a light transmissible film discharged from a discharge port of image forming apparatus to collating tray .

A discharge part of conveying path for supplying a core sheet to collating tray and a discharge part of conveying path for supplying a light transmissible film to collating tray are provided parallel in a height direction.

The conveying path may have a construction for example in which a smooth plate light member and conveying rolls for conveying a light transmissible film on a surface thereof are provided or may be constructed of a rotating belt like conveying body. And a conveying roll and a belt are rotated at such as timing that a light transmissible film is discharged from image forming apparatus and a light transmissible film is conveyed to collating tray .

Core sheet stacker is provided with a pick up roll or a paper supplying roll such as those provided in a conventional paper supplying apparatus and a paper supplying roll is rotated immediately after collating tray is moved to a position of a discharge port of a core sheet stacker to convey a core sheet to collating tray .

Collating tray is constructed so that a core sheet and a light transmissible sheet can be supplied thereto through the discharge part of conveying path and discharge part of conveying path . It would be a construction in which for example end part s of the collating tray are connected to the outer wall of a belt which is stretched up and down upper and lower directions in the figure . The tray then is raised and lowed along with driving rotation of the belt. There is no restriction to this mechanism raising and lowing means and a known raising and lowing means such as a motor drive can be used. In addition a means not shown for positioning by lining up the ends of core sheets and surface films laminated in and back films is provided positioning .

In collating tray a tentative fastening apparatus for tentatively fastening a laminate in which two light transmissible films are laminated via a core sheet is provided. This tentative fastening apparatus is constructed for example of a pair of protruding pieces consisting of a metal so that it is heated by a heater and by holding an end of a laminate by a pair of heated protruding pieces an end of a laminate is thermally fused to attain tentative fastening.

The tentative fastening apparatus when it is provided on a path for conveying a laminate from collating tray to cleaning apparatus as in needs to have a structure that it is arranged at an end of collating tray only when tentative fastening and at other times it can be removed from the conveying path.

In the present embodiment a cleaning apparatus is arranged between a collating apparatus and a heating pressing apparatus between a positioning step and a heating pressing step . In this cleaning apparatus one or more cleaning roll pairs are arranged and by passing through the nips of the cleaning roll pairs surface dirt or dust on the laminate is removed cleaning step . It goes without saying that by provision of plural cleaning roll pairs dust or dirt removing performance can be improved and by providing a cleaner not shown for cleaning cleaning roll pair performance of cleaning roll pair can be better maintained.

As a cleaning roll an adhesive roll can be used. More specifically a roll in which an adhesive elastic body such as butyl rubber silicone rubber or urethane rubber is provided at a periphery of a metal core can be used. However it is not preferable to use a material in which low molecular compounds therein bleed out by long term use or part of the material itself is adhered to a laminate surface.

In the present embodiment a cleaning roll pair composed of an adhesive roll is used. However in the invention a means for removing foreign matter such as dirt is not particularly limited and as long as it is a means capable of removing dirt such as a brush or air blower any may be used without any limitation.

On an upstream side of the cleaning roll pair s a charge removing member for removing charge of a laminate is provided. This charge removing member may be a charge removing brush or may be a fan or blower for blowing ions. By arranging a charge removing member like this an adhering force of dirt or dust due to static electricity of a light transmissible film is reduced and dirt or dust removing performance in cleaning apparatus can be improved.

In the invention a cleaning apparatus may be provided between the image forming apparatus and collating apparatus or between the collating apparatus and heating pressing apparatus. It is most preferable for reducing dirt or dust in an image recording body after heating pressing to arrange the cleaning apparatus between collating apparatus and heating pressing apparatus . That is to clean the front and back surfaces of a laminate immediately before inserting into heating pressing apparatus as in the present embodiment. Preferable effect of this is remarkable in the case of a belt nip format heating pressing apparatus which is constructed of one belt pair as described later being used.

A heating pressing apparatus has such a construction that by adopting a belt nip format construction of one belt pair a plastic sheet is easily manufactured in line. Belt pair is constructed so that belt pair does not produce distortion in the state where it is tightened by one tension roll pair and one inlet roll pair respectively.

Further in an interior of a belt pair one heating pressing roll pair and one cooling roll pair are arranged from both sides from upper and lower directions in the figure between tension roll pair and inlet roll pair via a belt so as to press through belts . Tension roll pair and inlet roll pair are arranged without nipping respectively so that a gap is provided between belt pairs . Thereby even when belt pair is made wavy due to continuous operation it is possible to return belts to a predetermined position while it is operated.

In a heating pressing apparatus a laminate is heated and pressed by a heating pressing roll pair arranged downstream of an inlet roll pair . Via this heating and pressing the laminate is thermally fused laminated .

The thermally fused laminate so that deformation does not occur is nipped when passing between heating pressing roll pair and cooling roll pair is passed through cooling roll pair while maintaining planarity and is discharged in a discharge tray .

A plastic sheet image recording body after lamination when it is for example a pattern of several cards is cut into single cards and cards having front and back surfaces laminated with a light transmissible film is obtained.

In an image recording body manufactured in accordance with the invention since cleaning is performed before lamination as described above for example when 100 A4 size plastic sheets having the aforementioned pattern of several cards are continuously manufactured no dirt is observed at all by naked eye in the area of each card 85.6 mm 54 mm .

This manufacturing apparatus has a configuration in which a peeling apparatus peeling means is provided further downstream of a heating pressing apparatus of the manufacturing apparatus explained in the first embodiment. Details of the construction other than the peeling apparatus is the same as that of the manufacturing apparatus shown in in the first embodiment. To be exact in the image forming apparatus since an image is transferred from a transferring sheet onto a material to be transferred onto it is necessary to form an image with a mirror image.

According to the manufacturing apparatus of the present embodiment the electrophotographic image forming material transferring sheet is separated from the laminate after heating pressing and an image forming material can be transferred onto a support peeling .

Since the steps up to and including heating pressing in the present embodiment are the same as those of the first embodiment those steps are omitted from the description.

A heated and pressed laminate is then conveyed to peeling apparatus . The laminate conveyed to peeling apparatus has a construction shown in . For example there is a notch at a right end of the leading edge thereof and at that part a first transferring sheet and a second transferring sheet are opposite at a certain gap without adhering to a material to be transferred onto . When the leading edge of the laminate approaches an air spraying nozzle compressed air is ejected through the nozzle. Then ends of first transferring sheet and second transferring sheet are floated away from the material to be transferred onto and tips of guides enter between transferring sheet and the material to be transferred onto and between second transferring sheet and the material to be transferred onto . Further as the laminate is conveyed two transferring sheets and are conveyed along guides in such a direction that they are separated from the material to be transferred onto and they are peeled from the material to be transferred onto .

Then the material to be transferred onto is discharged into a discharge tray and the material to be transferred onto image recording body with a finished recording thereon is obtained. Here when plural individual images are formed on the material to be transferred onto with finished recording the material is cut for each image to obtain image recording bodies having prescribed sizes.

Thereafter the first transferring sheet and second transferring sheet are discharged into a transferring sheet discharge tray via a route not shown. Discharged transferring sheets may be returned to a transferring sheet stacker and image recording may be performed again onto the transferring sheets.

As described above in the apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body of the present embodiment an image recording body is obtained by peeling a transferring sheet from a heated and pressed laminate and transferring an image forming material onto a material to be transferred and also in the present embodiment since it becomes possible to remove a dirt or a dust on a surface of the laminate before a heating pressing step as in the first embodiment transference unevenness when a dirt is present on a surface of a laminate is not caused and an apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body having a high good product ratio can be obtained.

The manufacturing apparatus shown in has the same construction as that of the manufacturing apparatus shown in explained for the first embodiment except that a cleaning apparatus is provided between an image forming apparatus and a collating apparatus between image forming and positioning steps . By such a construction it becomes possible to clean front and back surfaces of a light transmissible film laminate film for electrophotography on which an image discharged from an image forming apparatus is formed. That is it becomes possible to remove dirt or dust between a core sheet and light transmissible films in the laminate shown in . As a result dirt or dust of a laminate can be reduced and an apparatus for manufacturing a plastic sheet image recording body having a high good product ratio can be provided.

Since functions of a cleaning roll and a charge removing member in are the same as those of cleaning roll and charge removing member in the first embodiment explanation will be omitted.

In the manufacturing apparatus shown in a cleaning apparatus explained in the first embodiment may be further arranged between a collating apparatus and a heating pressing apparatus . By such a construction the rate of occurrence of defective product product in which dirt or the like which can be confirmed by visual observation is present in the card size area when an image recording body is continuously manufactured can be further reduced.

On the other hand it is also possible to arrange a peeling apparatus as explained in the second embodiment further downstream of heating pressing apparatus of the manufacturing apparatus shown in and perform image formation as a mirror image using an electrophotography image forming material transferring sheet as a film. In this case since not only transference unevenness in the finished recording of the material to be transferred onto but also occurrence of defects of toner images can be suppressed and an image recording body as shown in can be obtained at a high good product ratio.

The manufacturing apparatus shown in has the same construction as that of the manufacturing apparatus shown in explained in first embodiment except that a cleaning apparatus is arranged on a conveying path between an image forming step and a positioning step for supplying a core sheet from a core sheet stacker a support stacker to a collating tray . By such the construction it becomes possible to clean front and back surfaces of a core sheet support discharged from a core sheet stacker . That is it becomes possible to remove dirt or dust between a core sheet and light transmissible films and shown in . As a result dirt or dust of a laminate can be reduced and an apparatus for manufacturing a plastic sheet image recording body having a high good product ratio can be obtained.

Since functions of a cleaning roll and a charge removing member in are the same as those of cleaning roll and charge removing member in the first embodiment explanation will be omitted.

In the manufacturing apparatus shown in a cleaning apparatus explained in the first embodiment may be further provided between a collating apparatus and a heating pressing apparatus . By such a construction the rate of occurrence of defective product in which dirt which can be confirmed by visual observation is present in a card size area when an image recording body is continuously manufactured can be further reduced.

On the other hand it is possible to arrange a peeling apparatus as explained in the second embodiment further downstream of heating pressing apparatus of the manufacturing apparatus shown in and perform image formation in a mirror image manner using an electrophotography image forming material transferring sheet as a film. In this cace since not only transference unevenness in the finished recording of the material to be transferred onto but also occurrence of defects of toner images can be suppressed. So as in the second embodiment an image recording body shown in can be obtained at a high good product ratio.

The manufacturing apparatus shown in has a construction in which all cleaning apparatuses explained in the first third and fourth embodiments respectively and the details of the other constructions are the same as the respective constructions explained in the first embodiment. By such a construction cleaning of a light transmissible film and a core sheet laminate film for electrophotography and support before collating can be performed. Further it becomes possible to clean front and back surfaces of a laminate of a core sheet and light transmissible films shown in and an apparatus for preparing a plastic sheet image recording body having an extremely high good product ratio can be obtained.

On the other hand it is possible to arrange a peeling apparatus explained in the second embodiment further downstream of heating pressing apparatus of the manufacturing apparatus shown in and perform mirror image formation using as a film an electrophotographic image forming material transferring sheet. In this case since not only transference unevenness in the finished recording of the material to be transferred onto but also occurrence of detects of toner images can be suppressed as in the second embodiment an image recoding body as shown in can be obtained at an extremely high good product ratio.

Now the support and film used in the invention will be explained. In the invention as described above in the case of the image recording body as shown in the support is a core sheet and the film is the laminate films for electrophotography and . In the case of an image recording body as shown in the support is the material to be transferred onto and the film is the transferring sheets .

A support namely a core sheet used in the invention is preferably opaque so that an image formed on a light transmissible film can be visible when it is formed into a plastic sheet image recording body . The core sheet is particularly preferably white colored.

Examples of materials of the core sheet include plastics. Specific examples thereof includes acetate films triacetate cellulose films nylon films polyester films polycarbonate films polystyrene films polyphenylene sulfide films polypropylene films polyimide films vinyl chlorides and the like. Among these polyester films and vinyl chlorides are preferably used.

Pigments and dyes are added to the materials to color them so as to form the core sheet. The core sheet may have a film shaped form plate shaped form or a shape having a thickness such that it is inflexible or has sufficient strength required for use as a core sheet.

Preferable examples of the core sheet used in the invention include plastic films having a thickness of in a range of 50 to 5 000 m and more preferable example thereof include PET films having a thickness of in a range of 100 to 1 000 m.

A material to be transferred onto used in the invention can be made of metals plastics ceramics and the like preferably being those having a sheet shaped form.

Preferable examples of the material to be transferred onto used in the invention include plastic sheets. Particularly preferable examples of the material to be transferred onto used in the invention are opaque so that an image formed on a light transmissible film can be easily seen when it is formed into a plastic sheet image recording body . Typical examples of the transferred body used in the invention include white colored plastic sheets.

The same examples of resins for forming the plastic sheets can be used as the materials of the core sheet. Specific examples thereof include polyacetate films triacetate cellulose films nylon films polyester films polycarbonate films polystyrene films polyphenylene sulfide films polypropylene films polyimide films cellophane ABS acrylonitrile butadiene styrene resin films and the like.

Among the above examples polyester films are preferably used and particularly preferable examples thereof include PETG a copolymer of polyethylene terephthalate with a modifying glycol in which approximately half of ethylene glycol moieties of PET polyethylene terephthalate are substituted with 1 4 cyclohexane methanol moieties materials which are formed by alloying PET by mixing polycarbonate therewith and non crystalline polyesters which are non biaxial orientation and called A PET .

It is preferable that at least one surface on which an image is transferred of the transferred body used in the invention includes the PETG described above. By forming the image transferred surface with PETG transferred image forming material toner can be almost completely imbedded in the surface of the transferred body thus a surface of a finally obtained image recording body can be made in a similar condition as a surface of an electrophotography image forming material transferring sheet.

When the image recording body of the invention is used as IC cards magnetic cards or the like IC chips antennas magnetic stripes external terminals or the like are imbedded therein in accordance with necessity. Additionally magnetic stripes or holograms may be printed and or required text information may be embossed thereon.

A substrate used for a laminate film for electrophotography in the invention is required to have transparency. Transparency herein designates the characteristic to transmit light in a visible region to some extent. A substrate used in the invention is required to have transparency which at least allows visible observation of formed images through a side which is opposite to the side on which the image are formed.

The plastic films which can be used as materials of the core sheets can be similarly used for the substrate.

Among the above various plastic films polyester films are preferably used and particularly preferable examples thereof include PETG described above materials which are formed by alloying PET by mixing polycarbonate therewith and non crystalline polyesters which are non biaxial orientation called A PET .

A Vicat softening temperature VST of the substrate is preferably in a range of 70 to 130 C. and preferably in a range of 80 to 120 C.

If the VST of the substrate is lower than 70 C. insufficient adherence of the light transmittable sheet to the core sheet core may occur in the heating and pressing process. If the VST of the substrate is higher than 130 C. image defects image run may occur owing to excessive softening of images image forming materials even though the above described adherence is sufficient.

The Vicat softening temperature is measured by a method for evaluating a softening temperature of a thermoplastic resin. Examples of the method include known heat resistance testing methods for shape formed plastic materials and specific examples thereof which are applied to for evaluation of thermoplastic resins include ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials Standard D1525 ISO International Organization for Standardization and the like.

A surface resistivity of at least one surface of the substrate is preferably in a range of 1 10to 1 10 and is more preferably in a range of 1 10to 1 10 .

If the surface resistivity is smaller than 1 10 the resistance of an image recording body may become too small which may cause disturbed toner transferred from a transfer member. If the surface resistivity is larger than 1 10 a resistance of a light transmissible film may become too large which may cause image defects caused by insufficient transfer owing to incapability of transfer of toner from the transfer member to a surface of the film.

The surface resistivity can be measured by using a circular electrode for example trade name HR PROBE of HIRESTA IP manufactured by Mitsubishi Petrochemical Co. Ltd. under conditions of 23 C. and 55 RH in accordance with known surface resistivity measuring methods.

When only the surface on one side of a laminate film for electrophotography satisfies the above described range it is preferable that the surface on this side is the one on which an image is formed.

Examples of method for controlling a surface resistivity of at least one side surface of the substrate so as to be in the range of 1 10to 1 10 include adding surfactants conductive polymer materials conductive microparticles or the like to resins during formation of substrate films coating surfactants on surfaces of the films vapor depositing metallic thin films and adding appropriate amounts of surfactants to adhesives or the like.

A thickness of the substrate is preferably in a range of 50 to 500 m and more preferably in a range of 75 to 150 m. If the thickness is smaller than 50 m unfavorable conveyance conditions may be caused and if the thickness is larger than 500 m image deterioration owing to unfavorable transfer may occur.

The laminate film for electrophotography used in the invention preferably has a image receiving layer formed on a surface of one side thereof and a function controlling means on a surface of the side which is opposite to the one on which the image receiving layer is formed.

The function controlling means preferably has at least one function selected from the group consisting of glossiness controlling light resistance controlling antimicrobial property controlling flame retardancy controlling releasing property controlling and charging property controlling. Specifically the function controlling means are provided so as to add and or improve various functions such as glossiness light resistance antimicrobial property flame retardancy releasing property and conductivity and further preferably humidity resistance thermal resistance water repellency abrasion resistance and scratching resistance. Thereby the laminate film for electrophotography which has the function controlling means can exhibit resistances under various conditions of use.

Materials which can be used for the substrate of the light transmissible film can be similarly used for a substrate of an electrophotography image forming material transferring sheet used in the invention.

The transferring sheet used in the invention preferably has an image receiving layer formed on at least one side surface of the substrate in which the image receiving layer includes at least a releasing material and a surface resistivity of the image receiving layer is in a range of 1 10to 3.2 10 under conditions of 23 C. and 55 RH.

Namely since the surface resistivity of the image receiving layer formed on a surface of the transferring sheet is in the appropriate range favorable image formation can be implemented without occurrences of unfavorable transfer or the like in electrophotographic image formation. Further since the image receiving layer includes the releasing material which enables favorable transfer of image forming materials as described below to a transferred body the fixation properties of the images are also excellent.

Releasing material is used in the image receiving layer of the transferring sheet which is used for temporarily fixing an image forming material thereon and releasing the image forming material when it is heated and pressed with a body to be transferred onto. Accordingly the releasing material preferably has adhesiveness to toners which are generally used as image forming materials and releasing properties.

The composition of the releasing material is not specifically limited however the releasing material preferably includes silicone hard coat material in view of possessing releasing properties and being able to suppress scratching of a surface of the film which may occur when the film is conveyed.

Using an apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body shown in and using a light transmissible film laminate film for electrophotography as a film a plastic sheet is prepared. A cleaning apparatus in this manufacturing apparatus has a construction in which one cleaning roll pair of a diameter of 50 mm composed of a butyl rubber hardness 40 to 70 is provided and an charge removing apparatus is not provided. A conveying rate of a laminate in cleaning apparatus is 7 mm sec.

In image forming apparatus a color mirror image is formed containing a solid image 8 of 85.6 mm 54 mm card sized images are arranged is printed on a surface of a transparent film A4 size thickness 100 m surface resistivity 2.8 10 Vicat softening temperature 78 C. . The transparent film is composed of a PETG resin is stacked on a film stacker and a surface temperature of the laminate film at the time of fixation is in a range of 95 to 100 C.

In the collating apparatus the laminate film is overlaid on a front and back of a white sheet trade name DIACLARE W2012 manufactured by Mitsubishi Plastics Inc. A4 size thickness 500 m Vicat softening temperature 85 C. of an A4 size having a surface of PETG and an interior of A PET set in a core sheet stacker using collating tray . Positioning is performed on the image surfaces laminate surfaces so that the positions of the four corners of each film are aligned and for the laminate tentative fastening is performed with a tentative fastening apparatus .

In a heating pressing apparatus belts constituting a belt pair are stainless endless belts having specular processed surfaces having a ten point average roughness Rz of 2 m circumferential length of 1000 mm width of 340 mm and a thickness is 0.2 m. This belt is mounted on a laminating unit to form a belt pair and the belts are set to apply a pressure of 1 MPa to a heating pressing roll pair .

In the present apparatus a rate of conveying a laminate is 7 mm sec and a set temperature of heating pressing roll pair in the laminating unit is 150 C.

One hundred plastic sheets having the aforementioned construction are continuously manufactured. Then each of manufactured plastic sheets is cut into a card size the presence or the absence of dirt or dust is confirmed by visual observation of each card and no defects are detected in any of the cards.

Then the one hundred plastic sheets are continuously manufactured according to the same construction except that a cleaning apparatus in the manufacturing apparatus is removed. The presence or absence of dirt or dust is confirmed for each card obtained from a plastic sheet after manufacturing and defects due to incorporation of dust is recorded in 30 of the cards.

Using an apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body as shown in and using as a film an electrophotographic image forming material transferring sheet an image recording body is manufactured. The construction of a cleaning apparatus and other members in this manufacturing apparatus are the same as that of Example 1.

By setting a transferring sheet A4 size thickness 100 m surface resistivity 5.4 10 an image receiving layer having a thickness of 1 m comprising a silicone hard coating agent containing a silicone fine particle having a substrate of PET on a film stacker in an image forming apparatus and setting a white sheet trade name DIACLARE W2012 as above of an A4 size having a surface of PETG and an interior of A PET on a core sheet stacker in a collating apparatus . 100 of the laminates are continuously manufactured as in Experimental Example 1 and subsequently transferring sheets are peeled from front and back surfaces thereof with a peeling apparatus .

Then each of the manufactured finished recordings of the material to be transferred onto is cut into a card size the presence or the absence of dust or dirt is confirmed by visual observation of each card. No defects are perceived in any of the cards.

Then 100 of the finished recordings of the materials to be transferred onto are continuously manufactured according to the same construction except that a cleaning apparatus in the manufacturing apparatus is removed. The presence or the absence of dust or dirt is confirmed similarly for each card obtained from a plastic sheet after manufacturing. Defects due to incorporation of dust is perceived in 50 of the cards.

As explained above in the apparatus for manufacturing an image recording body of the invention manufacturing process since before a heating manufacturing step it becomes possible to remove dust or dirt on the surfaces of the laminate the film or the support an image recording body having a high good product ratio can be obtained.

