---

title: Catheter systems having flow restrictors
abstract: Catheter systems including one or more flow restrictors are disclosed. The catheter systems may include two or more delivery branches. The delivery branches may be connected to a supply catheter section using a branching catheter connector that may include one or more flow restrictors. The flow restrictors may include a restrictor body located within a lumen with a channel located between the restrictor body and interior surface of the lumen, the channel restricting flow through the lumen past the flow restrictor. The channel may be defined by a groove formed in the restrictor body and/or the interior surface of the lumen. Methods of providing pressure relief by flowing fluid past a flow restrictor are also disclosed.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07766860&OS=07766860&RS=07766860
owner: Medtronic, Inc.
number: 07766860
owner_city: Minneapolis
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050422
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 564 473 titled CATHETER SYSTEM HAVING FLOW RESTRICTION AND DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM FOR USE WITH SAME filed Apr. 22 2004 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

The present invention relates generally to implantable medical devices and more particularly to flow restrictors in medical catheters and branching catheter connectors incorporating one or more flow restrictors.

Implantable infusion systems are used to provide programmable long term delivery of a therapeutic agent e.g. infusate drug to a target site such as the brain or the spinal canal or epidural space. These systems typically include a pump implanted at a remote location e.g. within the abdominal or chest cavity and a catheter tunneled from the pump to the target site. A drug may be delivered from a reservoir in the pump to the target site via the catheter.

Some therapies e.g. treatment of many neurological diseases may benefit from infusion of a therapeutic agent to multiple locations within the body. For instance for the treatment of Parkinson s Disease it may be beneficial to deliver a substance e.g. Glial Derived Neurotrophic Factor GDNF to both hemispheres of the brain bilaterally . Infusing a drug to such multiple target sites is typically accomplished by separate infusion systems e.g. a separate pump and catheter system for each target site. However duplicate systems result in not only increased costs and patient invasiveness as compared to single target site systems but also increased complexity that is inherent in such dual systems.

The present invention is directed to catheter systems including one or more flow restrictors for use with the same. The catheter systems may include two or more delivery branches. The delivery branches may be connected a supply catheter using a branching connector. Methods of delivering a drug via catheter systems of the invention e.g. a branching catheter system to multiple target locations within a body are also provided.

In one embodiment a flow restrictor for use with an implantable catheter system is provided. The flow restrictor may include a restrictor body having one or more helical grooves formed in an outer surface thereof. The flow restrictor body is located within a lumen of the catheter such that the one or more grooves form channels with the interior surface of the lumen. Fluid flow through the channel or channels is preferably restricted because of the limited cross sectional size of the channel or channels.

Although it may be preferred that the groove or grooves in the flow restrictor body form the flow restricted channel or channels in combination with the interior surface of the lumen in some embodiments the flow restrictor may be provided using a body located within a separate sheath. The interior surface of the sheath is then used in combination with the groove or grooves in the restrictor body to form the flow restricted channel or channels. The combined flow restrictor body and sheath may then be inserted within the catheter lumen.

In another alternative one or more grooves may be formed in the interior surface of the lumen in which a flow restrictor body is located while the outer surface of the restrictor body is substantially smooth. In such an embodiment the groove or grooves in the interior surface of the lumen together with the smooth outer surface of the restrictor body define one or more channels extending from an upstream end of the flow restrictor body to the downstream end of the flow restrictor body.

In still another alternative both the interior surface of the lumen and the outer surface of the flow restrictor body may each include one or more grooves formed therein. In such an embodiment the grooves in the surfaces facing each other may preferably cooperate to form one or more channels that allow for fluid flow from the upstream end of the restrictor body to the downstream end of the restrictor body.

In another embodiment a branching catheter connector for use in bifurcating flow in an infusion system is provided. The connector may include in inlet port and at least two outlet ports. Each outlet port may include a flow restrictor associated therewith. In some embodiments the connector may further include a filter element. The flow restrictors may generate backpressure and maintain substantially equivalent flow through a distal catheter coupled to each outlet port.

In yet another embodiment a method for delivering a substance to two locations in a body is provided. The method includes delivering the substance to a branching catheter connector through a primary or proximal catheter. The branching catheter connector may e.g. bifurcate flow of the substance to a first and a second leg. Each of the first and second legs may include a flow restrictor to assist in maintaining substantially equal flow through both the first and second legs. First and second distal catheters may couple respectively to the first and second legs. In some embodiments the substance may be filtered prior or subsequent to flow bifurcation.

Although bifurcated catheter connectors are described herein catheter connectors of the present invention may be used to separate flow into three or more legs of a branching catheter.

Furthermore although the flow restrictors are described as providing equal flow rates through the different legs of a branched catheter the flow restrictors of the present invention may provide different flow rates through the different legs by varying the flow restriction provided by the different flow restrictors.

The term flow restrictor as used herein is intended to represent a resistance that is added to a system to bring the total resistance above a specified value it does not necessarily refer to a singular component. For example two flow restrictors i.e. two components of equal resistance placed in series at the tip of a given catheter could be functionally equivalent to a single flow restrictor whose resistance is twice that of either of the series restrictors taken by itself.

The fluids delivered using the present invention preferably contain one or more drugs. A drug of the present invention may include a therapeutic substance. Other substances may or may not be intended to have a therapeutic effect and are not easily classified such as e.g. saline solution fluoroscopy agents disease diagnostic agents etc. Unless otherwise noted in the following paragraphs the term drug as used herein may include any therapeutic diagnostic or other substance that is delivered using the implantable medical devices of the present invention.

Therapeutic substances delivered using the present invention may preferably be intended to have a therapeutic effect such as pharmaceutical compositions genetic materials biologics and other substances. Pharmaceutical compositions are typically chemical formulations intended to have a therapeutic effect such as intrathecal antispasmodics pain medications chemotherapeutic agents and the like. Pharmaceutical compositions may be configured to function in an implanted environment with characteristics such as stability at body temperature to retain therapeutic qualities concentration to reduce the frequency of replenishment and the like. Genetic materials include substances intended to have a direct or indirect genetic therapeutic effect such as genetic vectors genetic regulator elements genetic structural elements DNA and the like. Biologics include substances that are living matter or derived from living matter intended to have a therapeutic effect such as stem cells platelets hormones biologically produced chemicals and the like.

In one aspect the present invention provides a medical catheter that includes a lumen with an interior lumen surface a flow restrictor located within the lumen the flow restrictor comprising a restrictor body located within the lumen and a channel located between an outer surface of the restrictor body and the interior lumen surface of the lumen wherein the channel extends from an upstream end of the restrictor body to a downstream end of the restrictor body such that fluid passing through the lumen flows through the channel when the fluid is delivered to the flow restrictor below a selected pressure. In some embodiments the channel may be defined by a groove formed in the outer surface of the restrictor body wherein the groove extends from the upstream end to the downstream end of the restrictor body. In other embodiments the channel may be defined by a groove formed in the interior lumen surface of the lumen wherein the groove extends from the upstream end to the downstream end of the restrictor body.

In another aspect the present invention provides a branching catheter connector for use in a branched medical catheter. The connector includes an inlet port and two or more outlet ports in fluid communication with the inlet port. Each of the outlet ports includes an outlet port lumen with an interior surface a flow restrictor located within the outlet port lumen the flow restrictor having a restrictor body located within the outlet port lumen and a channel located between an outer surface of the restrictor body and the interior surface of the outlet port lumen wherein the channel extends from an upstream end of the restrictor body to a downstream end of the restrictor body such that fluid passing through the outlet port lumen flows through the channel when the fluid is delivered to the flow restrictor below a selected pressure. In some embodiments the channel may be defined by a groove formed in the outer surface of the restrictor body wherein the groove extends from the upstream end to the downstream end of the restrictor body. In other embodiments the channel may be defined by a groove formed in the interior surface of the outlet port lumen wherein the groove extends from the upstream end to the downstream end of the restrictor body.

In another aspect the present invention provides a medical catheter system that includes a lumen and a flow restrictor located within the lumen. The flow restrictor includes one or more capillaries within the lumen wherein each capillary of the one or more capillaries has a first opening at an upstream end of the flow restrictor and a second opening at a downstream end of the flow restrictor. Each capillary of the one or more capillaries includes one or more coils within the lumen. Fluid passing through the lumen from the upstream end to the downstream end of the flow restrictor flows through the one or more capillaries when the fluid is delivered to the upstream end of the flow restrictor below a selected pressure.

In another aspect the present invention provides a method of providing pressure relief within a medical catheter system. The method includes providing a medical catheter system that includes a lumen with an interior lumen surface a flow restrictor located within the lumen the flow restrictor having a restrictor body located within the lumen and a channel located between an outer surface of the restrictor body and the interior lumen surface of the lumen wherein the channel extends from an upstream end of the restrictor body to a downstream end of the restrictor body. The method further includes passing fluid through only the channel from the upstream end of the restrictor body to the downstream end of the restrictor body when fluid pressure within the lumen is below a selected pressure. Pressure relief is provided by passing fluid between the outer surface of the restrictor body and the interior lumen surface of the lumen outside of the channel when fluid pressure is above the selected pressure.

The above summary is not intended to describe each embodiment or every implementation of the present invention. Rather a more complete understanding of the invention will become apparent and appreciated by reference to the following Detailed Description of Exemplary Embodiments in view of the accompanying figures of the drawing.

In the following detailed description of illustrative embodiments of the invention reference is made to the accompanying figures of the drawing which form a part hereof and in which are shown by way of illustration specific embodiments in which the invention may be practiced. It is to be understood that other embodiments may be utilized and structural changes may be made without departing from the scope of the present invention.

Embodiments of the present invention may include flow restrictors for use in fluid delivery tubes e.g. in implantable medical catheters. These flow restrictors may provide flow resistance to a fluid within the catheter creating a backpressure therein. By generating such backpressure various potential benefits may be realized including for example the ability to generate diagnostic information as further described below.

Another potential benefit of flow restrictors in accordance with embodiments of the present invention is realized with branching catheter systems that may deliver a substance to two or more separate target areas within a body. Branching catheter systems may divide flow from a first or proximal catheter to two or more legs to which are coupled secondary or distal catheters e.g. utilizing a Y coupling for a bifurcating catheter system. As a result a single infusion pump may be used to deliver one or more drugs to multiple locations within a body. To provide substantially equal flow to each distal catheter embodiments of the branching catheter systems may provide a flow resistor limiting flow through each leg. The flow restrictor may preferably contribute to balancing flow through each leg. In addition the backpressure created by the flow resistor may preferably allow a sensor e.g. pressure sensor associated with the infusion pump to detect when catheter flow is abnormal e.g. when one or more of the proximal or distal catheters is cut or occluded.

For simplicity the catheters e.g. catheter and flow restrictors e.g. flow restrictor body are described herein as being generally cylindrical in shape. However this configuration is not limiting and embodiments having different shapes are certainly possible without departing from the scope of the invention. For example the catheters and flow restrictors may include cross sectional profiles that are triangular oval elliptical hexagonal semicircular etc.

The flow restrictor body may substantially block the lumen of the catheter as illustrated. However a fluid may pass the restrictor by entering a groove formed in the depicted embodiment in an outer surface of the flow restrictor body . While the depicted groove is helical in form it should be understood that the groove or grooves used in connection with the present invention may or may not be helical. Grooves with helical or other paths may be useful for increasing the length of the flow path for a given length along a longitudinal axis extending along the direction of fluid flow through the lumen .

While only a single groove is illustrated other embodiments may use multiple grooves where appropriate e.g. to reduce total flow resistance. If multiple grooves are used they may intersect with each other at one or more locations or they may not intersect. Moreover other factors e.g. groove dimensions and other threadform geometry surface finish etc. may be altered to provide the desired flow restriction.

The flow restrictor body may preferably fit tightly e.g. with an interference fit within the lumen such that the helical groove effectively forms a channel bounded by the inner diameter of the lumen . Accordingly it may be preferred that the only flow past the flow restrictor body may be through the channel formed by the groove in combination with the interior surface of the lumen .

The flow restrictor may provide flow resistance and thus backpressure so that a pressure sensor located upstream e.g. in an infusion pump can be utilized to detect when the catheter is cut or occluded. That is by creating a measurable pressure in the lumen upstream of the flow restrictor variations in that backpressure may potentially be utilized to predict occlusions increased pressure or leaks decreased pressure .

Another potential function that may be exhibited by flow restrictors of the present invention is pressure relief. In some embodiments the flow restrictors of the present invention may preferably allow increased flow in response to pressure increases past a selected relief pressure. For example the walls of the lumen may be made of materials that exhibit elastic properties that allow for expansion of the lumen e.g. expansion of the diameter of the lumen for circular lumens in response to increased pressure upstream of the flow restrictor. Expansion of the lumen may allow fluid to flow between the outer surface of the flow restrictor body and the interior surface of the lumen outside of the groove or grooves if multiple grooves are present .

In an alternative embodiment that may provide pressure relief function in situations where e.g. the interior of the lumen is inextensible the flow restrictor body may be compressible in response to increases in pressure of the fluid flowing past the flow restrictor . In such an embodiment the outer diameter of the outer surface of the flow restrictor body may decrease in response to fluid pressure thus allowing fluid to flow between the outer surface of the flow restrictor body and the interior surface of the lumen outside of the groove or grooves if multiple grooves are present .

In still another alternative pressure relief functions may be provided by embodiments that include both an expandable lumen and a compressible flow restrictor body .

The flow restrictors of the present invention may also be incorporated into branching catheter connector e.g. a flow restrictor may be located so as to limit fluid flow in each outlet leg of a branching catheter system. In this application discussed in more detail below the flow restrictors may help to control e.g. equalize or balance the flow to each catheter branch in the event of e.g. partial obstruction at one or both fluid outlets.

Although the embodiment of includes a bifurcating catheter system the present invention may include catheter systems with three or more branches. In other variations although the depicted system is implanted for delivery into the brain of a patient it should be understood that branching catheter systems of the present invention may be used to deliver fluids to other areas of the body.

The pump may include a reservoir to hold a volume of fluid preferably liquid containing one or more drugs. The reservoir may be periodically refilled via an injection port not shown and a pump mechanism e.g. pressurized bladder peristaltic pump piston pump etc. provided may propel the fluid through the proximal and distal catheters and . While not wishing to be bound to any particular configuration the pump may be a SYNCHROMED II manufactured by Medtronic Inc. of Fridley Minn. USA.

The pump may further include a flow sensing device e.g. a pressure sensor . The pressure sensor may be similar to that described in U.S. Patent Application Publication No. US 2005 0075624 A1 entitled Pressure Sensor for Medical Device see also U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 691 814 filed 23 Oct. 2003 and entitled Method for Monitoring Bolus Delivery U.S. Pat. No. 6 551 290 entitled Catheter for Target Specific Drug Delivery and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 625 751 filed 26 Jul. 2000 and entitled Catheter for Target Specific Drug Delivery .

The catheter system may preferably include a branching catheter connector that is used to divide flow to the different branches. is a top plan view of one embodiment of a branching catheter connector and is the same in cross section. Components within the connector may be at least partially visualized in if the materials of the catheter connector are transparent or translucent.

Referring back to although the branching catheter connector is depicted as being separated from the pump by the supply catheter which delivers fluid to the inlet port flow restriction could alternatively be provided at the pump such that the pump feeds directly into the inlet port of the connector . In such an embodiment the separate catheters for each branch may extend to the target sites without the need for subsequent branching.

As illustrated in these views a bifurcating connector such as that depicted may preferably form a generally Y shaped device having a lumen that starts at the proximal inlet port and then branches to both the first or left outlet port and the second or right outlet port . The outlet ports and may couple respectively to the first or left distal catheter and the second or right distal catheter see .

The included angle between the outlet ports and is illustrated and described herein as about 90 degrees. However embodiments wherein the included angle is different e.g. 0 degrees outlets are parallel or 180 degrees a T shaped connector etc. are certainly possible without departing from the scope of the invention.

The connector body may in one embodiment be made from molded silicone e.g. Nu Sil MED 4870 LSR 65 75 Shore A durometer . This material may provide certain potentially desirable benefits e.g. desirable material properties such as elastic and creep characteristics at a relatively low cost. However other biocompatible materials such as ETR silicone urethane polyurethane etc. are also possible without departing from the scope of the invention.

An inlet fitting may be inserted into the inlet port as illustrated herein while an outlet fitting may be inserted into each outlet port and . The inlet fitting is shown in while the outlet fitting is shown in .

The inlet fitting may preferably include an enlarged portion s having an external dimension or diameter that fits within the inlet port with an interference fit. The inlet fitting may also include a pin portion operable to insert into the lumen of a supply or proximal catheter e.g. catheter as depicted in with an interference fit.

As used herein the phrase interference fit refers to the coupling of a male member having a dimension larger than an undeflected or undeformed dimension of a mating female receptacle such that one or both of the male and female members deforms during assembly. As a result a substantially tight and leak free fit may be obtained once the parts are assembled.

A filter may preferably be attached to or integrally formed with the inlet fitting . In one embodiment the inlet fitting may preferably be made from titanium with the filter being a sintered titanium member welded to the fitting . However other embodiments wherein the filter is a separate component e.g. fits within the fitting or embodiments wherein one or both of the filter and the fitting are made from other biocompatible materials e.g. polysulfone polycarbonate ethylene tetrafluoroethylene ETFE etc. may also be used without departing from the scope of the invention. Regardless of the exact location of the filter it may preferably be located within the flow path between a pump and outlet ports and such that fluids passing into the branches through outlet ports and must pass through the filter before entering the branches.

As shown in the filter may preferably be a cup shaped member having its inner surface in fluid communication with a lumen of the inlet fitting which in turn is in fluid communication with a supply or proximal catheter e.g. catheter as depicted in . The cup shape of the filter may provide increased surface area and thus potentially increased filtering capacity over which to filter the passing fluid. To further improve fluid passage through the filter it may be preferable that a gap exist between the outer surface of the filter and the inner surface of the inlet port of the connector . However such a configuration is not required. In fact filters of most any configuration are possible without departing from the scope of the invention. For instance a flat porous disc or plug could be used in place of the cup shaped filter depicted in .

The micron rating of the filter may preferably be selected to reduce the likelihood that downstream flow restrictors used to control fluid flow through the branches will not occlude with debris. In one exemplary embodiment the filter may have a micron rating of about 5 microns.

It may be preferred that the filter or filters be positioned upstream of any point at which fluid flow is divided for delivery into the different branches of the branched catheter system. In the depicted embodiment the location of the inlet filter may be beneficial to ensure that occlusion of the filter pores has an essentially equivalent effect on flow to both branches i.e. both outlet ports and of the connector . However other configurations that replace the filter with branch filters or alternatively utilize staged filters are contemplated.

To assist with retaining the inlet fitting within the connector the inlet fitting may preferably be provided with a depressed portion that may preferably align with a suture groove formed in the connector when assembled. Thus when a suture is used to secure the connector to tissue additional resistance to separation of the fitting from the connector may be obtained.

A flow restrictor may also be provided within each outlet port and of the connector . Like the flow restrictor body described above each flow restrictor may preferably include a flow restrictor body having a groove preferably helical formed in an outer surface . The helical groove may provide a fluid pathway having a predetermined flow resistance by virtue of its small effective diameter e.g. its groove geometry.

The outer surface of the flow restrictor body may preferably fit inside the outlet port and with an interference fit sufficient to ensure reliable sealing under all anticipated flow rates and pressures. Alternatively other embodiments could configure the interface between the output port or and the outer surface to mimic a pressure relief valve e.g. the portion of the body defining the lumen of each outlet port and could swell sufficiently that at a particular threshold pressure a bypass of the restriction is created. Stated another way at a certain threshold backpressure the lumen of each outlet port in the body could expand sufficiently to permit fluid to pass between the outer surfaces of the flow restrictor bodies and the interior surfaces of the lumens of outlet ports and outside of the channels created by grooves of restrictors sometimes referred to as blow by thereby reducing backpressure to within acceptable ranges.

Similarly as shown in the downstream end of the flow restrictor body may include features e.g. one or more notches operable to more easily allow fluid to exit the helical groove . The notch or notches are optional and may not be provided in some embodiments. Notch may be formed using techniques similar to those used to form notch at the upstream end of the flow restrictor body .

After exiting the flow restrictor fluid may preferably enter a reduced section of the outlet fitting . The reduced section may provide increased clearance between the fitting and the interior surface of the lumen in each outlet port or . Once fluid has entered the reduced section it may preferably flow through a transverse passageway which is preferably in fluid communication with a fitting lumen see e.g. of the outlet fitting . The passageway may preferably be oriented perpendicular to a centerline of the outlet fitting where the centerline is defined by the direction of fluid flow through the fitting lumen . It may be preferred that the fitting lumen include a proximal end into which the passageway feeds and a distal end from which fluid flows out of the outlet fitting in the direction of the arrow seen in .

As illustrated in the passageway may pass completely through the fitting e.g. there may be multiple entries into passageway e.g. on opposing sides of the fitting . In an alternative embodiment the passageway may be blind e.g. it may intersect the lumen but not penetrate the opposite side of the fitting . In other alternatives more than two openings may be provided to allow fluid to pass into the fitting lumen from the flow restrictor.

The flow restrictor body and body of the outlet fitting may in one embodiment be a unitary part such that the bodies are provided as a one piece completely integral unit e.g. machined as a single component from a single block of material . Such a construction may provide ease of assembly e.g. low risk of damaging or clogging threads via handling and improved resistance to pullout upon attachment and or removal of distal catheters and . However designs in which the restrictor and fitting are separate components are within the scope of the present invention.

The flow restrictors used in the outlet ports and may preferably be configured to provide sufficient backpressure so that any naturally occurring resistance differentials at the target delivery site e.g. differential resistance caused by partial occlusion in one branch fed by one of the outlet ports is negligible in comparison. The backpressure created by the flow restrictors may also be relatively large in comparison to other potential catheter pressure changes such as those caused by variations in atmospheric or physiologic pressure. As a result a pressure sensor attached to the catheter system may have an adequate signal to noise ratio to accurately distinguish differentials due to cuts occlusions in the catheters from those changes attributable to these background factors.

Referring again to FIGS. B and one example of flow of infusate through the system will now be described. The infusate may flow from the catheter into the lumen of the inlet fitting where it may then enter the inside of the filter . After filtering the infusate may travel through each branch of the connector until it reaches the flow restrictors . The infusate may enter the helical groove via the notch see and travel along the channel formed by the groove which is substantially bounded on one side by the interior surface of the outlet ports the inner lumen of the body . The infusate may exit the groove via the notch see where it then enters the reduced section . The reduced section may preferably be as described above stepped down such that there is clearance with respect to the inner surface of the outlet port or . The infusate fluid may then pass through the passageway and into the lumen of the outlet fitting which is coupled to the distal catheter or .

The body of the connector may preferably include features to ensure that a physician does not place a suture around the flow restrictor body and thereby choke off flow through the helical groove . For example the body may include gussets or webs see that extend between the outlet ports and that prevent suturing in the location of the flow restrictors . Moreover while the body may provide suture grooves and to assist with preventing inadvertent removal of the inlet fitting and the outlet fittings other retaining features may be substituted or combined without departing from the scope of the invention. For example raised feature s on the inner surface of the inlet and outlet ports could engage corresponding depression s on the outer surface of the inlet and outlet fittings. Still further adhesives could be used to secure the fittings within the ports of the body .

In one embodiment the branching catheter connector may be assembled by first swelling the connector body in a suitable solvent e.g. hexane or heptane. Once the connector body is adequately swollen the inlet fitting and outlet fittings may be inserted into the respective inlet ports and outlet ports . The inner lumens of the body that define the ports and may be designed with necked down portions near the center of the body. The necked down portions may preferably create a palpable stop against which the fittings and may press thereby reducing the opportunity for over under insertion of the fittings. Alternatively other techniques for ensuring proper assembly are contemplated including for example crimp sleeves and flanges. Once the fittings and are correctly installed the solvent may be allowed to evaporate. Other methods of assembly such as for example press fitting or heat shrinking are also contemplated.

Although the flow restrictors described in connection with FIGS. and A provide a small channel formed by a groove in the outer surface of a restrictor body alternative constructions that achieve the same result may be used. One such alternative is depicted in the cross sectional view of . As seen there flow restrictor body is located within a lumen . The lumen may be in tubing e.g. a catheter or it may be formed as a port in a branching catheter connector.

The outer surface of the flow restrictor body in the embodiment of may preferably be relatively smooth while the interior surface of the lumen may include one or more grooves formed therein. The groove or grooves may preferably but not necessarily be helical in shape. As a result the groove and smooth outer surface of the flow restrictor body may preferably form a small channel that extends from an upstream end of the body to the downstream end of the body . That channel allows fluid to pass through the lumen while providing the desired flow restriction.

The variations described herein such as e.g. multiple grooves to form multiple channels other cross sectional shapes extensible lumens and or compressible flow restrictor bodies to provide pressure relief etc. may also be providing in connection with flow restrictors in which the grooves are formed in the interior lumen surface.

Yet another variation in the flow restrictors of the present invention is that the flow restrictor of and flow restrictor of my be provided as unitary articles that may be located within a separate lumen or passageway to provide the desired flow restriction. In other words the walls forming the lumen and walls forming the lumen may be located within a separate lumen or passageway to provide flow restriction as desired. In such embodiments the flow restrictors may be provided as e.g. flow restriction plugs that may be used alone or in groups of two or more to provide a selected level of flow restriction. One such embodiment may be schematically depicted in in which multiple flow restrictors are provided within a lumen .

The flow restrictors may preferably be secured within the lumen e.g. by an interference fit welding etc. such that fluid moving from the upstream end to the downstream end must move through the flow restrictors . The lumen and or flow restrictors may also possess some extensibility and or compressibility to provide pressure relief functions as described elsewhere herein.

In yet another embodiment of flow restrictors according to the present invention flow resistance may be achieved through a coiled capillary that provides a small channel similar to that formed by the grooves of the other flow restrictor embodiments described herein. Capillaries made of e.g. glass are available with diameters on the order of e.g. 0.001 inches about 0.025 mm . These capillary structures may be coiled with a bend radius and length sufficient to generate the desired flow resistance while maintaining an envelope suitable for implantation. It may be preferred that such capillaries be formed with a substantially uniform bore diameter along their length.

One embodiment of a flow restrictor is depicted in in which a coiled capillary is located within a lumen . The coiled capillary may preferably be held within a plug of material that occludes the remainder of the lumen . As a result fluid moving through the lumen from the upstream end to the downstream end must pass through the coiled capillary . The coiled capillary preferably includes an opening proximate the upstream end through which fluid flows into the capillary and a opening proximate the downstream end through which fluid exits from the capillary . The capillary may preferably include two or more coils located within the lumen where each coil passes around 360 degrees within the lumen .

Although flow restrictor includes only one capillary flow restrictors may include two or more independent capillaries each with openings proximate the upstream and downstream ends of the flow restrictor such that fluid can flow therethrough.

From the foregoing numerous alternative concepts may exist for a flow restrictor s that can be placed in the lumen of a drug infusing catheter. Two or more restrictors may be placed in each leg of a branching catheter system to ensure balanced flow in the event of a catheter malfunction e.g. partial occlusion or cut at one or both catheter outlets or an occlusion at most any location along a distal catheter leg.

A Medtronic SYNCHROMED II pump was used to infuse a saline solution at a rate of about 300 microliters day L day about 150 L day per side left and right via a catheter branching connector substantially similar to that illustrated in .

The connector incorporated a filter see e.g. filter having a 5 micron rating. An outlet fitting see e.g. fitting in incorporating a flow restrictor see e.g. flow restrictor was also provided. The restrictor included a helical groove see e.g. groove formed on a uniform cylindrical portion of the outlet fitting. The flow restrictor had a nominal diameter of about 0.072 inches about 1.8 mm and a length of about 0.14 inches about 3.6 mm . The groove had a nominal depth of about 0.0012 inches about 0.03 mm and a pitch of about 250 threads inch about 10 threads per mm .

The pump connector and related components were then immersed in a 37 C. water bath. Each outlet port of the connector was coupled to a distal catheter that terminated in an oil capped vessel of water set upon a balance. Catheter backpressure atmospheric pressure and the mass of each balance over time were monitored.

Two 72 hour tests were conducted one in which outlet pressures were equal and a second having a differential pressure of 0.15 psi about 1 kPa across outlets e.g. across distal catheter tips brought about by a 4.25 inch about 11 cm water head height difference . The latter was estimated to be a potential implant pressure differential.

Both tests yielded results indicating that flow from each leg of the branching connector was consistently within about 2 of its nominal flow rate of 150 L day. During these tests the 5 m sintered titanium filter remained substantially free from occlusion from the saline solution. Average catheter backpressure during both tests was about 3 psig about 20 kPa .

As used herein and in the appended claims the singular forms a and and the include plural referents unless the context clearly dictates otherwise.

Thus for example reference to a or the component may include one or more of the components and equivalents thereof known to those skilled in the art.

The complete disclosure of the patents patent documents and publications cited in the Background the Detailed Description of Exemplary Embodiments and elsewhere herein are incorporated by reference in their entirety as if each were individually incorporated.

Illustrative embodiments of this invention are discussed and reference has been made to possible variations within the scope of this invention. These and other variations and modifications in the invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art without departing from the scope of the invention and it should be understood that this invention is not limited to the illustrative embodiments set forth herein.

