---

title: Methods for the isolation and expansion of cord blood derived T regulatory cells
abstract: The present invention encompasses methods, and kits for the isolation and expansion of T regulatory cells having the CD45RAphenotype, including such cells from human umbilical cord blood.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09273282&OS=09273282&RS=09273282
owner: The Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania
number: 09273282
owner_city: Philadelphia
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050914
---
The present application claims priority pursuant to 35 U.S.C. 119 e to U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 609 916 filed Sep. 15 2004 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety herein.

This invention was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health Grant Nos. R01 AI34495 and R37 HL56067. The Government may have certain rights in this invention.

The present invention relates to T regulatory T cells isolated from human cord blood as well as compositions methods and kits using Tcells so isolated.

Naturally arising CD4CD25T regulatory cells T can restrict or alter most types of immune responses Sakaguchi 200422 531 562 . Initially Tcells were described to be critical for the control of autoimmunity Sakaguchi et al. 1995155 1151 1164 Shevach 2000 18 423 449 and were found on adoptive transfer to prevent experimental autoimmune diseases. More recently Thave been shown to suppress allogeneic immune responses and can prevent transplant rejection Hall et al. 1998161 5147 5156 Wood et al. 2003 3 199 210 . In addition these cells can restrain anti tumor Peng L et al. 2002169 4811 4821 Gallimore et al. 2002 107 5 9 and anti microbial immune responses Belkaid Y et al. 2002 420 502 507 . Thus CD4CD25Tappear to be central control elements of immunoregulation and understanding their biology is important to efforts aimed at therapeutically manipulating immune responses.

Tcells are best characterized in mice where they constitute 5 10 of lymph node and spleen CD4T cell populations. They are generated both through central thymic developmental mechanisms in pathogen free mice and also arise by poorly defined peripheral generation or expansion mechanisms Apostolou et al. 2002 3 756 763 Shevach et al. 2002 2 389 400 . To date Tcells have primarily been defined by co expression of CD4and CD25antigens on fresh isolation. CD25 as well as other markers of murine T CTLA4 CD 152 and GITR Glucocorticoid Induced TNF like Receptor are all activation antigens on conventional T cells and therefore are not specific. FoxP3 a nuclear protein thought to function as a transcriptional repressor is a newer marker considered to be more specific for Tcells Ramsdell et al. 2003 15 718 24 . It was demonstrated that after activation T cell receptor based antigen specific or anti CD3 Tcells can non specifically suppress proliferation of both CD4and CD8T cells. The mechanism of suppression is unclear and in vitro appears to require cell cell contact. A functional result of suppression is impaired production of IL 2 Thornton et al. 1998 188 287 296 Shevach et al. 2001 182 58 67 . In vivo the suppression mechanism is more controversial with some studies demonstrating dependence on immunosuppressive cytokines Asseman et al. 1999 190 995 1004 which are not required for in vitro suppression.

Studies in mouse models of bone marrow transplantation BMT have shown that fresh or culture expanded CD4CD25cells can delay or prevent disease Taylor et al. 2002 99 3493 3499 Hoffmann et al. 2002 196 389 399 Cohen et al. 2002 196 401 406 . Previous studies have demonstrated that Tpolyclonally expanded ex vivo for 10 days with anti CD3 plus IL 2 can be effective in preventing graft versus host disease GVHD Taylor et al. 2002 99 3493 3499 . Ex vivo expansion of Tcells with irradiated allogeneic APCs plus exogenous IL 2 is also effective at suppressing GVHD Cohen et al. 2002 196 401 406 . In some model systems Tcells can prevent GVHD and still allow for graft versus leukemia GVL effects Edinger et al. 2003 9 1144 1150 Jones et al. 20039 243 56 Trenado et al. 2003 112 1688 96 . In addition studies in mouse models of autoimmune disease have demonstrated that culture expanded antigen specific transgenic TCR CD4CD25cells can prevent or even treat diabetes Tang et al. 2004199 1455 1465 . Consequently Tcells have a role in clinical immunosuppressive therapy in transplantation provided human Tcells can be isolated and expanded in culture to generate sufficient numbers for in vivo infusion.

While the murine data are very promising there still remains a practical problem of isolating pure Tfrom human blood. In young mice CD4CD25cells are moderately abundant and the CD25subset is readily apparent. In humans the CD25cells are not as discrete of a population as there exists a large and overlapping population of CD25 dim cells. It is possible that the co purification of conventional T cells with Tis the basis for the modest or variable suppressor activity observed in studies of human CD4CD25cells Baecher Allan et al. 2004 16 89 98 . FACS cell sorting of the highest 1.7 of CD25expressors CD25cells has been reported to enable suppressor cell isolation Baecher Allan et al. 2001167 1245 1253 . A stringent magnetic bead based approach was required to isolate populations of adult blood derived Tcells pure enough for CD4CD25cells to generate potent suppressor cell lines. Even so strongly suppressive cell lines could only be generated in a subset approximately one third of donors and potency correlated with cell line purity Godfrey et. al. 2004 104 453 461 . FACS sorting of CD25cells top 2.1 has been reported to enable more consistent suppressor cell line generation from adult blood Hoffmann et al. 2004 104 895 903 .

Purification of Tcells from adult blood is possible but difficult. Previous attempts using magnetic activated cell sorting MACS purification to isolate Tcells from adult blood that are sufficiently pure for consistent suppressor activity have resulted in variability in cell function. This variability is largely due to the presence of CD25 dim memory cells which overlap with Tcells. Use of a cell sorter has facilitated the isolation of Tcells Baecher Allan et al. 2001167 1245 1253 and enabled the generation of suppressor cell lines from adult blood Hoffmann et al. 2004104 895 903 . However even sorted populations of adult blood derived CD25cells top 2.9 were found in one report to contain a mix of conventional and regulatory T cells on cloning and functional analysis Levings et. al. 2002 196 1335 1346 .

About 20 of the CD4CD25adult blood cells express CD45RA. This antigen is not expected to be expressed on suppressor cells as they have been described in several reports to be CD45RO positive generally mutually exclusive expression except for transiently during activation of na ve cells . However the isolation of these cells was much better than the CD45RA cells for generating suppressor cell lines 12 12 cell lines isolated by this method were found to be potent suppressors . On na ve T cells the CD45RA splice variant is expressed on the T cell surface. Once a T cell differentiates into a memory cell it usually expresses the CD45RO isoform U.S. Publication No. 20050196386 .

Cord blood has previously been shown to contain CD4CD25cells by fluorescence activated cells sorting FACS Paganelli et. al. 1994 155 486 489 Ng et al. 2001 98 2736 2744 Wing et al. 2002 106 190 199 . However there is minimal data reported on the function of these cells. One report has inferred suppressive function based on LDA frequency analysis Ng et al. 2001 98 2736 2744 . The only report evaluating functional activity of freshly isolated CD4CD25cells revealed no suppression of antigen specific responses. In addition there was no increased antigen specific reactivity of CD4cells after CD25cell depletion. However modest suppression was noted in anti CD3 based T cell co culture assays 60 at 1 1 responder suppressor cell ratio Wing et al. 2003 33 579 587 . Thus previous studies indicated that most cord blood derived CD25cells were not yet mature enough to be suppressive Wing K et al. 2003 33 579 587 .

Accordingly until the present invention the properties and benefits of Tcells were recognized but method to isolate and generate sufficient numbers of potent suppressor cells were unknown. Therefore a recognized need for methods to isolate and expand Tcells existed. The present invention meets this need.

The present invention includes a method for isolating a regulatory T cell from a population of phenotypically CD45RAblood cells wherein the Tcell suppresses T cell proliferation. The method of the present invention comprises isolating a population of mononuclear cells from a human umbilical cord blood sample contacting the population of mononuclear cells with an antibody that specifically binds CD25 under conditions suitable for formation of a mononuclear cell antibody complex and substantially separating the mononuclear cell antibody complex from said population of mononuclear cells thereby isolating a regulatory T cell from a population of phenotypically CD45RAblood cells. In one embodiment of the invention the population of phenotypically CD45RAblood cells is from umbilical cord blood preferably a human umbilical cord sample.

The present invention further includes a method of multiplying an isolated regulatory T cell comprising culturing the regulatory T cell in a medium comprising an antibody to CD3 and an antibody to CD28. The medium can further comprise IL 2.

The present invention further comprises a method of inhibiting proliferation of a T cell. The method comprises contacting a T cell with a regulatory T cell isolated by the method described herein.

The present invention also includes kit for isolating a regulatory T cell from a human umbilical cord blood sample. The kit comprises an antibody that specifically binds CD25 bound to a physical support an applicator and an instructional material for the use thereof.

The present invention also includes kit for multiplying a Tcell from a human umbilical cord blood sample. The kit comprises an antibody that specifically binds CD3 bound to a physical support an antibody that specifically binds CD28 bound to a physical support an applicator and an instructional material for the use thereof.

The present invention further comprises a regulatory T cell isolated by the methods of the present invention.

The present invention encompasses methods and kits for the isolation and expansion of an enhanced population of T regulatory cells T having the CD45RAphenotype. The term enhanced as used herein refers to at least 20 more preferably 30 preferably 40 even more preferably 50 even more preferably about 60 even more preferably 60 even more preferably 70 even more preferably 80 even more preferably 90 and even more preferably 100 more than an object that is not enhanced. As an example an enhanced population of regulatory cells has at least 20 more regulatory cells than a population that is not enhanced. The preferred source of such cells was found to be human umbilical cord blood. Methods for producing large numbers of active potent suppressor Tcells from other sources such as adult human blood have been confounded by the presence of memory T cells expressing CD25 at low to moderate levels CD25dim cells and conventional activated T cells CD25 that interfere with Tcell purification. The term T is used herein to refer to a regulatory T cell that expresses both CD4 CD4 and CD25 CD25 . However as demonstrated by the data disclosed herein both of these types of T cells memory and activated are generally lacking or in lower numbers in umbilical cord blood. This is because as disclosed herein cord blood cells develop in a protected environment and are immunologically na ve. Therefore the present invention demonstrates that the CD25Tcells in umbilical cord blood are more readily purified than those derived from other sources such as human adult peripheral blood.

A cell that is CD25 or that expresses CD25 is contrasted herein to a cell that is CD25or does not express a detectable level of CD25. A cell that is CD25dim as used herein has a lower detectable level of CD25 expression than a CD25cell or a CD25bright cell. In addition culturing and multiplying these cells is facilitated and simplified because feeder cells are not necessary to expand Tcell populations.

Tcells are critical to self and allograft tolerance in mice. Studies of human Thave been hindered by low numbers present in peripheral blood and difficult purification. The data disclosed herein demonstrate that cord blood is a superior source for Tisolation and cell line generation compared to adult blood. Cord blood CD4CD25cells were purified and cell lines were generated that consistently exhibited potent suppressor activity with 95 suppression of allogeneic MLR 29 30 donors . Cultured Tcells blocked cytokine accumulation in MLR with inhibition of chemokine production. These cell lines uniformly expressed CD25 CD62L CCR7 CD27 and intracellular CTLA4. Further FoxP3 protein but not mRNA was specifically expressed. Upon re stimulation with anti CD3 CD28 beads the cultured Tproduced minimal cytokines IL 2 IFN gamma and IL 10 and preferentially expressed TGF beta latency associated protein. Cytokine production however was restored to normal levels by re stimulation with PMA ionomycin. Cord blood derived cultured suppressor cell function was predominantly independent of IL 10 and TGF beta. The data disclosed herein demonstrate that cord blood contains a significant number of Tprecursor cells capable of potent suppressor function after culture activation. Banked cord blood specimens may serve as a readily available source of Tfor immunotherapy.

The present invention further encompasses Tcells isolated from human umbilical cord blood samples that have more potent suppressor activity and cytokine suppression capabilities than those derived from other sources. In marked contrast to the prior art the data disclosed herein demonstrates that Tcells isolated from human umbilical cord blood have a potent ability to suppress T cell proliferation and to suppress T cell activation dependent cytokines. Further the present data further demonstrates that cord blood CD4CD25cells can form potent suppressor cells after isolation and culture. The present invention encompasses a method for purifying Tcells using a straightforward direct antibody based purification system for isolating such suppressor cells. After activation and multiplication with anti CD3 CD28 beads and culture in IL 2 cord blood derived CD4CD25cells acquire potent suppressor function which was maintained for long periods of time. Thus the present invention further encompasses a method for inhibiting T cell proliferation and a method for inhibiting cytokine production.

To date all assays of suppressor cell phenotype and function reveal that the cord blood derived and the purest of the adult derived cells have similar profiles. Flow cytometric analysis cytokine production potential and functional profiling have all been essentially the same. Thus the data disclosed herein indicate that both types of lines when pure express equivalent suppressor mechanisms and potency and the advantage of cord blood primarily relates to ease of purification and culture.

The availability of large numbers of suppressor cells has enabled the biochemical and molecular characterization of these special cells. Using the methods disclosed herein greater than 300 million uniform and potent suppressor cells can be generated from one average sized research grade cord blood unit 300 million cells without a cell sorter. These results demonstrate a 1 CD4CD25cell recovery and a 100 fold expansion in culture. This number of cells enables further characterization of TCR signaling alterations FoxP3 regulation and function and suppressor effector mechanisms. In addition an important utility of these cells is to enable clinical testing of a new form of immunotherapy. Suppressor cell lines can be useful for enhancing allograft tolerance induction or down modulating autoimmune diseases.

The present invention comprises a method of isolating a Tcell from an umbilical cord blood sample. The articles a and an are used herein to refer to one or to more than one i.e. to at least one of the grammatical object of the article. By way of example a Tcell means one Tcell or more than one Tcell. The Tcell isolated using the methods of the present invention as demonstrated by the data disclosed herein inhibits T cell proliferation. The method of the present invention comprises isolating a population of cord blood mononuclear cells from an umbilical cord blood sample. A population is used herein to refer to a group of cells having a substantially similar phenotypic characteristic such as being mononuclear cells or expressing CD25RA. Methods for isolating mononuclear cells from a biological sample such as a cord blood sample are well known in the art and include but art not limited to using a density gradient centrifugation techniques so that blood components such as plasma and erythrocytes are separated from mononuclear cells. Methods for isolating mononuclear cells from a blood sample include the Ficoll Hypaque technique.

The cord blood mononuclear cells so isolated can be depleted of cells expressing certain antigens including but not limited to CD34 CD8 CD14 CD19 and CD56. Depletion of these cells can be accomplished using an isolated antibody a biological sample comprising an antibody such as ascites an antibody bound to a physical support and a cell bound antibody. The term antibody as used herein refers to an immunoglobulin molecule which is able to specifically bind to a specific epitope on an antigen. Antibodies can be intact immunoglobulins derived from natural sources or from recombinant sources and can be immunoreactive portions of intact immunoglobulins. Antibodies are typically tetramers of immunoglobulin molecules. The antibodies in the present invention may exist in a variety of forms including for example polyclonal antibodies monoclonal antibodies Fv Fab and F ab as well as single chain antibodies and humanized antibodies Harlow et al. 1999 NY Harlow et al. 1989 New York Houston et al. 198885 5879 5883 Bird et al. 1988 242 423 426 . By the term specifically binds as used herein is meant a compound e.g. a protein a nucleic acid an antibody and the like which recognizes and binds a specific molecule but does not substantially recognize or bind other molecules in a sample.

The antibody of the present invention can be bound to a physical support such as a magnetic bead a dynal bead a microbead a column an adsorption column and an adsorption membrane. Conjugating an antibody to a physical support is well known in the art. Id. Alternatively an antibody conjugated to a physical support such as a magnetic bead can be purchased from a variety of sources such as Milteny Biotec Auburn Calif. .

A variety of antibodies are useful in the present invention. As will be understood by one skilled in the art any antibody that can recognize and bind to a CD antigen of interest such as CD25 CD4 CD34 CD8 CD14 CD19 and CD56 is useful in the present invention. Methods of making an using such antibodies are well known in the art. For example polyclonal antibodies useful in the present invention are generated by immunizing rabbits according to standard immunological techniques well known in the art see e.g. Harlow et al. 1988 supra . Such techniques include immunizing an animal with a chimeric protein comprising a portion of another protein such as a maltose binding protein or glutathione GSH tag polypeptide portion and or a moiety such that the marker protein is rendered immunogenic e.g. a marker protein conjugated with keyhole limpet hemocyanin KLH and a portion comprising the respective marker protein amino acid residues. The chimeric proteins are produced by cloning the appropriate nucleic acids encoding the marker protein into a plasmid vector suitable for this purpose such as but not limited to pMAL 2 or pCMX.

However the invention should not be construed as being limited solely to methods and compositions including these antibodies or to these portions of the protein antigens.

Rather the invention should be construed to include other antibodies as that term is defined elsewhere herein to Tcell surface marker proteins or portions thereof. Further the present invention should be construed to encompass antibodies inter alia bind to the Tproteins and they are able to bind the protein present on Western blots in solution in enzyme linked immunoassays in FACS assays in magnetic actived cell sorting MACS assays and in immunofluorescence microscopy.

One skilled in the art would appreciate based upon the disclosure provided herein that the antibody can specifically bind with any portion of the marker protein and the full length protein can be used to generate antibodies specific therefor. However the present invention is not limited to using the full length protein as an immunogen. Rather the present invention includes using an immunogenic portion of the protein to produce an antibody that specifically binds with a specific Tcell surface protein. That is the invention includes immunizing an animal using an immunogenic portion or antigenic determinant of the cell surface marker protein.

The antibodies can be produced by immunizing an animal such as but not limited to a rabbit a mouse or a goat with a protein of the invention or a portion thereof by immunizing an animal using a protein comprising at least a portion of an Tcell surface antigen or a fusion protein including a tag polypeptide portion comprising for example a maltose binding protein tag polypeptide portion covalently linked with a portion comprising the appropriate amino acid residues. One skilled in the art would appreciate based upon the disclosure provided herein that smaller fragments of these proteins can also be used to produce antibodies that specifically bind an Tcell surface protein.

The invention encompasses polyclonal monoclonal synthetic antibodies and the like. The present invention further comprises the use of biologically active fragments of antibodies such as an Fab fragment an F ab fragment an Fv fragment and an scFv fragment of an antibody. One skilled in the art would understand based upon the disclosure provided herein that the crucial feature of the antibody of the invention is that the antibody bind specifically with an Tcell surface protein. That is the antibody of the invention recognizes an Tcell or a fragment thereof e.g. an immunogenic portion or antigenic determinant thereof on Western blots in immunostaining of cells or immunoprecipitates the protein using standard methods well known in the art.

One skilled in the art would appreciate based upon the disclosure provided herein that the antibodies can be used to immunoprecipitate and or immuno affinity purify their cognate antigen as described in detail elsewhere herein and additionally by using methods well known in the art. In addition the antibody can be used to isolate a Tin a population of cord blood mononuclear cells derived from an umbilical cord blood sample. Thus by using an antibody to a Tcell surface marker such as CD25 a Tcan be identified enriched or isolated. One skilled in the art would understand based upon the disclosure provided herein that any marker either native or genetically engineered expressed on an Tcell surface is thus useful in the present invention.

The skilled artisan would appreciate based upon the disclosure provided herein that that present invention includes use of either a single antibody recognizing a single Tantigen but that the invention is not limited to use of a single antibody. Instead the invention encompasses use of at least one antibody where the antibodies can be directed to the same or different Tantigens.

The generation of polyclonal antibodies is accomplished by inoculating the desired animal with the antigen and isolating antibodies which specifically bind the antigen therefrom using standard antibody production methods such as those described in for example Harlow et al. 1988 supra .

Monoclonal antibodies directed against full length or peptide fragments of a protein or peptide may be prepared using any well known monoclonal antibody preparation procedures such as those described for example in Harlow et al. 1988 Id. and in Tuszynski et al. 198872 109 115 . Quantities of the desired peptide may also be synthesized using chemical synthesis technology. Alternatively DNA encoding the desired peptide may be cloned and expressed from an appropriate promoter sequence in cells suitable for the generation of large quantities of peptide. Monoclonal antibodies directed against the peptide are generated from mice immunized with the peptide using standard procedures as referenced herein.

Nucleic acid encoding the monoclonal antibody obtained using the procedures described herein may be cloned and sequenced using technology which is available in the art and is described for example in Wright et al. 1992 12 125 168 and the references cited therein. Further the antibody of the invention may be humanized using the technology described in for example Wright et al. id. and in the references cited therein and in Gu et al. 1997 77 755 759 and other methods of humanizing antibodies well known in the art or to be developed.

Once expressed whole antibodies dimers derived therefrom individual light and heavy chains or other forms of antibodies can be purified according to standard procedures known in the art.

In one embodiment of the invention a phage antibody library may be generated. To generate a phage antibody library a cDNA library is first obtained from mRNA which is isolated from cells e.g. the hybridoma which express the desired protein to be expressed on the phage surface e.g. the desired antibody. cDNA copies of the mRNA are produced using reverse transcriptase. cDNA which specifies immunoglobulin fragments are obtained by PCR and the resulting DNA is cloned into a suitable bacteriophage vector to generate a bacteriophage DNA library comprising DNA specifying immunoglobulin genes. The procedures for making a bacteriophage library comprising heterologous DNA are well known in the art and are described for example in Sambrook et al. supra.

Bacteriophage which encode the desired antibody may be engineered such that the protein is displayed on the surface thereof in such a manner that it is available for binding to its corresponding binding protein e.g. the antigen against which the antibody is directed such as an Tcell surface antigen. Thus when bacteriophage which express a specific antibody are incubated in the presence of a cell which expresses the corresponding antigen the bacteriophage will bind to the cell. Bacteriophage which do not express the antibody will not bind to the cell.

The antibodies used in the present invention are placed in contact with the population of cord blood mononuclear cells isolated from a human umbilical cord sample under conditions suitable for formation of a cord blood mononuclear cell antibody complex.

That is the method of the present invention comprises contacting a population of cord blood mononuclear cells with an antibody that specifically binds to a Tcell in the population of cord blood mononuclear cells so that the antibody binds to an antigen including CD25 on the Tcell. Conditions suitable is used herein to refer to temperature pH buffers time and other factors that facilitate the binding of an antibody to its cognate antigen or to a cell such as a Tcell. Conditions that are suitable for an antibody binding to an antigen or to a cell or to an antigen on a cell are well known in the art and are usually from about 4 C. to about 20 C. to about 37 C. for a period of time from about 2 minutes to about 5 minutes to about 30 minutes to about 1 hour to about 24 hours. Various buffers are well known in the art and include for example Tris phosphate buffered saline and the like. Various examples of conditions suitable for the formation of a cord blood mononuclear cell antibody complex are described in for example Harlow et al. 1988 supra.

The present invention further comprises the step of substantially separating the cord blood mononuclear cell antibody complex from a population of cord blood mononuclear cells. That is as demonstrated by the data disclosed herein the present method of isolating a Tcell that inhibits T cell proliferation from an umbilical cord blood sample comprises substantially separating such a Tcell from other cord blood mononuclear cells in a sample. As the term is used herein substantially separated from or substantially separating refers to the characteristic of a population of first substances being removed from the proximity of a population of second substances wherein the population of first substances is not necessarily devoid of the second substance and the population of second substances is not necessarily devoid of the first substance. However a population of first substances that is substantially separated from a population of second substances has a measurably lower content of second substances as compared to the non separated mixture of first and second substances.

Various techniques may be employed to separate a Tbound to an antibody such as an anti CD25 antibody from cells that do not have an antibody bound cell surface marker by removing antibody bound Tcells from the cell mixture of cord blood mononuclear cells. Alternatively various techniques may be employed to separate the Tcontaining an antibody bound cell surface marker from cells that do not have an antibody bound cell surface marker by removing from the cell mixture Tnot bound by an antibody.

In one embodiment the CD25 cell surface marker is used to separate antibody bound Tfrom T cells and other cord blood mononuclear cells not conjugated with antibody. In one aspect of the invention the antibodies may be attached to a solid support to allow for crude separation. The separation techniques employed should maximize the retention of viability of the fraction to be collected. For relatively crude separations that is separations where up to 10 usually not more than about 5 preferably not more than about 1 of the total cells present having the marker may remain with the cell population to be retained various techniques of different efficacy may be employed. The particular technique employed will depend upon efficiency of separation cytotoxicity of the methodology ease and speed of performance and necessity for sophisticated equipment and or technical skill all of which is within the ability of the ordinary skilled artisan.

Procedures for separation may include magnetic separation using antibody coated magnetic beads or dynal beads affinity chromatography cytotoxic agents joined to a monoclonal antibody or used in conjunction with a monoclonal antibody e.g. complement and cytotoxins and panning with antibody attached to a solid matrix e.g. plate or other convenient technique. Techniques providing accurate separation include fluorescence activated cell sorters which can have varying degrees of sophistication e.g. a plurality of color channels low angle and obtuse light scattering detecting channels impedance channels etc. as well as magnetic activated cell sorters.

Conveniently the antibodies may be conjugated with markers such as magnetic beads which allow for direct separation biotin which can be removed with avidin or streptavidin bound to a support fluorochromes such as FITC which can be used with a fluorescence activated cell sorter or the like to allow for ease of separation of the particular cell type. Any technique may be employed which is not unduly detrimental to the viability of the remaining cells. Other techniques include but are not limited to dense particles for density centrifugation an adsorption column an adsorption membrane and the like.

In one embodiment of the invention an antibody specific for an cord blood derived cell surface marker is conjugated to a magnetic bead. A population of cord blood derived mononuclear cells is contacted with the magnetic bead antibody conjugate under conditions suitable for binding of the antibody conjugate to an Tcell surface antigen such as CD25 displaying the antigen. After incubation under conditions suitable for binding such as but not limited to an incubation at 4 C. for 20 minutes a Tpositive for the antigen are selected by passing the entire sample through a magnetic based separation apparatus. Upon evacuation or elution of free solution from the apparatus only the magnetically retained marker containing cells will remain. The antigen containing Tcells are then eluted from the apparatus resulting in an enriched isolated or purified population of Tcells. In one aspect of the invention a Tmarker is CD25.

After substantial isolation of the cells lacking comprising a Tantigen such as CD25 generally by at least about 50 preferably at least about 70 even more preferably about 80 even more preferably about 90 or greater than 90 the cells can be separated by a fluorescence activated cell sorter or other methodology having high specificity such as magnetic activated cell sorting MACS . Multi color analyses can be employed with the FACS which is particularly convenient.

In order to increase the stringency of the of the present method of isolating a Tcell from a human umbilical cord blood sample a Tcell that have been substantially separated from a population of cord blood mononuclear cells can be contacted again with an antibody that specifically binds CD25 under conditions suitable for formation of a cord blood mononuclear cell antibody complex followed by substantially separating the cord blood mononuclear cell antibody complex from the population of cord blood mononuclear cells. This step can be performed one or more times to isolate a human Tcell from an umbilical cord blood sample.

The present invention further comprises a method of multiplying expanding or otherwise culturing a Tcell isolated using the methods disclosed herein. As demonstrated by the data disclosed herein multiplying a Tcell isolated by the methods of the present invention can by multiplied by about 100 fold using the methods disclosed herein. Following isolation a Tcell is incubated in cell medium in a culture apparatus for a period of time or until the cells reach confluency before passing the cells to another culture apparatus. The culturing apparatus can be of any culture apparatus commonly used in culturing cells in vitro. Preferably the level of confluence is greater than 70 before passing the cells to another culture apparatus. More preferably the level of confluence is greater than 90 . A period of time can be any time suitable for the culture of cells in vitro. Tcell medium may be replaced during the culture of the Tcells at any time. Preferably the Tcell medium is replaced every 3 to 4 days. Tcells are then harvested from the culture apparatus whereupon the Tcells can be used immediately or cryopreserved to be stored for use at a later time. Tcells may be harvested by trypsinization EDTA treatment or any other procedure used to harvest cells from a culture apparatus.

Various terms are used to describe cells in culture. Cell culture refers generally to cells taken from a living organism and grown under controlled condition. A primary cell culture is a culture of cells tissues or organs taken directly from an organism and before the first subculture. Cells are expanded in culture when they are placed in a growth medium under conditions that facilitate cell growth and or division resulting in a larger population of the cells. When cells are expanded in culture the rate of cell proliferation is typically measured by the amount of time required for the cells to double in number otherwise known as the doubling time.

Each round of subculturing is referred to as a passage. When cells are subcultured they are referred to as having been passaged. A specific population of cells or a cell line is sometimes referred to or characterized by the number of times it has been passaged. For example a cultured cell population that has been passaged ten times may be referred to as a P10 culture. The primary culture i.e. the first culture following the isolation of cells from tissue is designated P0. Following the first subculture the cells are described as a secondary culture P1 or passage 1 . After the second subculture the cells become a tertiary culture P2 or passage 2 and so on. It will be understood by those of skill in the art that there may be many population doublings during the period of passaging therefore the number of population doublings of a culture is greater than the passage number. The expansion of cells i.e. the number of population doublings during the period between passaging depends on many factors including but is not limited to the seeding density substrate medium and time between passaging.

The medium used to multiply the Tcells of the present invention comprises an antibody to CD3 and antibody to CD28 and a cytokine preferably but not limited to IL 2. This is because as demonstrated by the data disclosed herein a cell isolated by the methods of the present invention can be multiplied approximately 100 fold by culturing the cell with an antibody that binds CD3 and antibody that binds CD28 and IL 2. Further as also disclosed herein cells multiplied using the methods of the present invention are uniform and potent suppressor cells. Further since the Tcells of the present invention are immunologically na ve such cells can be administered to an animal preferably a mammal even more preferably a human to suppress an immune reaction such as those common to autoimmune diseases such as diabetes psoriasis rheumatoid arthritis multiple sclerosis GVHD enhancing allograft tolerance induction transplant rejection and the like. In addition the cells of the present invention can be used for the treatment of any condition in which a diminished or otherwise inhibited immune response especially a cell mediated immune response is desirable to treat or alleviate the disease.

The CD3 antibody and CD28 antibody used in the methods of the present invention can be any of the antibodies known in the art those disclosed elsewhere herein or those yet to be discovered. Further and preferably the antibodies of the present invention are conjugated or otherwise attached to a bead such as a magnetic bead or a dynal bead. Such beads are known in the art and are described elsewhere herein.

The medium of the present invention further comprises a cytokine preferably IL 2. This is because as demonstrated by the data disclosed herein the addition of IL 2 to the medium used in the methods of the present invention results in an approximate 100 fold expansion of the Tcells of the present invention. IL 2 and other cytokines are well known in the art and are available commercially from various sources.

The Tof the present invention further comprises certain antigenic markers some of which are present when a Tcell is isolated from an umbilical cord blood sample some of which are present when the Tcell is multiplied cultured or otherwise expanded according to the methods of the present invention. Such antigenic markers are useful in the identification of a Tcell of the present invention and allow one of skill in the art to determine if a Tcell isolated and multiplied according to the methods of the present invention has the properties and biological activities of a Tcell of the present invention. Such biological activities include but are not limited to suppression of an allogeneic immune response inhibition of cytokine accumulation in an immune response accompanied by less inhibition of chemokine production the production of IL 2 IL 10 and gamma interferon the expression of TGF beta latency associated protein LAP and suppressor activity independent of IL 10 and TGF beta. Markers on the Tcell of the present invention include but are not limited to CD25 CD4 CTLA4 CD27 CD26L and Fox P3.

The present invention further comprises a method for inhibiting proliferation of a T cell. Such inhibition can occur in vitro or in vivo preferably in an animal more preferably in a mammal even more preferably in a human. This is because as demonstrated by the data disclosed herein HLA mismatched T cells in a mixed lymphocyte reaction MLR were inhibited from proliferating by a factor greater than about 95 in the presence of a Tcell isolated and multiplied according to the methods of the present invention. Further as demonstrated by the data disclosed herein Tcells isolated and or multiplied according to the methods of the present invention are potent suppressors of T cell proliferation at ratios of from about 1 16 to about 1 32 T T cell . Further the Tcells of the present invention are active in suppressing an immune response when a antigen presenting cell such as a dendritic cell is mature and activated. Thus the cells of the present invention can be used to inhibit active immune responses or to prevent an immune response.

The method of the present invention comprises contacting a T cell with a Tcell isolated and or expanded according to the methods of the present invention such that the proliferation of a T cell is inhibited. The Tcell can be administered using techniques well known in that art so that a Tcontacts or is in proximity to an immune cell such as a T cell dendritic cell plasma cell and the like.

The method of inhibiting the proliferation of a T cell using a Tisolated and or cultured according to the methods of the present invention encompasses the preparation and use of pharmaceutical compositions comprising a Tof the invention as an active ingredient. Such a pharmaceutical composition may consist of the active ingredient alone as a combination of at least one active ingredient e.g. an effective dose of an T in a form suitable for administration to a subject or the pharmaceutical composition may comprise the active ingredient and one or more pharmaceutically acceptable carriers one or more additional active and or inactive ingredients or some combination of these.

As used herein the term pharmaceutically acceptable carrier means a chemical composition with which the active ingredient may be combined and which following the combination can be used to administer the active ingredient to a subject.

The formulations of the pharmaceutical compositions described herein may be prepared by any method known or hereafter developed in the art of pharmacology. In general such preparatory methods include the step of bringing the active ingredient into association with a carrier or one or more other accessory ingredients and then if necessary or desirable shaping or packaging the product into a desired single or multi dose unit.

Although the descriptions of pharmaceutical compositions provided herein are principally directed to pharmaceutical compositions which are suitable for ethical administration to humans it will be understood by the skilled artisan that such compositions are generally suitable for administration to animals of all sorts. Modification of pharmaceutical compositions suitable for administration to humans in order to render the compositions suitable for administration to various animals is well understood and the ordinarily skilled veterinary pharmacologist can design and perform such modification with merely ordinary if any experimentation. Subjects to which administration of the pharmaceutical compositions of the invention is contemplated include but are not limited to humans and other primates mammals including commercially relevant mammals such as non human primates cattle pigs horses sheep cats and dogs birds including commercially relevant birds such as chickens ducks geese and turkeys fish including farm raised fish and aquarium fish and crustaceans such as farm raised shellfish.

Pharmaceutical compositions that are useful in the methods of the invention may be prepared packaged or sold in formulations suitable for oral rectal vaginal parenteral topical pulmonary intranasal intra lesional buccal ophthalmic intravenous intra organ or another route of administration. Other contemplated formulations include projected nanoparticles liposomal preparations resealed erythrocytes containing the active ingredient and immunologically based formulations.

A pharmaceutical composition of the invention may be prepared packaged or sold in bulk as a single unit dose or as a plurality of single unit doses. As used herein a unit dose is discrete amount of the pharmaceutical composition comprising a predetermined amount of the active ingredient. The amount of the active ingredient is generally equal to the dosage of the active ingredient which would be administered to a subject or a convenient fraction of such a dosage such as for example one half or one third of such a dosage.

The relative amounts of the active ingredient the pharmaceutically acceptable carrier and any additional ingredients in a pharmaceutical composition of the invention will vary depending upon the identity size and condition of the subject treated and further depending upon the route by which the composition is to be administered. By way of example the composition may comprise between 0.1 and 100 w w active ingredient.

In addition to the active ingredient a pharmaceutical composition of the invention may further comprise one or more additional pharmaceutically active agents. Particularly contemplated additional agents include anti emetics and scavengers such as cyanide and cyanate scavengers and other immune inhibitory compounds such as cyclosporine steroids antibodies to pro inflammatory cytokines inhibitory cytokines such as IL 10 and the like.

Controlled or sustained release formulations of a pharmaceutical composition of the invention may be made using conventional technology.

As used herein parenteral administration of a pharmaceutical composition includes any route of administration characterized by physical breaching of a tissue of a subject and administration of the pharmaceutical composition through the breach in the tissue. Parenteral administration thus includes but is not limited to administration of a pharmaceutical composition by injection of the composition by application of the composition through a surgical incision by application of the composition through a tissue penetrating non surgical wound and the like. In particular parenteral administration is contemplated to include but is not limited to subcutaneous intraperitoneal intramuscular intrasternal injection and kidney dialytic infusion techniques.

Formulations of a pharmaceutical composition suitable for parenteral administration comprise the active ingredient combined with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier such as sterile water or sterile isotonic saline. Such formulations may be prepared packaged or sold in a form suitable for bolus administration or for continuous administration. Injectable formulations may be prepared packaged or sold in unit dosage form such as in ampules or in multi dose containers containing a preservative. Formulations for parenteral administration include but are not limited to suspensions solutions emulsions in oily or aqueous vehicles pastes and implantable sustained release or biodegradable formulations. Such formulations may further comprise one or more additional ingredients including but not limited to suspending stabilizing or dispersing agents.

The pharmaceutical compositions may be prepared packaged or sold in the form of a sterile injectable aqueous or oily suspension or solution. This suspension or solution may be formulated according to the known art and may comprise in addition to the active ingredient additional ingredients such as the dispersing agents wetting agents or suspending agents described herein. Such sterile injectable formulations may be prepared using a non toxic parenterally acceptable diluent or solvent such as water or 1 3 butane diol for example. Other acceptable diluents and solvents include but are not limited to Ringer s solution isotonic sodium chloride solution and fixed oils such as synthetic mono or di glycerides. Other parentally administrable formulations which are useful include those which comprise the active ingredient in microcrystalline form in a liposomal preparation or as a component of a biodegradable polymer systems. Compositions for sustained release or implantation may comprise pharmaceutically acceptable polymeric or hydrophobic materials such as an emulsion an ion exchange resin a sparingly soluble polymer or a sparingly soluble salt.

The Tof the invention and or a Texpanded using the methods of the present invention can be administered to an animal preferably a human. When the Tof the invention are administered the amount of cells administered can range from about 100 000 cells to about 300 billion cells wherein the cells are infused into the animal preferably a human patient in need thereof. While the precise dosage administered will vary depending upon any number of factors including but not limited to the type of animal and type of disease state being treated the age of the animal and the route of administration.

The Tmay be administered to an animal as frequently as several times daily or it may be administered less frequently such as once a day once a week once every two weeks once a month or even less frequently such as once every several months or even once a year or less. The frequency of the dose will be readily apparent to the skilled artisan and will depend upon any number of factors such as but not limited to the type and severity of the disease being treated the type and age of the animal etc.

An Tmay be co administered with the various other compounds cytokines chemotherapeutic drugs immunosuppressive drugs among many others . Alternatively the compound s may be administered an hour a day a week a month or even more in advance of the T or any permutation thereof. Further the compound s may be administered an hour a day a week or even more after administration of a T or any permutation thereof. The frequency and administration regimen will be readily apparent to the skilled artisan and will depend upon any number of factors such as but not limited to the type and severity of the disease being treated the age and health status of the animal the identity of the compound or compounds being administered the route of administration of the various compounds and the T and the like.

Further it would be appreciated by one skilled in the art based upon the disclosure provided herein that where the Tis to be administered to a mammal the cells can be treated so that they are in a state of no growth that is the cells are incapable of dividing when administered to a mammal. As disclosed elsewhere herein the cells can be irradiated to render them incapable of growth or division once administered into a mammal. Other methods including haptenization e.g. using dinitrophenyl and other compounds are known in the art for rendering cells to be administered especially to a human incapable of growth.

The invention includes various kits which comprise the reagents used to isolate a Tfrom a human umbilical cord blood sample. The kit comprises an antibody that specifically binds to a molecule on the surface of a Tcell such as CD25 an applicator and instructional materials which describe use of the kit to perform the methods of the invention. Although exemplary kits are described below the contents of other useful kits will be apparent to the skilled artisan in light of the present disclosure. Each of these kits is included within the invention. By the term applicator as the term is used herein is meant any device including but not limited to a hypodermic syringe a pipette and the like for administering the compounds and compositions of the invention.

 Instructional material as that term is used herein includes a publication a recording a diagram or any other medium of expression which can be used to communicate the usefulness of the composition and or compound of the invention in the kit for effecting alleviating or treating the various diseases or disorders recited herein. Optionally or alternately the instructional material may describe one or more methods of alleviating the diseases or disorders in a cell or a tissue or a mammal including as disclosed elsewhere herein.

The invention further includes a kit for multiplying a Tfrom a human umbilical cord blood sample. The kit comprises an antibody that specifically binds to CD3 and an antibody that specifically binds to CD28. The antibodies of the present kit can be isolated antibodies antibodies bound to a physical support such as a magnetic bead or other antibodies described elsewhere herein or known in the art. The kit can further comprise a cytokine such as IL 2 for culturing multiplying or otherwise expanding a Tof the present invention. The kit is used pursuant to the methods disclosed in the invention. The kit can further comprise an applicator and an instructional material for the use thereof.

The invention is now described with reference to the following Examples. These Examples are provided for the purpose of illustration only and the invention should in no way be construed as being limited to these Examples but rather should be construed to encompass any and all variations which become evident as a result of the teaching provided herein.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells PBMC were isolated from buffy coat preparations which were derived from the whole blood of normal healthy volunteer donors Memorial Blood Centers Minneapolis Minn. . Leukocyte rich buffy coat cells were centrifuged over Ficoll Hypaque layers to collect PBMC. CD25cells were isolated using the following indirect antibody based microbeads. PBMC were stained with anti CD25 FITC clone 2A3 Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems San Jose Calif. washed and then bound secondarily to anti FITC multi sort microbeads 5 microliters 10cells Miltenyi Biotec Auburn Calif. and positively selected. The CD25cells were reapplied to a second column washed and re eluted. After column purification the anti FITC multisort beads were detached. The CD25cells were further depleted of CD8 CD14 CD19 CD20 and CD56 expressing cells with a cocktail of mAb coated microbeads for lineage depletion. These CD25lineage depleted cells DC 8x minus were then selected for CD45RA by direct positive selection with anti CD45RA microbeads 20 microliters 10cells Miltenyi . In some cases a further purification of anti HLA DR cells was isolated from the CD45RAcells by positive selection with anti HLA DR microbeads 20 microliters 10cells Miltenyi . The CD25cells were further depleted of CD25 by a second round of depletion with direct anti CD25 microbeads 20 microliters 10cells Miltenyi . After CD25 depletion these cells were then positively selected for CD4 with direct anti CD4 microbeads 20 microliters 10cells Miltenyi .

Isolated CD25cells CD25subsets or CD4CD25control cells were cultured at 1 million total cells ml in 24 well plates. An equal number of irradiated CD4CD25feeder cells were added to the cultures. Anti CD3 CD28 mAb coated dynabeads University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia Pa. were added at a 3 1 bead to cell ratio as a growth stimulus and moderate dose IL 2 was added on day 3 at 50 IU ml in the fresh media Chiron Emeryville Calif. Godfrey et. al. 2004 Blood 104 453 461 Levine et al. 1998 J. Hematother. 7 437 48 . For cord blood cultures feeder cells were not required for culture or preservation of suppressor function and therefore were not used. Cell cultures were split as needed approximately every 3 days during the fast growth phase. Culture media was RPMI 1640 Invitrogen Gibco Carlsbad Calif. supplemented with 10 FCS Invitrogen Gibco and L glutamine penicillin and streptomycin.

Cell lines previously isolated using a MACS based strategy for isolation of CD4CD25cells for Tcell line generation from adult blood exhibited variable potency which was possibly caused by contaminating conventional T cells. To improve on the purification strategy CD25cells were analyzed for subsets by flow cytometric analysis. A subset of CD4CD25cells could be further enriched for suppressor cells or conversely a subset might be enriched for conventional T cells. The approach described herein was to characterize subset markers selectively purify these cell subsets and then evaluate their ability to form cell lines with potent suppressor function.

The first markers analyzed were CD45RO a marker of memory cells and CD45RA a marker of naive T cells. The CD45ROsubset of CD4CD25cells has been reported to contain the suppressor cells as freshly isolated CD4CD25CD45ROcells contained most of the suppressor activity of CD4CD25cells Jonuleit et al. 2001193 1285 1294 . CD4CD25CD45RO minus cells had minimal suppressor activity in functional assays secondary allogeneic MLR . The CD4CD25CD45RO minus cells were suggested to be conventional T cells. As conventional T cells typically overgrow suppressor cells in culture depletion of the CD4CD25CD45RO minus cells was investigated as a means to improve cell line generation.

Purified CD4CD25cells were assessed for CD45RA and CD45RO expression by FACS analysis . The CD25cells coexpressed CD45RO on approximately 80 the cells mean 80 range 62 89 n 6 . The CD25cells also contained a subset of cells which coexpressed CD45RA on approximately 20 of cells mean 24 range 15 38 n 6 . High level expression of these antigens was mutually exclusive but there are a significant number of double positive cells only expressing low amounts of both antigens and a two color dot plot reveals a whole spectrum of expression. The CD45RAcells did not express CD25 at the highest levels and the CD25 bright cells thought to be the true Tcells appear to not express CD45RA . These data therefore indicate that depletion of the CD45RA subset would further enrich for the CD45ROTcells and elimination of these CD4CD25CD45RAcells was attempted.

The indirect purification system with a cleavable microbead allowed purification of CD25cells removal of the magnetic bead and then depletion of the CD45RAcells. Using a typical buffy coat the starting material was approximately 500 million cells and through purification obtain approximately 10 million CD25cells 7 million CD25lineage negative cells 5 million CD45RA minus cells and 1 million CD45RAcells were derived. Purifications from two donors are depicted . These various CD25populations were cultured with one round of stimulation with anti CD3 28 beads. After 3 weeks the cell lines were tested for ability to suppress allo MLR.

To evaluate suppressor function of these cell lines an HLA mismatched allo MLR assay was used as a functional readout. The CD4responder and DC stimulated MLR assays are very robust and consistent amongst donors and therefore served as our standard measure of suppression. All cell lines were initially screened for suppressor activity in MLR after 2 3 weeks of culture and then further analyzed over the next 3 4 weeks.

Surprisingly it was the CD45RAderived cell lines which were expected to be conventional T cells and lack activity that demonstrated potent suppressor activity . In contrast the CD45RA minus cell derived lines had very poor suppressor function. Twelve cell line donors were tested and 10 12 RA cell lines demonstrated potent suppressor activity and 2 12 RA minus lines demonstrated similar activity. These data and the percent suppression mediated by these cell lines is depicted in a scatter plot which also includes straight CD25selected cells from adult blood and cord blood .

Further analysis of CD25cell subsets revealed that the CD45RAcells were distinct from the CD25bright classically described human Tcell Baecher Allan et al. 2001167 1245 1253 Godfrey et. al. 2004 Blood 104 453 461 Hoffmann et al. 2004 104 895 903 . Prior reports have noted these cells to be CD25hi and CTLA 4 positive Jonuleit et al. 2001 193 1285 1294 . The data disclosed herein demonstrate that the CD45RA cells are distinct. In two color dot plots the CD45RA cells are shown to be intracellular CTLA 4 negative HLADR negative . Double staining for CD25 versus HLA DR reveals that the HLA DRcells are the CD25bright cells and they double stain for intracellular CTLA 4 . This demonstrates two distinct cell subsets.

Purification of the HLA DR cells was performed by further positive selection of the CD45RA cell population. This left three subsets of CD25 cells the CD45RAcells the HLA DRcells and the double negatives . All three subsets were cultured and tested for suppressor function. The CD45RAderived cell lines mediated the most potent suppressor function. The double negative cells mediated a middle level of suppression and the HLA DRmediated the worst suppressive activity .

CD4CD25responder T cells were isolated from buffy coat preparations derived from the whole blood of normal healthy volunteer donors Memorial Blood Centers Minneapolis Minn. . Cells were centrifuged over Ficoll Hypaque to collect PBMC. PBMC were first depleted of CD25cells with anti CD25 mAb coated microbeads Miltenyi Biotec before CD4T cells were isolated by positive selection with anti CD4 mAb coated magnetic microbeads Miltenyi Biotec . Cells were routinely 96 98 pure by FACS analysis. Immature dendritic cells DC were generated from CD14monocytes Sallusto and Lanzavecchia 1994 J. Exp. Med. 179 1109 1118 isolated from PBMC by magnetic bead based purification Miltenyi Biotec and were cultured in X vivo 15 BioWhittaker Walkersville Md. media at 1 million cells ml supplemented with GM CSF 50 ng ml final and IL 4 20 ng ml final R D Systems Minneapolis Minn. . Cells were cultured for 5 10 days before use as stimulators in MLR. For some experiments DC were matured with LPS Sigma St. Louis Mo. 100 ng ml or TNF alpha 20 ng ml final and Poly I C a Toll like receptor TLR 3 agonist ligand 20 g ml final Sigma for two days Godfrey et al. 2004 103 1158 1165 Cella et al. 1999 189 821 829 . DC stimulators were irradiated at 30 Gy.

5 10responding CD4CD25 T cells and 5 10DC stimulator antigen presenting cells APC were cultured per well in 96 well U bottom plates. Cultured suppressor or conventional T cell lines were added at 2.5 10per well for standard assays or in graded numbers for titration experiments. For antibody blocking experiments 10 or 5 10suppressor cells were used. Culture media was RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 FCS. Wells were pulsed on days 3 5 6 and 7 with H thymidine for the last 16 hours of culture. Each timepoint had 6 replicates. Results expressed in counts per minute. Data was collected with a direct beta counter no liquid scintillation thus the magnitude of the results was lower but proportionally correct.

MLR culture supernatants were spun free of cells and aliquots were frozen at 80 C. For re stimulations anti CD3 CD28 beads were used at a 1 1 bead to cell ratio. Supernatants were evaluated by the Luminex assay system with a latex bead based multianalyte system R D Systems Minneapolis Minn. .

Titration experiments were performed to further evaluate suppression potency. Lowering the number of suppressors added to standard DC stimulated MLR cultures demonstrated that nearly full inhibitory activity of cord blood derived suppressors was maintained out to a ratio of 1 16 or 1 32 as few as 1500 suppressors to 50 000 responders . This is slightly more potent 2 fold than the selected most potent adult derived cell lines CD25lineage .

As a further assessment of potency suppressor cell lines were evaluated in MLR where the DC stimulators had been matured. Activation maturation of DC with lipopolysaccharide LPS TLR4 ligand or the combination of TNF polyIC double stranded RNA analog TLR 3 ligand did not lead to bypass of suppression. In addition inclusion of LPS or TNF Poly IC in the MLR culture also did not bypass suppression. Thus the CD45RAderived Tcells were both potent and activated DC which abundantly express costimulatory molecules and cytokines. Further DC and the expressed costimulatory molecules were not able to bypass the suppressive effect of the CD4CD25cells.

To determine the effects of the suppressor cell lines on responder T cells in MLR assays the culture supernatants were evaluated for the presence and magnitude of multiple cytokines. Suppressor cell addition to MLR assays markedly reduced accumulation of T cell activation dependent cytokines including IL 2 IFN gamma GM CSF TNF and IL 10. Activation dependent cytokine accumulation was minimal at all timepoints during the suppressed MLR. These data demonstrate a marked impairment of T cell activation.

To determine the functional capabilities of the suppressive versus conventional T cell lines we evaluated their potential for cytokine production and cell surface molecule expression after re stimulation. Cell lines were re stimulated with anti CD3 CD28 beads for potent reactivation and supernatants harvested at defined timepoints for analysis of cytokine content by luminex bead based assay. The CD45RAderived cell lines produced essentially no IL 2 IFN or IL 10 while control CD25derived cell lines produced high levels of these cytokines. The accumulation of TNF GM CSF and IL 5 and the chemokine IL 8 was also markedly reduced as compared to control cell lines.

The critical role of Tcells in cord blood immunology and transplantation has not been generally appreciated Barker et al. 200348 35 43 . Many researchers use total CD4selected cord blood populations as a representative model of truly na ve T cells for purposes of immunological characterization Kaminski et al. 2003102 4608 4617 . However in light of the data disclosed herein some prior studies may need to be re evaluated with CD25 depleted CD4cells Jonuleit et al. 2000192 1213 1222 . These cells may be a contributing factor to the low rate of GVHD experienced in cord blood transplantation CBT Wadlow et al. 20028 637 647 .

CD25and CD25 CD4T cells were isolated from umbilical cord blood Red Cross Saint Paul Minn. . Cord blood mononuclear cells were prepared by centrifugation over Ficoll Hypaque according to the manufacturer s directions. After CD34depletion with magnetic microbeads Miltenyi Biotec Auburn Calif. CD25cells were isolated by positive selection with directly conjugated anti CD25 magnetic microbeads 4 microliters per 10cells Miltenyi Biotec . Cells were then applied to a second magnetic column washed and re eluted. After the double column procedure cells were routinely 90 pure for CD4 CD25 by FACS analysis. The non CD25 fraction was then applied to another magnetic column to deplete any remaining CD25cells before isolation of CD4CD25 cells by positive selection with anti CD4 mAb coated microbeads Miltenyi Biotec . Stringent purification of adult CD25cells used anti CD25 FITC and anti FITC microbeads 2 microliters per 10cells and passage over magnetic column and elution for two cycles. This was followed by releasing the magnetic beads and subsequent lineage depletion with anti CD8 CD14 CD19 and CD56 direct conjugated microbeads CD4CD25lin as described in Godfrey et al. 2004104 453 461 .

Isolated CD4CD25cells or control CD4CD25 cells were cultured as described in Godfrey et al. 2004104 453 461 with anti CD3 CD28 mAb coated dynabeads obtained from the University of Pennsylvania and described in Levine et al. 19987 437 448 at a three to one bead to cell ratio. Cells were cultured at 1 million total cells ml in 24 well plates. IL 2 was added on day 3 at 50 IU ml Chiron Emeryville Calif. . In contrast to the prior study all lines were cultured without feeder cells. For cord blood cultures the addition of irradiated feeder cells CD4CD25cells Godfrey et al. 2004104 453 461 was neither helpful for expansion nor preservation of suppressor function therefore feeders were omitted to simplify the culture protocol. Cell cultures were split as needed approximately one to three every three days during the fast growth phase. Culture media was RPMI 1640 Invitrogen Gibco Carlsbad Calif. supplemented with 10 fetal calf serum FCS Invitrogen Gibco and L glutamine penicillin and streptomycin.

Cord blood mononuclear cells CBMC have been shown to contain CD4T cells that co express CD25. Therefore the present results disclose an evaluation of the potential of these cells for suppressor functions and suppressor cell line generations. FACS analysis was used to confirmed that CBMC contained a significant population of CD4T cells that co express CD25 and that this was a discrete population of cells . In contrast adult blood contains CD4T cells with a broad spectrum of levels of CD25 including a large population of non suppressive CD25 dim cells . Approximately 5 of the cord blood CD4T cells distinctly expressed CD25 mean 5.2 range 2.3 9.5 n 20 a slightly higher percentage than present in adult peripheral blood CD4T cells mean 3.8 of CD4 . For direct comparison of purification CD25Tcells were isolated from both adult and cord blood using an identical MACS based protocol direct anti CD25 based selection . The CD25cells purified from cord blood contained a more focused population of CD25bright cells MFI 320 vs 130 and fewer CD25 dim or CD25 negative cells mean 9 range 5 21 n 10 and 3 range 1 9 n 10 respectively. In comparison the CD25cells derived from adult blood were found to contain more CD25 dim and CD25 negative cells mean 30 range 25 38 n 10 and 10 range 2 24 n 10 respectively.

Cord blood CD25cells were purified by direct selection. They were stained for CD25 and CD45RA. The cells are predominantly CD45RA .

Stimulating stringently purified adult derived CD25Tcells with anti CD3 CD28 coated beads supplemented with IL 2 induces significant expansion. This culture strategy was used to generate cell lines from purified adult or cord blood CD4CD25cells as well as cord blood CD4CD25cells for comparison. The cord blood derived CD4CD25cells expanded readily in culture approximately 100 fold over three weeks with a single initial stimulation. After three to four weeks the cell lines stopped expanding in number and were maintained in IL 2. Thus the growth curves of these cell lines were similar to that of the adult blood derived CD4CD25cell lines.

CD4CD25 responder T cells were isolated from buffy coat preparations derived from the whole blood of normal healthy volunteer donors Memorial Blood Centers Minneapolis Minn. . Cells were centrifuged over Ficoll Hypaque to collect PBMC. PBMC were first depleted of CD25cells with anti CD25 mAb coated microbeads Miltenyi Biotec before CD4T cells were isolated by positive selection with anti CD4 mAb coated magnetic microbeads Miltenyi Biotec . Cells were routinely 96 98 pure by FACS analysis. Immature dendritic cells DC were generated from CD14monocytes Sallusto et al. 1994179 1109 1118 isolated from PBMC by magnetic bead based purification Miltenyi Biotec and were cultured in X vivo 15 BioWhittaker Walkersville Md. media at 1 million cells ml supplemented with GM CSF 50 ng ml final and IL 4 20 ng ml final R D Systems Minneapolis Minn. . Cells were cultured for 5 10 days before use as stimulators in MLR. For some experiments DC were matured with LPS Sigma St. Louis Mo. 100 ng ml or TNF alpha 20 ng ml final and Poly I C a Toll like receptor TLR 3 agonist ligand 20 g ml final Sigma for two days Spisek et al. 200150 417 427 Godfrey et al. 2004103 1158 1165 . DC stimulators were irradiated at 30 Gy.

5 10responding CD4CD25T cells and 5 10DC stimulator APC were cultured per well in 96 well U bottom plates. Cultured suppressor or conventional T cell lines were added at 2.5 10per well for standard assays or in graded numbers for titration experiments. For antibody blocking experiments 10or 5 10suppressor cells were used. Culture media was RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 FCS. Wells were pulsed on days 3 5 6 and 7 with H thymidine for the last 16 hours of culture. Each time point had 6 replicates. Results were expressed in counts per minute. Data was collected with a direct beta counter no liquid scintillation thus the magnitude of the results was lower but proportionally correct.

To evaluate suppressor function of the cell lines an HLA mismatched allo MLR assay was used as a functional readout. The CD4responder and DC stimulated MLR assays are very robust and consistent amongst donors and therefore served as the standard measure of suppression. All cell lines were initially screened for suppressor activity in MLR after 2 3 weeks of culture and then further analyzed over the next 3 4 weeks. Strikingly the cell lines derived from cord blood CD25cells were consistently and potently suppressive . Potent suppressive cell lines were isolated from 29 of 30 donors where inhibition of proliferation was typically 95 . Control cell lines derived from adult or cord blood CD25 cells were not suppressive . Cell lines derived from adult CD25cells directly isolated manifested weak and variable suppressive activity . It was previously reported that stringent MACS based selection was required to generate significant potent suppressor cell lines in a subset of adult donors. The suppression mediated by these lines CD25lineage is depicted in which demonstrates the remarkable consistency of the cord blood derived cell lines.

To further evaluate suppression potency titration experiments were undertaken. Lowering the number of suppressors added to standard DC stimulated MLR cultures revealed that nearly full inhibitory activity of cord blood derived suppressors was maintained out to a ratio of 1 16 or 1 32 as few as 1500 suppressors to 50 000 responders . This is more potent 2 fold than the selected most potent adult derived cell lines pCD25lin . Cell lines derived from directly selected adult CD25cells were poorly suppressive upon titration.

As a further assessment of potency suppressor cell lines were evaluated in MLR where the DC stimulators had been matured. Activation maturation of DC with lipopolysaccharide LPS TLR4 ligand or the combination of TNF polyIC double stranded RNA analog TLR 3 ligand Cella et al. 1999189 821 829 did not bypass suppression . In addition inclusion of LPS or TNF Poly IC in the MLR culture did not bypass suppression. Thus the cord derived Tcells were as potent as the best selected adult derived cell lines and activated DC which abundantly express co stimulatory molecules and cytokines were not able to bypass their suppressive effect.

Cord Blood Suppressor Cells Impair Cytokine Production with Less of an Effect on Chemokine Production

To determine the effects of the suppressor cell lines on responder T cells in MLR assays supernatants were evaluated for the presence and magnitude of multiple cytokines. Suppressor cell addition to MLR assays markedly reduced accumulation of T cell activation dependent cytokines including IL 2 IFN gamma GM CSF TNF and IL 10. Importantly levels of TGF accumulation did not seem to be altered. Activation dependent cytokine accumulation was minimal at all time points during the suppressed MLR with results at time of peak detection in control DC MLR depicted . These data demonstrate a marked impairment of T cell activation. To determine the effects of suppression on selected chemokine expression MLR supernatants were evaluated for the expression of IL 8 CXCL8 MIP 1a CCL3 and RANTES CCL5 pro inflammatory chemokines. At early time points no effect on accumulation was noted . However at late timepoints in MLR accumulation was diminished by approximately by 50 75 . Thus chemokine production appears to be less affected by suppression and there is some degree of selectivity in the effects of suppressor cells.

Studies of both human and mouse CD4CD25Tcells have not revealed a clear mechanism of action of in vitro suppression Shevach 2002 2 389 400 . Consistent with previous studies the cord blood derived cultured suppressor cells required cell contact for function did not suppress across a semi permeable membrane and were not cytotoxic. Since TGF beta is variably reported to be a primary factor in Tmediated suppression Chen et al. 2003 14 85 89 and rLAP was reported to impair suppressor function Nakamura et al. 2004172 834 842 the TGF beta pathway was carefully evaluated with multiple neutralizing reagents including rLAP. Multiple antagonists of TGF beta even in various combinations were found to minimally affect suppression. Neutralizing antibodies to immunosuppressive factor IL 10 or its receptor had no effect on suppression. This is consistent with the lack of IL 10 production by the cord blood suppressor cells even with very strong activating stimuli. Thus in the presently disclosed in vitro MLR system neither TGF beta nor IL 10 appear to be the primary mediators of suppression and the molecules mediating suppression remain uncharacterized.

To evaluate purification cells were stained with anti CD25 PE clone M A251 BD Pharmingen San Diego Calif. which is not blocked by anti CD25 microbeads. Other antibodies for flow cytometry included anti CD4 PerCP clone SK3 from Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems San Jose Calif. anti CD152 PE BNI3 anti CD27 FITC M T271 anti CD62L APC Dreg56 anti CD69 FITC FN50 anti CD134 ACT35 from BD Pharmingen and anti GITR PE 110416 from R D Systems . In functional experiments designed for blocking suppression neutralizing antibodies were used at 10 g ml. Antibodies included anti CTLA4 BNI3 BD Pharmingen anti PD1 J116 eBioscience San Diego Calif. anti OX40 L106 from Becton Dickinson and anti GITR MAB689 anti GITR L MAB6941 anti OX40L MAB10541 anti IL10 MAB217 anti IL10 Receptor alpha MAB274 anti TGFbeta 1 2 3 1D11 anti TGFbeta 1 MAB1835 polyclonal chicken anti TGFbeta1 1.2 AF 101 NA from R D Systems .

To determine if the cultured suppressor cell lines work through known soluble immunosuppressive or cell surface negative regulatory proteins DC MLR suppressor assays were treated with neutralizing or blocking monoclonal antibodies. Assays were evaluated for the reversal of suppression by resumption of proliferation. Initially antibodies to IL 10 IL10R and TGF betawere tested alone or in various combinations with minimal effect. Only by combining all three antibodies at high doses 30 g ml were modest and probably non specific reversal of suppression effects seen. Treated control cultures treated with all three antibodies also evidenced increased proliferation similar to Tcells treated with all three antibodies.

For immunofluorescence staining cells were stained for 30 minutes at 4 C. Cells were washed and run on a FACS Calibur cytometer Becton Dickinson . Data was analyzed by FlowJo software version 4.5 Treestar Ashland Oreg. . Intracellular staining was performed using 2 paraformaldehyde fixed cells followed by permeabilization and staining in 0.1 saponin containing buffer.

Cell lines were analyzed by flow cytometry for antigens associated with suppressor cell phenotype. Suppressor cell lines were cultured in parallel with CD4CD25derived cell lines which served as conventional T cell controls. The cell lines maintained a relatively stable phenotype and function for the next 3 5 weeks. The CD45RAderived CD25cell lines maintain remarkably uniform expression of multiple antigens including CD25 intracellular CTLA4 CD27 and CD62L. In comparison the CD45RA derived cell lines were heterogeneous for these antigens.

The CD45RAderived CD25cell lines maintained high expression of cell surface CD25 and intracellular CTLA4 an expression pattern considered typical of the Tphenotype. This occurs despite the fact that other activation antigens such as CD69 CD71 and OX40 have returned to baseline expression. The CD45RAderived suppressor cell lines also uniformly express both CD62L and CD27. Within potent adult derived suppressor cell lines the cells with suppressor function reside within this double positive subset Godfrey et. al. 2004 Blood 104 453 461 . CD25derived cells lines also maintain CD27 expression but at a lower level than CD25derived cell lines. This CD27dim expression pattern was also noted with adult derived CD25derived cell lines Godfrey et. al. 2004104 453 461 .

Total RNA was extracted using TRI reagent Molecular Research Center Cincinnati Ohio or RNAeasy Qiagen Valencia Calif. . cDNA was synthesized from 1 g of each RNA sample using Taqman universal master mix Applied Biosystems Foster City Calif. . 10 ng was used in each qPCR reaction. All samples were run in duplicate. Primers and probes for FoxP3 and cyclophillin A were purchased from Applied Biosystems. Real time PCR was performed using the ABI Prism 7900 Advanced Biosystems . FoxP3 message levels were determined after normalizing data to cyclophillin A.

Nuclear extracts were prepared according to the manufacturer s directions using Active Motif Carlsbad Calif. and 70 g of protein were loaded per lane. Samples were run on NuPage 10 Bis Tris mini gels Invitrogen . Proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes and incubated with Goat anti FoxP3 antibody AB2481 Abeam Cambridge Mass. followed by Rabbit anti Goat IgG horseradish peroxidase. Blots were developed with SuperSignal WestPico Chemiluminescense substrate Pierce Rockford Ill. .

MLR culture supernatants were spun free of cells and aliquots were frozen at 80 C. For re stimulations anti CD3 CD28 beads were used at a one to one bead to cell ratio or PMA at 2 ng ml and ionomycin at 500 ng ml were used. Cells were cultured at 1 million cells ml media in 24 well plates. Supernatants were evaluated by the Luminex assay system with a latex bead based multianalyte system R D Systems Minneapolis Minn. .

To evaluate purification cells were stained with anti CD25 PE clone M A251 BD Pharmingen San Diego Calif. which is not blocked by anti CD25 microbeads. Other antibodies for flow cytometry included anti CD4 PerCP clone SK3 Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems San Jose Calif. anti CD152 PE BNI3 anti CD27 FITC M T271 anti CD62L APC Dreg56 anti CD69 FITC FN50 anti CD134 ACT35 from BD Pharmingen and anti GITR PE 110416 biotinylated anti LAP 27240 from R D Systems . In functional experiments designed for blocking suppression neutralizing antibodies were used at 10 g ml. Antibodies included anti CTLA4 BNI3 BD Pharmingen anti PD1 J116 eBioscience San Diego Calif. anti OX40 L106 Becton Dickinson and anti GITR MAB689 anti GITR L MAB6941 anti OX40L MAB10541 anti IL10 MAB217 anti IL10 Receptor MAB274 anti TGF 1D11 anti TGF MAB1835 polyclonal chicken anti TGF AF 101 NA polyclonal goat anti TGFRII AF 241 NA anti LAP MAB246 polyclonal goat anti LAP AF 246 NA recombinant LAP 246 LP and recombinant TGF RII Ig 1003 RT R D Systems .

For immunofluorescence staining cells were stained for 30 minutes at 4 C. Cells were washed and run on a FACS Calibur cytometer Becton Dickinson . Data was analyzed by FlowJo software version 4.5 Treestar Ashland Oreg. . Intracellular staining was performed using 2 paraformaldehyde fixed cells followed by permeabilization and staining in 0.1 saponin containing buffer.

Cell lines were analyzed by flow cytometry for antigens associated with suppressor cell phenotype. Suppressor cell lines were cultured in parallel with CD4CD25derived cell lines which served as conventional T cell controls. Cell lines were evaluated after 3 weeks of culture at which time the bead based activation had nearly resolved and the cells had returned to a more quiescent state. The cell lines maintained a relatively stable phenotype and function for the next 3 5 weeks. The cord derived CD25cell lines maintain remarkably uniform expression of multiple antigens including CD25 intracellular CTLA4 CD27 and CD62L . In comparison the best adult derived suppressor cell lines generated by the most stringent purification were slightly heterogeneous for these antigens .

The cord derived CD25cell lines maintained high expression of cell surface CD25 and intracellular CTLA4 an expression pattern considered typical of the Tphenotype . This occurs despite the fact that other activation antigens such as CD69 CD71 and OX40 have returned to baseline expression. The cord derived suppressor cell lines also uniformly express both CD62L and CD27 . It was previously demonstrated that within potent adult derived suppressor cell lines the cells with suppressor function reside within this double positive subset Godfrey et al. 2004104 453 461 . CD25 derived cells lines also maintain CD27 expression but at a lower level than CD25derived cell lines. This CD27 dim expression pattern was also noted with adult derived CD25 derived cell lines Godfrey et al. 2004104 453 461 .

Expression of the transcription factor FoxP3 has been proposed to be the most specific marker for regulatory cells in mice Ramsdell et al. 2003 15 718 24 . The results disclosed herein demonstrate that the FoxP3 message was expressed at higher levels in CD25cells and lines compared to CD25T cells and lines. Freshly isolated CD25cells from cord blood contained approximately 64 fold more message than CD4CD25 cells or fresh CD8T cells . Cultured CD25derived cell lines contained 2 4 fold more message than freshly isolated CD25cells. Although message levels are low in CD25cells on isolation they increase approximately 25 30 fold on culture. This occurred even with exhaustive depletion of CD25 dim positive cells prior to culture . Further re stimulation of the 3 6 week old cell cultures with anti CD3 CD28 beads did not increase message expression but rather slightly decreased it in both types of cell lines.

In contrast to the data with mRNA message levels western blotting with a polyclonal antibody revealed FoxP3 protein expression to be primarily expressed in the CD25derived cell lines. Despite expressing message the CD25derived cell lines expressed minimal background levels of FoxP3 protein . Importantly re stimulation of the CD25cell lines markedly increased FoxP3 protein expression. The increase in FoxP3 protein level occurred despite the minimal change actual decrease in message levels. Re stimulation of CD25cells still did not induce FoxP3 protein in CD25derived cell lines.

The data disclosed herein demonstrates several interesting facets of FoxP3 mRNA message and protein regulation. Most importantly FoxP3 protein was found to be relatively specific for CD25derived suppressor cells and was minimally present in CD25derived cell lines. We also determined that even exhaustively CD25 depleted CD4T cell derived lines could make significant amounts of FoxP3 message upon culture activation approximately 20 30 fold more versus resting CD25cells. The discordance between FoxP3 mRNA and protein expression indicates that FoxP3 message levels do not necessarily identify or quantify suppressor cells. In addition re stimulated CD25cells expressed much more FoxP3 protein despite decreased message levels. These findings indicate FoxP3 expression is augmented with activation and suggest that post transcriptional mechanisms may contribute to regulation of FoxP3 protein expression.

Reactivation of Suppressor Cell Lines Induces Minimal Cytokine Production and Enhanced Surface TGF Beta LAP Expression

To determine the functional capabilities of the suppressive versus conventional T cell lines these cells were evaluated for their potential for cytokine production and cell surface molecule expression after re stimulation. Cell lines were re stimulated with anti CD3 CD28 beads for potent reactivation and supernatants harvested at defined time points for analysis of cytokine content by Luminex bead based assay. The CD25derived cell lines produced essentially no IL 2 IFN or IL 10 while control CD25derived cell lines produced high levels of these cytokines. The accumulation of TNF GM CSF IL 5 and the chemokine IL 8 was also markedly reduced as compared to control cell lines . In contrast the accumulation of TGF beta and the chemokines MIP 1a and RANTES were not significantly different between different cell lines.

Re stimulation of the cell lines with pharmacological agents PMA and ionomycin which can bypass proximal signaling pathways led to nearly equivalent levels of cytokine production by both the CD25and CD25derived cell lines . Thus the CD25derived cell lines appear to have proximal TCR and CD28 signaling impairments that preclude the normal production of multiple cytokines. In addition the CD25derived cell lines had impaired production of the immunosuppressive cytokine IL 10 which was not restored by PMA ionomycin stimulation. This suggests that production of IL 10 is probably not a major mechanism of suppression affected by the CD25derived cell lines.

To determine if general activation of cord blood derived CD25cell lines was impaired the expression of cell surface activation antigens was evaluated by flow cytometric analysis. Cell lines were re stimulated with anti CD3 CD28 beads and evaluated after overnight culture for CD69 OX40 CD134 and GITR expression. All three antigens were re expressed on both the CD25and CD25derived cell lines . The expression of OX40 and GITR appeared slightly enhanced on the CD25derived cell lines versus the reactivated CD25cell lines McHugh et al. 200216 311 323 . Importantly re activation of the CD25cell lines was relatively intact as determined by cell surface activation antigen expression analysis in contrast to the results shown for cytokine accumulation.

Cell surface expression of the TGF beta latency associated protein LAP the TGF beta precursor protein has been reported to be associated with Tcells Nakamura et al. 2004172 834 842 . In addition recombinant forms of this protein have been recently reported to partially neutralize suppressor function Nakamura et al. 2004172 834 842 . Thus the expression of LAP on the CD25and CD25derived cell lines was evaluated. Neither CD25or CD25lines expressed this protein after culture for 3 6 weeks however after re stimulation with anti CD3 CD28 beads there was a distinct expression of cell surface LAP on the CD25derived cell lines but not the CD25derived cell lines. Cell surface expression of TGF beta was not detectable.

Suppressor cells were found on re stimulation to have limited potential for cytokine production. There was a profound lack of IL 2 IFN gamma and IL 10 production and a markedly reduced ability to produce GM CSF TNF IL 5 and IL 8. In contrast activation as assessed by up regulated expression of CD69 OX40 and GITR and production of MIP 1a and RANTES was generally intact. Interestingly cytokine production ability was restored with PMA ionomycin stimulation. This indicates a partial proximal TCR signaling block in the suppressor cells and is consistent with the anergic response characteristics of the suppressor cells to TCR stimulation.

Cultured Suppressor Cells Function by an Unknown Mechanism Independent of IL 10 TGF Beta and Multiple Costimulatory Molecules

To determine if the cultured suppressor cell lines work through known soluble immunosuppressive or cell surface negative regulatory proteins DC MLR suppressor assays were treated with neutralizing or blocking monoclonal antibodies. Assays were evaluated for the reversal of suppression by resumption of proliferation. Initially antibodies to IL 10 IL 10R and TGF were tested alone or in various combinations with minimal effect. Only by combining all three antibodies at high doses 30 g ml were modest and probably non specific effects seen . Treated control cultures also evidenced increased proliferation. Antibodies to the negative costimulatory signaling molecules CTLA4 and PD1 were also tested and found to have essentially no effect on their own but again only in combination was a marginal effect on suppression noted . Agonist antibodies to receptors whose signaling is reported to abrogate or diminish suppressor function of resting murine T GITR Ji et al. 2004172 5823 5827 and OX40 CD134 Takeda et al. 2004172 3580 3589 were tested and found to have minimal effects on the cultured suppressor cells. Agonist antibody to OX40 appeared to impair suppressor function in some donors more than others mean 32 reversion n 6 range 15 75 . However agonist antibody to OX40 also increased the magnitude of the control MLR in approximate correlation with the magnitude of reversion of suppression . Antibodies to OX40L inhibited the MLR with donor variability but also increased the apparent magnitude of suppression mean 96 suppression n 5 range 90 98 versus 90 for control cultures .

Because of the specific increased cell surface LAP expression on reactivated cultured suppressor cells and the suggested importance of TGF beta to suppressor function Nakamura et al. 2004172 834 842 Chen et al. 2003 14 85 89 multiple antagonists of the TGF beta pathway were evaluated. Neutralizing antibodies both monoclonal and polyclonal soluble receptors recombinant LAP and antibody to LAP were all tested in the MLR system. All reagents alone or in multiple combinations failed to reverse suppression mediated by the cultured Tcell lines. Experiments were conducted with a lower number of suppressor cells specifically a 1 10 responder stimulator ratio to minimize the potency of the suppression resulting in approximately 50 inhibition in control MLR. Even under these conditions minimal effects were noted .

These studies demonstrate that cord blood when compared to adult blood is an improved source for Tisolation and culture. Potent suppressive cell lines were isolated from virtually every donor and these results were obtained with a straightforward direct MACS based purification. Flow cytometric profiles of antigen expression on cord blood Tcell lines were surprisingly uniform. This system was used to further characterize suppressor cell phenotype and function.

The disclosures of each and every patent patent application and publication cited herein are hereby incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

While this invention has been disclosed with reference to specific embodiments it is apparent that other embodiments and variations of this invention may be devised by others skilled in the art without departing from the true spirit and scope of the invention. The appended claims are intended to be construed to include all such embodiments and equivalent variations.

