---

title: Method for authorizing a telephone transaction and local node
abstract: The invention is characterized in that the comparative result is output by the authentification device over the local node to the access control and the result of the comparison is communicated by the access control to the user over the local node, signals sent by the authentification device being masked.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08171305&OS=08171305&RS=08171305
owner: Avaya Inc.
number: 08171305
owner_city: Basking Ridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050526
---
This application is a national stage application under 35 U.S.C. 371 of PCT Application No. PCT DE2005 000976 having an international filing date of May 26 2005 which designated the United States which PCT application claimed the benefit of German Application Serial No. 10 2004 026 349.3 filed May 26 2004 the entire disclosure of which is hereby incorporated herein by reference.

The invention relates to the authorization of a telephone transaction by means of voice recognition and in particular to a method for authorizing an access to information through a user wherein the user is requested by an interactive voice device to deliver a voice sample the voice sample is compared with a comparative data record and the access to the desired information through the user is released by the interactive voice device as a function of the result of the comparison as well as to a corresponding local node.

The telephone authentication by means of voice recognition is gaining more and more importance for voice dialog applications in the public telephone network. Before a user can use the service e.g. telephone banking of a service provider he must identify himself. For this purpose the service provider possesses one or more voice samples of the user. The user identifies himself in this case by entering his name or his user access number and then repeating a voice pattern. Through comparison with the stored voice pattern the user is identified and can then if the result of the comparison is positive control his transactions.

As the analysis of the voice speaker identification or verification requires high expenditure a dedicated system hereinafter referred to as authentication system is used in most cases. There are a number of products which implement this as an independent solution and provide proprietary or Voice XML interfaces for this purpose.

From EP 1 172 771 a method is known for authorizing a commercial transaction between a customer and a provider of goods or services through an authorization provider with authentication of the customer through comparison of a biometric sample of the customer with a biometric pattern of the customer stored with the authorization provider the authorization process comprising the steps a establishment of a telephone connection over a communication network between the provider and the authorization provider via a router the router assigning the real telephone number of the authorization provider to a virtual telephone number and transmitting the telephone number of the provider and a code which is computed simultaneously by the router and by the authorization provider with the help of the same algorithm b acceptance of the telephone connection through the authorization provider if the provider is registered with the authorization provider under the transmitted telephone number and the transmitted code corresponds to the code computed by the authorization provider c transmission of an identifier serving for identifying the customer from the customer to the authorization provider over the established telephone connection d transmission of a biometric sample of the customer over the established telephone connection e transmission of the amount to the transferred and any further data needed for the transaction from the customer to the authorization provider over the established telephone connection f initiation of the transaction through the authorization provider if the correspondence between the biometric sample and the stored biometric pattern of the customer is greater than a predetermined threshold value.

A method and a device for verifying the identity of a person using a telephone card bank card or credit card are known from U.S. Pat. No. 5 806 040. The system establishes a connection between the card user and a telephone network the user entering the card number. The card number is used for access to a central database over the telephone network a voice recognition pattern corresponding to the entered card number being loaded. The voice recognition comprises several samples of the user s voice pronouncing selected words sentences and or numbers. As soon as the corresponding voice recognition pattern has been loaded the system requests the user to pronounce one of the words sentences and or numbers included in the voice recognition pattern. The word sentence and or number spoken upon the request is compared with the voice recognition pattern. If the words spoken correspond to the pattern it is assumed that the user is authorized and the card is released. If the words spoken do not correspond to the pattern authorization can be denied or not be denied to the user as a function of the use of the card and the financial frame of the card.

This type of voice dialog systems requires the provision of interfaces and a considerable expenditure of adaptation of systems to integrate the identification or verification of the speaker into their sequence of operations the more so if a telephone system is to be retrofitted with an authentication system and or the telephone system and the authentication system come from different manufacturers.

It is the object of the present invention to provide a method for authorizing a telephone transaction i.e. a method with which the authorization of access to data over a public telephone network is safely guaranteed and at the same time the expenditure regarding the networking of user interactive voice dialog system and authentication device is simplified. In particular it shall be made possible in this way to retrofit already existing systems.

This object is achieved according to the invention through the method according to claim and through the local node according to claim . Preferred embodiments of the invention are the subject matter of the dependent claims.

The method according to the invention for authorizing an access to a database through a user in a telecommunication network said telecommunication network comprising a user interface an access control for the database and an authentication device which are connected with each other over a local node in the telecommunication network and including the following steps requesting the user by means of the access control to deliver a voice sample comparing the voice sample with a comparative data record which is assigned to the user and had been stored before in a storage by the authentication device releasing or denying the access to the desired information through the user as a function of the result of the comparison by the access control is characterized in that the result of the comparison is output by the authentication device over the local node to the access control and the result of the comparison is communicated by the access control to the user over the local node signals sent by the authentication device being masked.

In a preferred embodiment of the method according to the invention the B channels of the ISDN network are interconnected in such a way that in each case only that receive time slot for signals sent by the authentication device is mixed with the send time slot for signals sent to the user telephone in which no authentication signals were received.

Preferably the result of the comparison is transmitted in the form of DTMF sequences between the authentication device and the access control.

In a further preferred embodiment of the invention the voice sample comprises at least one sequence of several syllables or words the user being requested several times to pronounce a word and or a syllable whereby each time a voice sample is recorded each of the several voice samples is compared with a comparative data record whereby a hit rate is determined and the access to the desired information through the user is released or denied by the interactive voice device as a function of the determined hit rate.

The masking of signals sent by the authentication device out of the signals sent by the access control for the user is in particular effected in the local node.

The corresponding local node according to the invention for exchanging signals in a telecommunication network between a user telephone an authentication device and a database for authorizing an access to a database through a user in a telecommunication network is characterized in that the signals sent by the authentication device to the access control of the database are masked out of the signals sent by the access control of the database to the user telephone.

In a preferred embodiment the local node is an ISDN local node in which the B channels are interconnected in such a way that in each case only that receive time slot for signals sent by the authentication device is mixed with a send time slot for the user telephone in which no authentication signals were received.

It is particularly preferred that the local node comprises a voice filtering device to eliminate troubles in the telephone line.

One advantage of the described solution consists in the fact that no safety problems will arise because no further interface except the voice channel to the existing authentication device is needed. In particular this also excludes the possibility of wiretapping the communication between the authentication device and the database so that fundamentally there is no opportunity for logging signals sent by the authentication device for release denial of access. Furthermore with the method according to the invention and the corresponding local node according to the invention the authentication device properly speaking can be established subsequently and at any location within the telecommunication network.

In the following a transaction over a public telecommunication network according to the state of the art will be described in which an authentication is effected in advance i.e. the access authorization is verified by means of an unambiguous identification of the user.

In the user is connected over his telephone with a telecommunication network . Over the telecommunication network he can in principle access a database which is also connected with the telecommunication network . For the case that in this database personal and confidential data are stored the access to the data shall of course be restricted to the actually authorized persons. For this purpose an access control is connected upstream of the database which verifies the authorization of the user from whom a corresponding request is received before granting him access to the data.

For the case that the user s authentication can be effected by means of a voice sample the access control returns the request of the user to a local node from where it is transferred to an external authentication device . The local node is a usual node situated inside or outside the network . If the telecommunication network is an ISDN network a send time slot will be mixed in the local node with a receive time slot so that the users connected with each other can communicate with each other like over a wire line network. In other words one user hears all signals generated by the two other users there is no filtering.

In the authentication device the voice sample of the user a is compared with comparative data which had been stored before in a local storage not shown for this user. The comparative data can be correctly assigned to the user by means of an input access or identification number which can be input either as spoken words or by entering a number. The result of the comparison is returned to the access control over the same lines used for transmitting the request. Then the access control either grants the user access to the database or informs him that he is not authorized for access. The access control can be informed by the authentication device over an API Application Programming Interface .

The access control is in particular an interactive voice system so that the user can be requested by the operators of that system to repeat after them a word or syllable or number etc. selected at random the spoken text then being compared as described before in the authentication device with comparative data which had been stored before.

One possible application is e.g. a money transaction effected by a bank employee after prior authentication. The customer caller calls for example his bank and is directed to a voice dialog system. The voice dialog system sets up a conference circuit with the customer and the authentication system being participants. The authentication system performs the further authentication control. For this authentication for example a predefined sentence is requested and compared with a pattern. The authentication is acknowledged to the voice dialog system through DTMF i.e. the authentication system sends defined DTMF sequences signalling the success or failure of the authentication.

The above described conference circuit with the user telephone the local node the database and the authentication device which are connected with each other over the network involves the risk that a listener or the caller himself records the acknowledgment signals and reproduces them in the next authentication procedure in order to outwit the system and obtain access to confidential data which otherwise would have been refused to him.

In order to exclude such a circumvention of the system attempted with fraudulous intent a conference circuit is set up according to the invention in which the reply of the authentication system is exclusively received by the voice dialog system but not by the caller himself.

By means of a remote authentication will be described in the following as an exemplary embodiment of the invention.

The caller inputs over the telephone receiver or the keyboard of his telephone data by means of which a connection with the access control to the database is established. These data can be an access number a secret number PIN or a voice signal. These data are first of all transferred over the telephone network to the local node . In the local node the data required for an authentication are transferred to the authentication device i.e. for example both DTMF signals entered via the keyboard of the user telephone and voice signals input via the telephone receiver of the user telephone . It is however also possible to transmit only the voice signals sent by the caller to the authentication device . In the authentication device at least some of the characteristic data sent by the caller are compared with a data record which had been stored before for this caller.

The access control of the database requests the user to repeat after it certain words syllables sentences numbers and the like. These voice data are sent possibly in digitized form either directly or by the access control over the local node to the authentication device . shows an embodiment in which the data are directly sent from the user telephone to the authentication device . In the authentication device as explained above with reference to the voice data are compared with sample or comparative data which had been stored before.

The result of the comparison is communicated by the authentication device over the local node to the access control of the database preferably over a standard telephone line by means of a DTMF sequence. The access control of the database receives and analyzes the result. Then the result is communicated by the access control of the database to the user over the local node and the standard telephone line over which he is connected with the local node . To exclude a wiretapping of the result sent by the authentication device the communication to the user is however not effected in the form of the same DTMF signals with which the result sent by the authentication device to the access control of the database was signalized but for example in the form of voice signals if the access control consists of a call center with personnel or else in the form of other DTMF signals generated however according to a new alphabet so that they differ from the DTMF sequences of the authentication device .

In the following the function of the local node in the method according to the invention will be described in more detail. The data flows over the line in the communication of user access control authentication device and local node form a closed path namely a data flow from the user telephone to the local node a data flow from the local node to the authentication device a data flow from the authentication device to the local node a data flow from the local node to the database or its upstream interactive voice dialog system a data flow from the database or its upstream interactive voice dialog system to the local node and a data flow from the local node to the user telephone .

The data flows and transmit voice signals and other signals over the local node from the user telephone to the authentication device . These data are indicated by the hatched arrow . The data which are transmitted as data flows and from the authentication device over the local node to the interactive voice dialog system may contain the voice signals of the caller and in addition signals indicating the result of the comparison of the voice signals of the caller with corresponding stored samples. The latter signals are preferably DTMF signals. The data are indicated in by a second black arrow . In the voice dialog system the DTMF signals are filtered out by the authentication device so that only uncritical signals remain namely the information to the user that he is allowed or not allowed to access the database . These message signals are sent as data flows and over the local node to the user telephone .

The filtering of the DTMF signals sent by the authentication device out of the signals is achieved by a corresponding interconnection of the B signalizing channels whereby only that receive time slot for data sent by the authentication device is mixed in the local node with a send time slot for data for the user telephone in which no authentication signals were received. This might possibly mean that no receive time slot at all for data sent by the authentication device is mixed in the local node with a send time slot for data for the user telephone . Thus the reply of the authentication device only reaches the database or its upstream voice dialog system . In other words The data flows and sent by the database or its upstream voice dialog system over the local node to the user telephone and therefore to the caller do not contain any signals sent by the authentication device and can therefore not be misused. These data are indicated in by a white arrow in which no authentication signals are contained any more.

Therefore the system can be operated like a conference circuit of three participants in which critical data are only transmitted by a first participant to a firmly specified second participant. The replies of the caller to requests of the voice dialog system Say after me . . . are immediately recorded and analyzed by the authentication device . The communication between the authentication device and the voice dialog system is effected over DTMF and is not heard by the caller because these sound sequences are filtered out.

Over an application programming interface API the voice dialog system of the database is informed of a positive authentication. In the embodiment according to the invention the application does not require any data connection to the authentication device .

In addition to the communication via DTMF sequences an evaluation of the voice voice recognition in the authentication device is also possible. In this case no adaptations of the authentication system are necessary. The voice recognition has in this case a 100 hit rate because the text sequences are firmly programmed in the authentication system. An announcement of a successful authentication can be recognized by the remote authentication.

With that the invention offers the advantage that the communication between an authentication system and a voice dialog system can be realized without requiring the use of an interface other than the telephone interface. The authentication device can be situated at any location with network connection.

In the description it was assumed so far that the authentication signals are separated from the signals destined for the user in the local node . It is however evident for the person skilled in the art that this is only an example and that these signals may also be separated in the access control properly speaking i.e. an ISDN card or the interactive voice dialog system

Furthermore the method according to the invention is not limited to one authentication attempt but several attempts can be admitted in which if necessary an averaging of the individual results can be effected. In other words A voice sample is recorded which comprises at least one sequence of several syllables or words i.e. the user is requested several times as standard or as a function of the preceding authentication results to pronounce a word and or a syllable a voice sample being recorded in each case. Each of the individual voice samples is compared with a comparative data record and a total hit rate is determined i.e. a quotient of the successful attempts and the total number of attempts. Access to the desired information through the user is then released or denied by the access control as a function of the hit rate.

In order to avoid as far as possible misses due to line troubles preferably a voice filtering device not shown is used to eliminate troubles in the telephone line.

