---

title: Vehicle crew training system
abstract: A computer based simulation system for virtual training for vehicle crews is disclosed. The vehicle crew training system (VCTS) simulates crew positions for different military vehicles. Two or more crewman modules are networked together to support a partial or full vehicle crew. The crewman modules are self-contained devices that are modular in hardware and software design, easily reconfigurable, and that require minimal facility space, allowing use in restricted environments such as trailers. The VCTS is modular at the crew position level; crewman modules are added or deleted as required to meet a particular training need. One of the crewman modules can be a gunner module, which provides an unrestricted view of the simulated environment to the gunner by means of a display and a simulated vehicle-mounted weapon.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08864496&OS=08864496&RS=08864496
owner: Raydon Corporation
number: 08864496
owner_city: Port Orange
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050211
---
Historically most virtual crew training has been accomplished with appended trainers or with crew station trainers. An appended trainer consists of equipment added to an actual parked combat vehicle such that the vehicle is used to train a full or partial crew in a virtual environment. Examples are Raydon s Abrams Appended Trainer A FIST XXI and the Bradley Appended Trainer AB FIST . A crew station trainer includes a replica of a crew compartment of an actual vehicle. Examples are Raydon s M COFT XXI and SIMNET XXI trainers for the Abrams tank and the Bradley fighting vehicle. The appended and crew station trainers typically provide higher fidelity and very little modularity. Here fidelity refers to the physical and functional realism of the man machine interface specifically the realism of the vehicle and or weapon controls in terms of numbers of controls and control realism the realism of visual imagery in terms of field of view resolution and scene content and the realism of the physical crew position in terms of the human support structure. Further these trainers tend to be purpose built for either individual crew training or for collective training but not both.

More recently desktop training systems have emerged that are capable of training individuals and crews of military combat vehicles with less fidelity but at a much lower cost than the appended and crew station trainers. However these desktop systems are not modular and like the higher fidelity appended and crew station trainers tend to be purpose built for either individual crew training or for collective training but not both.

Hence there is a need for a virtual crew training system that is sufficiently flexible to allow both individual crew training and collective training is modular and can provide any level of fidelity.

Current simulators for mounted weapons training use video projection screens and a fixed mount weapon mockup. Taken together this results in a limited field of view for the gunner i.e. the gunner can only look and shoot at scenes depicted on the projection screen. Typically these screens are limited to the forward direction only.

This approach also requires more space to implement making it impractical to use in standard trailers or portable shelters. One instantiation of this approach was implemented by the U.S. government at the Mounted Warfare Testbed in Fort Knox Ky. Another instantiation of this approach was implemented by Lockheed Martin for the government s Virtual Combat Convoy Trainer program as documented in the Aug. 31 2004 . Hence there is a need for a mounted weapon training simulator module that has a relatively small physical footprint yet provides realistic perspective i.e. in all possible directions for a trainee s view and aim.

The vehicle crew training system VCTS is a computer based simulation system intended to serve the virtual training needs of military users. However unlike other simulation systems the VCTS is modular at the crew position level crewman modules are added or deleted as required to meet a particular training need. The VCTS provides virtual training for vehicle crew members. Virtual training refers to a mode of training in which the trainee is immersed in a simulated environment as a participating entity and in which results of all actions occur in real time based on cause and effect. This is also referred to as real time man in the loop simulation. The simulation system also supports virtual dismounting of a trainee such that the trainee may virtually exit the virtual vehicle while maintaining the ability to interact with the virtual environment from the vantage point of a dismounted position. Three modes of virtual training are supported individual training crew training and collective training with multiple vehicle crews. The VCTS is able to simulate crew positions for different military vehicles and their associated weapon systems. The VCTS comprises crewman modules networked together to support a partial or full vehicle crew. Moreover not only is the VCTS modular but each crewman module is itself modular. The crewman modules are self contained devices that are modular in hardware and software design and easily reconfigurable. In addition the crewman modules occupy a minimal physical footprint.

One instantiation of the VCTS is a high mobility multipurpose wheeled vehicle HMMWV trainer developed by Raydon Corporation of Daytona Beach Fla. This system can be used for virtual combat convoy training in a simulated geographical environment. In an embodiment of the invention the simulated environment corresponds to an actual urban or rural setting. Future VCTS variants include but are not limited to the heavy expanded mobility tactical truck HEMTT the standard cargo truck and the five ton tactical truck.

The VCTS consists of two or more crewman modules networked together. A typical set of crewman modules constituting a VCTS includes a driver module a commander module and a gunner module. Via a network other devices such as an instructor station and a simulated radio may be integrated with the VCTS. Additional crewman modules may be added for other crew members such as an observer riflemen. Vehicle crew training systems may also be linked together to form groups of simulated vehicles such as platoons of three or four vehicles where each vehicle is configured with two or more crewman modules. Two instructor stations may be included in these larger embodiments to facilitate training simultaneously with the conduct of after action reviews of previously conducted exercises. Additional instructor stations may be added to facilitate individual and crew training.

Various embodiments of the invention therefore may or may not interface with the instructor station. However it can be an important component of the overall training system. In embodiments where it is included it initializes the different VCTS crewman modules monitors the performance of the trainees controls the operation of the simulated enemy and friendly forces during the various training exercises and records all exercise events. In addition the instructor station supports the conduct of after action reviews AARs wherein previously conducted exercises are played back as an aid to the instructor s critique of trainee performance. An instructor station can also act as a surrogate driver in the absence of a driver module or any other missing crewmember. If two instructor stations are included then it is possible to perform the exercise control and monitoring functions with the AAR function simultaneously.

The vehicle crew training system is designed in a modular fashion such that systems may be reconfigured to meet different training needs. Reconfiguration may involve adding deleting or changing the mix of crewman modules. Modularity also extends to the design of the crewman modules such that the weapon system and or the vehicle type may be rapidly changed. For example a .50 caliber machine gun in use on the HMMWV variant of the vehicle crew training system can be swapped for an MK 19 grenade launcher a 7.62 mm machine gun an M249 squad automatic weapon or a tube launched optically tracked wire guided TOW missile launcher for example. Note also that the weapon system can alternatively be a non lethal weapon that might be used for such actions as crowd control for instance. Examples of such non lethal weapons include water cannons devices for firing tear gas canisters or beanbags and sound and microwave generators.

An embodiment of the invention can consist of four simulated HMMWV vehicles each represented by a VCTS with five Crewman Modules. Two instructor stations and simulated radios can be interfaced with such an embodiment of the VCTS through a network. The system provides individual crew and collective training to platoons of HMMWV drivers commanders gunners and observer riflemen.

The VCTS is designed to fit into a very constrained space such as a semi trailer or a portable shelter. The HMMWV trainer just described fits into two 53 foot semi trailers.

Another embodiment of the VCTS is a HMMWV training system developed for the U.S. Army National Guard. This system can consist of five simulated HMMWV vehicles where four of the vehicles are represented by VCTS s consisting of two crewman modules each and the fifth vehicle external to any VCTS is represented by an Appended HMMWV containing a driver and gunner position. Simulated radios and an instructor station can also be interfaced to the VCTS. The system provides individual crew and collective training to platoons of HMMWV drivers and gunners. The VCTS modules and the instructor station of this embodiment fit in one 53 foot semi trailer.

The gunner module embodies a unique approach to weapon system training for simulated ground vehicles. It provides an unrestricted view of the simulated environment to the gunner by means of a head mounted display HMD and a moveable vehicle mounted weapon mock up. The HMD provides a complete spherical 360 degree field of regard FOR to the gunner as the gunner moves his head the instantaneous field of view IFOV changes in relation to the direction his head is pointed. The weapon mock up is cradle pintle mounted on a 360 degree traverse ring to allow full 360 degree horizontal traverse as well as the authentic amount of weapon pitch and yaw. External cabling is routed through a slip ring to allow unlimited rotations of the traverse ring. In addition weapon mock ups and the weapon software may be easily changed to simulate different vehicle mounted weapons. Finally the gunner module is very compact in size allowing use in restricted environments such as trailers and mobile shelters.

Crewman modules may be of varying fidelity. For example a lower fidelity desktop version of the gunner module may be used instead of the simulated crew position version described above. Fidelity in this context refers to the fidelity or realism of the man machine interface as experienced by the trainee i.e. the fidelity of the vehicle and or weapon controls in terms of numbers of controls and the realism of the controls the fidelity of visual imagery in terms of field of view resolution and scene content and the fidelity of the physical crew position in terms of the human support structure.

The VCTS architecture supports any mix of varying fidelity crewman modules. Since the lower fidelity desktop versions provide subsets of the capabilities embodied in the simulated crew position versions all discussions of crewman module will refer to the higher fidelity variants unless specifically stated otherwise.

Embodiments of the invention are discussed in detail below. In describing embodiments specific terminology is employed for the sake of clarity. The invention is not intended to be limited to the specific terminology so selected. While specific exemplary embodiments are discussed it should be understood that this is done for illustration purposes only. A person skilled in the relevant art will recognize that other components and configurations can be used without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

The computational system contains the crewman module software. In an embodiment of the invention the crewman module software consists of a commercially available operating system and application software. The major functions performed by the application software include simulating vehicle movement weapon aiming firing and impact effects image generation of visual scenes interfacing with the various hardware components and interfacing with other crewman modules and with external systems such as other vehicle simulators via the network. The application software in the driver module has the additional functions of calculating collision with other objects in the virtual world and of terrain following by the driver s virtual vehicle.

Software components are categorized as either being application specific or reusable. If the latter they are placed into a library of reusable components. In an embodiment of the invention one or more application specific components generally links to one or more reusable components to perform a given function. A collection of drivers and application program interfaces APIs may also be included with the application software to interface with hardware . Drivers and APIs include drivers for the video and data acquisition cards housed in the PC as well as network joystick and sound drivers and the API for the visual software. Underlying the components drivers and APIs is the real time executive software that provides the universal means for components drivers and API s to communicate via messages events and data reflection through its interface. The real time executive software can also be componentized.

In the embodiment illustrated of the display system is comprised of a head mounted display HMD with an attached head tracker HT receiver an HT transmitter mounted above the gunner position and the HMD and HT interface electronics and respectively . In addition an LCD panel is provided to serve as a video repeater for the benefit of the instructor. In this embodiment of the invention an acoustic HT system senses the position and attitude of the HMD and continuously feeds the data to the PC via the HMD HT data interface. Referring to HT data is continuously input to visual I O software where it is formatted and then output see to visual simulation software . The visual simulation software uses the formatted HT data to determine the position and look angle of the head relative to the visual scene that is displayed to the trainee wearing the HMD . In an embodiment of the invention the visual simulation software also performs the following functions 

In the illustrated embodiment the network software sends and receives data to and from the network . Data sent to the network includes projectile state data received from the weapon simulation software and weapon impact and collision data received from the visual simulation software . Data received from the network includes own vehicle state data plus the state of all other vehicles and projectiles that are active in the virtual environment.

In the embodiment of the invention shown in a sound system generates aural cues synchronized with and representative of actions and events in the virtual environment. Sounds can caused by for example own vehicle and other vehicle movements own weapon and other weapon firing weapon impacts and explosions caused by own weapons or other weapons and could even include environmental noise such as crowd noise.

The sound system includes amplified speakers that receive audio from the PC via standard audio cables in an embodiment of the invention. The sound I O software is a sound driver that receives the sound data from sound simulation software and formats it for use by the standard sound hardware in the PC . The sound simulation software creates sounds based on weapon and vehicle state data that is received from the network software . Sound files representing different battlefield sounds are created off line and then stored in a sound file library during real time the sound simulation software accesses the appropriate sound files and weights them appropriately to create aural cues for the trainee.

In an embodiment of the invention the computational system consists of a commercially available PC equipped with 2 GB of main memory and a Pentium 4 CPU Windows XP may be used as the operating system. In this embodiment the DAQ card is a commercially available PCI card that supports both analog and digital signals. The video card may be a commercially available PCI graphics card.

For this embodiment of the invention the slip ring is attached to the slip ring support structure which is attached to the main body of the gunner station . Therefore the slip ring stays fixed in space as the traverse ring moves. The slip ring is a commercially available device that routes wires through the slip ring to the HMD HT support structure . As the traverse ring moves slip ring cabling moves in a circular motion around the slip ring but cable connections are maintained. Since most of the electronics are mounted on the bustle plate or otherwise attached to the traverse ring only a few wires are passed over the slip ring cabling . They include 

Note that in addition to the HT apparatus discussed above other mechanisms could be used to track the position and or orientation of the head of the gunner trainee. Examples include inertial head trackers and eye trackers both of which are known in the art.

While various embodiments of the present invention have been described above is should be understood that they have been presented by way of example and not limitation. It will be apparent to persons skilled in the relevant art that various changes in form and detail may be made therein without departing from the spirit and the scope of the invention.

