---

title: Scheme for securing locally generated data with authenticated write operations
abstract: A scheme for securing a locally generated data on a system using authenticated write operations is disclosed. According to an embodiment of the present invention, a private/public key pair is randomized and repeatedly generated to protect operations to data blocks.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08219829&OS=08219829&RS=08219829
owner: Intel Corporation
number: 08219829
owner_city: Santa Clara
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051208
---
This invention relates generally to memory devices. Memory devices are used in many different types of systems to store software and data.

Many systems such as handheld or portable devices are vulnerable to attack from hackers viruses worms and the like. Software and data stored in memory on a system are subject to various types of undesired modification due to one of these attacks. Because software is typically only modified during a system installation or a software upgrade a system manufacture may put protections in place to eliminate the threat to software stored in system memory. However important data for example file system data is often generated locally routinely updated and thus vulnerable to undesired modification.

System designers are constantly looking for mechanisms to prevent hackers viruses worms and the like from altering important data stored in a system memory.

In the following description numerous specific details are set forth. However it is understood that embodiments of the invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known methods structures and techniques have not been shown in detail in order not to obscure an understanding of this description.

References to one embodiment an embodiment example embodiment various embodiments etc. indicate that the embodiment s of the invention so described may include a particular feature structure or characteristic but not every embodiment necessarily includes the particular feature structure or characteristic. Further repeated use of the phrase in one embodiment does not necessarily refer to the same embodiment although it may.

As used herein unless otherwise specified the use of the ordinal adjectives first second third etc. to describe a common object merely indicate that different instances of like objects are being referred to and are not intended to imply that the objects so described must be in a given sequence either temporally spatially in ranking or in any other manner.

Unless specifically stated otherwise as apparent from the following discussions it is appreciated that throughout the specification discussions utilizing terms such as processing computing calculating or the like refer to the action and or processes of a computer or computing system or similar electronic computing device that manipulate and or transform data represented as physical such as electronic quantities into other data similarly represented as physical quantities.

In a similar manner the term processor may refer to any device or portion of a device that processes electronic data from registers and or memory to transform that electronic data into other electronic data that may be stored in registers and or memory. A computing platform may comprise one or more processors.

Memory device includes an array of memory cells that store information. Array is divided into multiple blocks. Some of the blocks are used for code storage for example boot block operating system and system library blocks carrier application blocks . Other blocks are used for data storage for example file system data blocks . Memory device may include other blocks not shown.

Memory device utilizes controller to perform authenticated write operations to the code and data blocks. Authenticated writes are program operations that include additional information that may used by controller to authenticate the entity requesting the operation. The additional information may range from public private asymmetric key cryptography to simple password protection. Memory device will not perform the operation unless the authentication by controller memory is successful. Authenticated operations such as an authenticated program or erase operation can prevent unwanted modification of data stored in the memory.

To implement authenticated operations to the code blocks and the data blocks key register and keys within public key storage are used to verify any attempted operations. The authentication operation may be any authentication function including one which operates under the RSA algorithm invented in 1978 by Ron Rivest Adi Shamir and Leonard Adlemen a symmetric key or a password to mention a few examples. RSA is a cryptographic algorithm that offers a high level of security for digital data transfers. RSA uses a public key and a private key and incorporates modular exponentiation mathematics. Modular exponentiation of large integers may be efficiently computed within the public key function by repeated modular multiplications. Pipelining techniques or repetitive multiplication cycles may be used for the massive parallel computations.

Public key storage stores public keys that are used for authentication. While public key storage is indicated to be a separate storage it too may be part of memory array in some embodiments. Key register identifies which key stored in public key storage is to be used for each memory block. As illustrated public keys are used to verify code blocks and respectively. Because updated software code typically comes from an external source such as a manufacture or software house a private key is not stored on the local system. Public key is used to verify data blocks . Because data is often generated locally on a system the system must also have a private key. Because the private key must be stored locally within the system data blocks are vulnerable to attacks.

According to an embodiment of the present invention the private public key pair used to authenticate operations to data block may be randomized that is the key pair may be generated to have a random non predicable value. According to another embodiment of the invention the key pair may be generated each time the system powers up. Additionally or alternatively the key pair may be repeatedly generated at periodic or random time intervals to impede hackers from discovering the private and public keys and generating unwanted operations. The key pair may be repeatedly generated at a rate that makes attacking the data blocks non practical.

According to an embodiment of the present invention multiple key pairs may be used to protect the data blocks for example one key pair for each data block or subset of data blocks.

Although system is illustrated as a system with a single processor other embodiments may be implemented with multiple processors in which additional processors may be coupled to the bus . In such cases each additional processor may share main memory and non volatile storage device for writing data and or instructions to and reading data and or instructions from the same. Also although non volatile storage device is shown external to main memory in other embodiments nonvolatile storage device may be part of main memory . The embodiments of the invention are not limited in this respect.

System may be any processor based system including a wired or wireless system. It may be a system which is involved in wireless communications such as a cellular telephone. System may be any of a variety of processor based systems including desktop computers laptops cellular telephones digital media players cameras communications devices personal digital assistants set top boxes medical equipment or automotive equipment to mention a few examples. Processor maybe a microcontroller one or more microprocessors or a digital signal processor to mention a few examples. In one embodiment the system may be battery powered but in other embodiments system may be hard wired to a line power. The architecture shown in is not meant to be limiting and the present invention may be adapted to any conceivable system architecture.

Realizations in accordance with the present invention have been described in the context of particular embodiments. These embodiments are meant to be illustrative and not limiting. Many variations modifications additions and improvements are possible. Accordingly plural instances may be provided for components described herein as a single instance. Boundaries between various components operations and data stores are somewhat arbitrary and particular operations are illustrated in the context of specific illustrative configurations. Other allocations of functionality are envisioned and may fall within the scope of claims that follow. Finally structures and functionality presented as discrete components in the various configurations may be implemented as a combined structure or component. These and other variations modifications additions and improvements may fall within the scope of the invention as defined in the claims that follow.

