---

title: Method and apparatus for providing secure remote access to enterprise networks
abstract: The invention includes a method and apparatus for providing secure remote access to enterprise networks. An apparatus includes a network interface module adapted for maintaining a secure network connection with a network device independent of a power state of a host computer associated with the apparatus a storage module for storing information associated with the secure connection, and a processor coupled to the network interface and the memory where the processor is adapted for automatically initiating the secure connection without user interaction.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08286002&OS=08286002&RS=08286002
owner: Alcatel Lucent
number: 08286002
owner_city: Paris
owner_country: FR
publication_date: 20051202
---
The invention relates to the field of communication networks and more specifically to providing secure remote access to enterprise networks.

In general broadband wireless access technologies enable enterprises to increase productivity by providing mobile enterprise users with continuous access to critical enterprise resources. The deployment of such technologies however is introducing enterprise security problems. For example an enterprise user may connect to the public Internet using broadband wireless access while simultaneously maintaining a connection to the enterprise Intranet over an Ethernet connection. This concurrent connectivity may result in significant security violations.

A variety of security violations resulting in attacks on enterprise network infrastructure may originate from outside the enterprise premises. For example from the outside of the enterprise premises the enterprise user system may be infected by a virus worm over the public Internet and may propagate this virus worm to the enterprise Intranet. In this example if IP forwarding is enabled the enterprise user system operates as a router enabling a malicious outside intruder to bypass the enterprise firewall and access critical enterprise resources. Furthermore the enterprise may be vulnerable to other attacks in which a malicious outside user utilizes an enterprise user system with dual connectivity in order to attack the enterprise. Although enterprises are deploying expensive mechanisms to prevent such outside access of the enterprise network dual network connectivity provides malicious outside users a capability to access the enterprise network.

A variety of security violations resulting in attacks on enterprise network infrastructure may originate from inside the enterprise premises. In fact enterprises increasingly realize that the majority of attacks on network infrastructure occur as a result of either internal sabotage or unintentional mistakes. For example such activities may include an employee forwarding confidential documents over the public Internet without encryption or an executive exchanging Instant Messages without adhering to enterprise security policies. Furthermore such activities may lead to computer espionage and violations of government regulations resulting in significant financial damages to enterprises. Although enterprises are deploying expensive mechanisms and policy controls to prevent enterprise users from engaging in such activities dual network connectivity enables users to by pass such mechanisms and controls and directly connect to the Internet without being subjected to the mechanisms and controls.

Various deficiencies in the prior art are addressed through the invention of a method and apparatus for providing secure remote access to enterprise networks. An apparatus includes a network interface module adapted for maintaining a secure network connection with a network device independent of a power state of a host computer associated with the apparatus a storage module for storing information associated with the secure connection and a processor coupled to the network interface and the memory where the processor is adapted for automatically initiating the secure connection without user interaction.

To facilitate understanding identical reference numerals have been used where possible to designate identical elements that are common to the figures.

In general from the enterprise user perspective the performance of the wireless network should match that of other broadband access technologies. While the main benefit of broadband wireless access is ubiquitous availability of network connectivity such availability often comes at the expense of reduced bandwidth availability. The enterprise users require low latency high bandwidth performance irrespective of enterprise user location connectivity type system management and maintenance functions and various other factors. In general from an enterprise system administrator perspective management and maintenance of systems supporting remote mobile enterprise users is typically difficult and expensive. Since many such remote mobile enterprise users e.g. enterprise sales teams are rarely within an enterprise campus and constantly access network resources remotely while traveling software updates must be performed while the enterprise users access the enterprise network from remote locations. Although such software updates may involve critical security patches the software updates may also cause significant inconvenience e.g. by consuming valuable system and network resources for transmitting and applying software updates to the enterprise users. For example a software patch may be initiated while the enterprise user is in an important meeting and requires immediate access to resources.

The present invention provides a secure system enabling enterprise users e.g. remote enterprise users accessing a secure enterprise network remotely using a public network local enterprise users accessing a secure enterprise network locally and the like to securely access an enterprise network while increasingly utilizing broadband wireless networks. The secure system ensures that enterprise user traffic originating from secure client devices is routed through a secure gateway irrespective of user location . The secure system includes a secure client device associated with each endpoint device accessing the enterprise network. The secure system includes a secure gateway device by which each secure client device accesses the enterprise network. In one embodiment the always on capability of the secure client device enables constant communication between the endpoint device and the enterprise network. The secure always on system enables support of various features benefiting end users and system administrators. The features enabled by the secure always on system may include application acceleration features remote management features wireless network optimization features and like features as well as various combinations thereof.

In one embodiment application acceleration features include background transfers traffic filtering data protocol compression tunnel address translation protocol optimizations e.g. at secure client devices base stations and the like and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment remote management features include enabling system administrators to push software upgrades policy updates back up operations and the like to remote endpoint devices even when the remote endpoint devices are not powered on enabling end users to schedule software upgrades policy updates back up operations when the remote endpoint devices are not powered on and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment wireless network optimization features include analyzing requested information transfers for distinguishing between delay sensitive information transfers requiring instant responses e.g. audio conversations and delay insensitive transfers not requiring instant responses e.g. email transfers data backup transfers and the like and delaying delay insensitive information transfers in response to various conditions e.g. until a wireless signal quality satisfies a threshold when a threshold number of other clients are being served and the like and the like.

As depicted in REs communicate with WNs using a plurality of wireless connections WCs collectively WCs . Specifically SC of RE communicates with WN using WC SC of RE communicates with WN using WC SC of RE communicates with WN using WC and SC of RE communicates with WN using WC . As depicted in WNs communicate with Internet using a plurality of communication links CLs collectively CLs . The Internet communicates with EC illustratively with SG of EC using a communication link CL . As such REs and specifically SCs may access any network element within EC using secure connections between SCs and SG .

As depicted in LEs communicate with Intranet using a plurality of communication links CLs collectively CLs . Specifically SC of LE communicates with Intranet using CL SC of LE communicates with Intranet using CL and SC of LE communicates with Intranet using CL . The Intranet communicates with SG using a communication link CL . As such LEs and specifically SCs may access any network element external EC using secure policies policed by SG . The MS communicates with Intranet using a communication link CL . As such MS may communicate with REs specifically with SCs using secure connections between SCs and SG .

As depicted in REs illustratively SCs communicate with EC using a plurality of Internet Protocol Security IPSec tunnels collectively IPSec tunnels . In one embodiment IPSec tunnels may be established by SCs in response to detection by SCs of an available WN irrespective of whether the associated REs are powered on . In one embodiment IPSec tunnels may be established by SCs in response to requests by SG for establishment of IPSec tunnels irrespective of whether the associated REs are powered on . The IPSec tunnels between SCs and SG transport information between REs and various network devices in communication with SG illustratively LEs MS and the like . Although described with respect to IPSec tunnels any secure connection between SCs and SG may be utilized in one embodiment of the present invention.

As depicted in communication network generally illustrates a secure system for enterprise users located external to EC i.e. users associated with REs and enterprise users located internal to EC i.e users associated with LEs and optionally system administrators associated with MS . As depicted in the secure system includes i secure client devices illustratively endpoints integrating security as well as application acceleration remote management wireless network optimization and like features at the broadband wireless network interface and ii secure gateway devices deployed at the edge of the enterprise illustratively SG deployed as an interface between EC and Internet providing a secure interface to the secure client devices for supporting application acceleration remote management wireless network optimization and like features.

In one embodiment of the present invention when an enterprise user system equipped with a secure client is located external to the enterprise campus the remote secure client may establish a secure tunnel to a secure gateway without any user intervention. A remote secure client according to one embodiment of the present invention operates as an active network component operable for establishing a secure network connection when the associated remote endpoint device is in an inactive power state e.g. in sleep mode powered off and the like and in the absence of any user interaction. As such a remote secure client of one embodiment of the present invention replaces previous network interface clients which operated as passive modems operable for establishing network connections only when the associated remote endpoint device was powered on and in response to at least some user interaction .

In one embodiment of the present invention when an enterprise user system equipped with a secure client is located internal to the enterprise campus the local secure client may authenticate the user and traffic transmitted from the local secure client is routed directly to the enterprise Intranet illustratively Intranet thereby ensuring that all enterprise user traffic is subject to the same enterprise policy controls before reaching the public Internet illustratively Internet . In one embodiment of the present invention by implementing secure tunneling functionality within a local secure client the enterprise user associated with a local endpoint including a local secure client is thereby prevented from by passing the enterprise security policies.

In one embodiment the secure system including the secure clients and secure gateways is adapted for supporting mobile users. When a device is mobile within an IP network the public IP address of the mobile device can change as it moves from one location to another. When such an IP address change occurs all active networking sessions will be terminated. This is clearly undesirable for a mobile user. An existing mechanism addressing this problem is Mobile IP which requires special support on mobile devices and which creates additional network overhead. The network overhead is further increased if the mobile device is an IPSec endpoint. In one embodiment in order to avoid such disadvantages of Mobile IP the secure system supports a mechanism for maintaining the IPSec tunnel without using Mobile IP even when the public IP address of the client changes. In this embodiment since networking applications on the mobile device use the tunnel IP address they are not affected.

As described herein a secure client according to one embodiment of the present invention includes a network interface module for interfacing with various wireless networks a dedicated micro controller running a secure operating system which is not subject to the same vulnerabilities as other end user systems and a non volatile memory e.g. flash memory . In one embodiment when the wireless network interface through which network connectivity is established fails e.g. the endpoint moved from indoors to outdoors the secure client may select a next available wireless network interface from a priority list prompt a user associated with the endpoint for another network interface and the like. In one such embodiment since the IPSec tunnel may have to be re established applications on the endpoint may be affected by the network interface failure.

In one embodiment a secure client according to one embodiment of the present invention is adapted for being active e.g. in wake up mode powered on and the like even when the associated host computer illustratively endpoints is powered off e.g. in sleep mode . As such a secure client according to one embodiment of the present invention comprises an always on capability which enables the secure client to complete network transfers while the associated host computer is idle enables system administrators to remotely activate e.g. wake up the associated host computer and which enables like functions.

Although remote client devices and local client devices are described with respect to specific elements functions and the like remote client devices in one embodiment of the present invention may include at least a portion of the elements and functions described with respect to local client devices and local client devices in one embodiment of the present invention may include at least a portion of the elements and functions described with respect to remote client devices. As such client devices according to one embodiment of the present invention may include various combinations of elements functions and the like for supporting the various functions of the present invention.

As described herein for remote secure clients illustratively SCs a secure gateway illustratively SG according to one embodiment of the present invention supports security functions e.g. terminates secure tunnels from the remote secure clients . As described herein for local secure clients illustratively SCs a secure gateway according to one embodiment of the present invention supports security functions e.g. manages network access e.g. for local secure clients illustratively SCs management systems illustratively MS and the like manages user credentials security policies and the like and performs like security functions .

As described herein a secure gateway according to one embodiment of the present invention complementary to supported security functions may support application acceleration remote management wireless network optimization and like functions. For example a secure gateway according to one embodiment of the present invention may support compression mechanisms connection management e.g. managing the mobility aspects of connections by allowing users to roam between interfaces and or networks with minimal disruption connection optimization e.g. hiding the limitations of different access technologies from the applications and various other functions.

As depicted in MS is a management system adapted for communicating with secure clients and secure gateways. In one embodiment MS communicates with secure clients illustratively SCs and SCs for pushing software upgrades policy updates back up operations and the like to associated endpoint devices illustratively REs and LEs respectively . In one embodiment MS communicates with secure gateways illustratively SG for distributing security policy updates managing inventories and end user policies and performing like functions. In one embodiment MS provides various mechanisms supporting system administrator functions.

In one embodiment MS includes at least one of a user management interface a policy management interface a secure client access interface a maintenance interface network intrusion countermeasure control functions and like interfaces functions and associated processors memories support circuits and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment a user management interface enables system administrators to manage secure client inventories user client computer associations and the like. In one embodiment a policy management interface defines network policies resource access policies and the like. In one embodiment a client access interface enables system administrators to access remote secure clients independent of the network connection type . In one embodiment a maintenance interface enables remote maintenance of clients including software updates virus firewall policy updates and the like. In one embodiment administratively controlled network intrusion countermeasures include protection of secure client flash memory and the remote endpoint erase flash memory and disable hard disk if secure client is lost or stolen .

As depicted in SC comprises network interface module NIM a client processor CP a user memory UM a host interface HI and a client memory CM . The CM includes an operating system OS programs and data . As depicted in CP is coupled to NIM UM HI and CM . As depicted in NIM interfaces with at least one external network. In one embodiment in which the secure client is a remote secure client illustratively SC NIM communicates with a wireless network illustratively one of WNs depicted in . In one embodiment in which the secure client is a local secure client illustratively SC NIM communicates with an enterprise network illustratively Intranet depicted in .

As depicted in SC may be implemented with various combinations of elements and associated functions. In one embodiment SC may be implemented in a Cardbus 32 bit PC Card format. In one embodiment SC may be compatible with PC platforms supporting a type II PCMCIA slot. In one such embodiment SC may support at least D D D and D power states on the Cardbus interface and may be able to maintain power at the D hot state. In one embodiment different instantiations of SC may be supported including support for various combinations of wireless networks.

In one embodiment SC supports data traffic processing including full IP stack operations Point to Point Protocol PPP encapsulations IPSec encapsulations encryption decryption operations data header compression and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment SC includes additional features such as internal and external antenna support SIM compatibility an embedded flash memory with separate partition for user access an embedded processor sub system with local DRAM and integrated infrastructure for two factor authentication an external on off switch for the network interface which is independent of host computer state i.e. independent of whether the host computer is active e.g. powered on or inactive e.g. powered off and the like as well as various combinations thereof.

As depicted in NIM may be implemented as a wireless modem providing IP network connectivity to an associated host computer illustratively endpoint over a wireless network. The NIM may be configured for interfacing with various combinations of wireless networks including 1 Evolution 1 EV data only EVDO networks single carrier 1 radio transmission technology 1 RTT networks high speed downlink packet access HSPDA networks General Packet Radio Service GPRS networks wireless fidelity WiFi networks Universal Mobile Telecommunications System UMTS networks and like public and private wireless networks. As such different instantiations of NIM may support different combinations of wireless interfaces.

As depicted in NIM operates as a transmitter and receiver. In one embodiment the transmitter functionality of NIM includes various configurable parameters including minimum transmit power maximum transmit power frequency error out of band emissions adjacent channel leakage power ration spurious emissions inter modulation error vector magnitude peak code domain error and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment the receiver functionality of NIM includes various configurable parameters including sensitivity maximum input level adjacent channel selectivity blocking characteristics in band parameters out of band parameters narrowband parameters spurious response inter modulation spurious emissions and the like as well as various combinations thereof.

As depicted in CP is configured for performing at least a portion of the functions of the present invention as described herein including security functions secure connection initiation user authentication as well as application optimization network optimization and control and like functions. In one embodiment CP cooperates with at least a portion of the components of endpoint for performing various functions described herein. In one embodiment while SC is in a hot state e.g. D hot state and while NIM is in a dormant mode CP may enter a sleep mode in order to conserve power.

As depicted in UM stores user information. In one embodiment user information stored within UM may be used by CP or at least one other component e.g. an authentication subsystem not depicted for associating a user with computer hardware and an enterprise network. As depicted in CM stores OS programs and data . In one embodiment CM stores persistent data security certificates client synchronization data and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment UM and CM are implemented using a single memory component partitioned to form a user memory space and a system memory space. In one embodiment UM and CM comprise non volatile memory.

As depicted in CM stores OS programs and data . As depicted in OS is an on card operating system hosting on card remote access functions applications services and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment OS provides a management link to an enterprise security center that enables active enterprise network management such as tunnel monitoring remote software firmware updates remote assistance and the like as well as various combinations thereof.

As depicted in HI operates as an interface between SC and associated endpoint i.e. host system . In one embodiment HI facilitates transfer of information between SC and endpoint . For example HI may facilitate transfer of information e.g. emails created by a user on endpoint from endpoint for storage in CM of SC for transmission over a secure connection. For example HI may facilitate delivery of information e.g. information received over a secure connection and stored in CM to endpoint . In one embodiment HI provides interfaces to the host operating system illustratively OS through the Advanced Configuration and Power Interface ACPI standard.

As depicted in in addition to SC endpoint includes a client interface module CIM a host processor HP support circuits SC an input output I O module and host memory HM . The HM includes an operating system OS e.g. Windows Linux and the like kernel drivers KDs programs support libraries SLs applications and data . As depicted in HP is coupled to CIM SC I O module and HM . As depicted in endpoint comprises a personal computer e.g. a laptop .

As depicted in CI operates as an interface between endpoint i.e. host system and associated SC . In one embodiment CI facilitates transfer of information between SC and endpoint . For example CI may facilitate transfer of information e.g. emails created by a user on endpoint from endpoint for storage in CM of SC for transmission over a secure connection. For example CI may facilitate delivery of information e.g. information received over a secure connection and stored in CM to endpoint . In one embodiment CI provides interfaces to the host operating system illustratively OS through the Advanced Configuration and Power Interface ACPI standard.

As depicted in I O module operates as an interface between the user and the functions on the secure client. In one embodiment I O module is adapted for interfacing with various user interfaces such as a display a speaker an output port a user input device such as a keyboard a keypad a mouse and the like storage devices e.g. including but not limited to a tape drive a floppy drive a hard disk drive or a compact disk drive a receiver a transmitter and various other devices . As such I O module supports any user interaction available from a personal computer. As depicted in SCs cooperate with HP for performing various other functions according to one embodiment of the present invention.

As depicted in HP is configured for performing and or supporting at least a portion of the functions of the present invention as described herein including security functions secure connection initiation user authentication as well as application optimization network optimization and control and like functions. In one embodiment HP cooperates with at least a portion of the components of SC for performing various functions described herein.

In one embodiment of the present invention endpoint i.e. various combinations of interactions between HP CIM SC HM and I O module implements various function according to one embodiment of the present invention. In one embodiment endpoint provides an interface between endpoint and the secure client illustratively SC . In one embodiment endpoint provides the host driver for the secure client incorporates mechanisms for directing all network connectivity to be routed through the secure client logs and reports any malicious user activity to the secure gateway illustratively SG depicted in provides an interface for any user configurable parameters of the secure client and like functions as well as various combinations thereof.

As depicted in HP cooperates with various combinations of OS KDs programs SLs applications and data stored in HM for performing various functions described herein. As such the various functions of endpoint are further described herein in the context of host software e.g. cooperation of combinations of components of endpoint adapted for performing such functions. As depicted and described with respect to the host software includes kernel mode software drivers illustratively KDs graphical user interface GUI applications illustratively applications and support libraries illustratively SLs .

In one embodiment the kernel mode software drivers include a secure client driver a networking support driver networking device drivers and the like. The secure client driver support may be implemented to run as one process or multiple processes. In one embodiment the networking support driver drives the wireless interface s . In one embodiment the networking support driver is always loaded. In one embodiment the networking support driver is disposed between the networking device drivers and the secure client driver thereby ensuring that all IP traffic traverses the secure client for secure communication with the enterprise i.e. ensuring that no connection to the public Internet is possible without going through the enterprise network . Furthermore low level support for various functions including remote administration monitoring security and the like is provided by both the secure client driver and the networking support driver. As such endpoint ensures that all network interfaces may be reached only after passing through a valid present secure client.

In one embodiment endpoint provides networking support tamper protection features management applications remote administration support and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment such functions may be provided using various management applications stored on endpoint illustratively applications . In one embodiment such applications provide support for configuration monitoring and connection establishment. In one embodiment a service monitoring application displays interface statistics and current connection state. In one embodiment a configuration application allows configuration of the operation of secure system as permitted by enterprise policy defined at the secure gateway. In one embodiment a connection establishment application supports connections when a public IP address must first be negotiated through user interaction.

In general the purpose of the secure client is to provide services to the associated endpoint. In one embodiment of the present invention the endpoint and associated secure client operate together to provide various functions. In one embodiment the endpoint and associated secure client operate together to provide security features provide application acceleration features provide remote system administration features provide network optimization features and provide other features as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment various power mode combinations may be supported for providing such functions as depicted with respect to Table 1.

Since the endpoint and associated secure client may only protect the associated enterprise when working properly in one embodiment of the present invention the endpoint and associated secure client operate together to provide tamper detection and protection features. As described in Table 2 various scenarios exist in which security is compromised. Although specific scenarios in which security is compromised are depicted and described with respect to endpoints and associated secure clients may include various functions adapted for detecting and preventing such scenarios. In other words endpoints and associated secure clients may include functions adapted for detecting and preventing attempts to bypass the security functionality of the present invention.

In one embodiment detection of attempts at tampering with either or both of the endpoint and the associated secure client may be performed by the endpoint and associated secure client. In one such embodiment the secure client monitors the endpoint drivers and the endpoint drivers monitor each other and the secure client. If a component is compromised at least a portion of the other components detect and report the tampering. In another embodiment attempted tampering may be detected using any of a variety of server driven challenge response techniques that induce a wide range of cryptographically protected integrity checks of at least one of the secure client and the associated endpoint.

In another embodiment detection of attempts at tampering with either or both of the endpoint and the associated secure client may be performed by at least one other component e.g. the secure gateway a management system and the like . In one such embodiment endpoints and secure clients log activities and times at which specific conditions occur and the logs are transmitted to at least one other device for analysis and correlation for detecting the effects of tampering. In one embodiment audit trails may be generated for determining the sequence of events leading to security breaches e.g. inappropriate transfer of intellectual property . In one embodiment the endpoint is operates as a primary generator of log messages. In one such embodiment if connectivity to the secure gateway is not available the endpoint or secure client may cache log information in encrypted and authored files until connectivity is re established.

In one embodiment an enterprise may restrict which secure clients may operate with which endpoints. In one such embodiment if a valid secure client is not present in the associated endpoint to which that secure client is assigned various responses may be initiated. In one such embodiment a security lock may be implemented. In general security locks are typically USB devices that must be present in the computer in order to access the computer. Once removed the screen locks until the security key is re inserted. In this way removal of the secure client results in an endpoint on which no users remote or local may work. In another such embodiment all network traffic may be dropped. In another such embodiment the endpoint is not bootable.

In one embodiment the endpoint may be rendered unusable in response to a determination that the associated secure client is not disposed within an associated slot of the endpoint. For example the endpoint software may perform actions such as disabling user interface components e.g. mice keyboards and the like blanking display screens and performing like actions as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment actions performed in response to removal of the secure client from the endpoint may be determined by administrative configuration. In another embodiment enforcement of the presence of the correct secure client may be enforced by encrypting the hard disk of the associated endpoint and to configure the secure client to perform at least a portion of the decrypting functions required for decrypting the endpoint hard disk.

As depicted in Internet interface is coupled to Internet using CL . In one embodiment Internet interface interfaces with Internet through at least one of an edge router a firewall and the like. In one embodiment Internet interface is adapted for terminating secure connections originating from remote endpoints illustratively from REs as depicted in . The Intranet interface is coupled to Intranet using CLs . In one embodiment Intranet interface is adapted for terminating secure connections originating from local endpoints illustratively from LEs as depicted in .

As depicted in acceleration module includes various acceleration mechanisms. In one embodiment acceleration module includes an application acceleration mechanism for providing enterprise side support for application acceleration over wireless networks. In one such embodiment acceleration module is adapted for use in performing at least a portion of the application acceleration functions supported by the secure system of the present invention. In one embodiment acceleration module includes a wireless acceleration mechanism for optimizing performance of associated secure clients over low speed wireless networks. In one embodiment acceleration module supports encryption decryption functions key management functions compression functions and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one such embodiment acceleration module is adapted for use in performing at least a portion of the network optimization functions supported by the secure system of the present invention.

As depicted in management console ports are adapted for providing user interfaces enabling system administrators to perform various functions e.g. initiate configuration actions view configuration results and the like . As such management console ports is adapted for interfacing with various user interfaces such as a display a speaker an output port a user input device such as a keyboard a keypad a mouse and the like storage devices e.g. including but not limited to a tape drive a floppy drive a hard disk drive or a compact disk drive a receiver a transmitter and various other devices . In one embodiment management console ports are adapted for use in performing at least a portion of the remote network configuration functions supported by the secure system of the present invention.

As depicted in processor cooperates with various combinations of Internet interface Intranet interface management console ports acceleration module and memory for supporting various functions according to one embodiment of the present invention. For example processor may support user authentication e.g. based on a two factor challenge response authentication mechanism through an interface to industry standard authentication platforms such as RSA SecureID and the like fine grain policy control mechanisms for managing network and resource access on a per user or per endpoint basis where policies may include user identification user group remote access technology location and the like and like mechanisms as well as various combinations thereof.

In one embodiment of the present invention security gateways are typically deployed at or near the edge of the enterprise network. Since associated firewalls as well as other security components are typically deployed at or near the edge of the enterprise network various security gateway deployment configurations may be supported according to one embodiment of the present invention. In other words although depicted in as being disposed between the public Internet and the enterprise intranet SG may be deployed in a plurality of different configurations. In one embodiment the secure gateway cooperates with at least one of an access router a firewall and other application level gateways as well as services such as NAP network access protection servers and the like as well as various combinations thereof.

As depicted in with respect to first configuration ER communicates with SG using a communication link and ER communicates with firewall using a communication link . As depicted in with respect to second configuration ER communicates with firewall using a communication link and firewall communicates with SG using a communication link . As depicted in with respect to third configuration ER communicates with SG using a communication link and SG communicates with firewall using a communication link . The first configuration second configuration and third configuration are configurable for supporting various functions.

With respect to first configuration depicted and described with respect to for traffic originating outside the enterprise and destined for the enterprise ER routes all IPSec related traffic to the secure gateway and all other traffic to the firewall. The ER identifies IPSec traffic using the protocol type in the IP header e.g. and and port numbers used by protocols such as the Internet Key Exchange IKE protocol e.g. UDP port . With respect to first configuration depicted and described with respect to for traffic originating within the enterprise a routing mechanism routes IPSec traffic to the secure gateway and all other traffic to the firewall. In one embodiment at least one interior routing protocol is run on SG for directing all IPSec related traffic towards itself through strict partitioning and prioritization of address space. In this embodiment SG need only have forwarding capacity that accounts for the aggregate IPSec traffic.

With respect to second configuration depicted and described with respect to all traffic entering the enterprise goes to the firewall which has pinholes for IPSec related traffic that firewall forwards to SG . In one such embodiment firewall sends all other traffic to SG which potentially has a default route for such traffic. In this embodiment SG includes forwarding capacity for supporting both IPSec and non IPSec traffic. In this embodiment complicated routing protocol mechanisms are not required. In another such embodiment firewall sends all other traffic to a different device not depicted . In this embodiment as in first configuration SG only requires capacity sufficient for supporting IPSec traffic however complicated routing mechanisms may be required for routing traffic originating within the enterprise towards IPSec tunnel endpoints.

With respect to third configuration depicted and described with respect to as in various embodiments of first configuration and second configuration SG SG includes forwarding capacity for supporting both IPSec and non IPSec traffic. In this embodiment since SG is disposed between ER and firewall all traffic arriving on IPSec tunnel endpoints is subject to the enterprise firewall policy. Although specific secure gateway deployment configurations have been depicted and described herein with respect to the present invention is not intended to be limited to such secure gateway deployment configurations. The functions of the present invention may be supported using various other secure gateway deployment configurations.

As described with respect to SG may include one external interface to the public Internet via an access router and a plurality of internal interfaces to the enterprise network. In one embodiment the actual use of the internal interfaces may depend on the secure gateway deployment scenario implemented by an enterprise. In one embodiment in which an enterprise is partitioned into virtual local area networks VLANs the secure gateway may perform policy based access control by mapping secure tunnels to established VLANs. In one embodiment such secure tunnel mapping is performed for port based VLANs. In one such embodiment in which the secure gateway supports multiple VLANs per port using the multiple VLAN per port support is implemented in accordance with Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE 802.1q mechanisms.

In one embodiment a secure gateway according to one embodiment of the present invention supports user authentication functions. In one embodiment implementation of user authentication functions on a secure gateway may vary according to existing infrastructure deployed by an enterprise among other reasons. In one embodiment local with respect to the secure gateway user authentication is performed. In another embodiment user authentication is performed using a RADIUS server. In another embodiment user authentication is performed using a SecureID server. In another embodiment user authentication is performed using various combinations of such user authentication functions.

In one embodiment local with respect to the secure gateway user authentication is performed. In general local authentication is a self contained mechanism with respect to the secure gateway in which all information about users and passwords is maintained locally on the secure gateway illustratively memory depicted in . In one embodiment the storage may be in an encrypted form. It should be noted that the term password is being used loosely in this context and should not be equated solely with passwords used for login purposes. The term password here refers to all the information including the user identification information and information stored in the secure client associated with the user as described herein with respect to tunnel establishment and maintenance.

In one embodiment user authentication is performed using a RADIUS server. In this embodiment which leverages on the fact that numerous enterprises typically already employ a RADIUS server for performing various other functions the secure gateway supports an associated RADIUS client in order to support authentication based on information provided by a RADIUS server. This embodiment avoids limitations of some other user authentication solutions e.g. scalability manageability and the like . In one embodiment user authentication is performed using a RSA SecureID server.

In one embodiment of the present invention the secure gateway performs secure connection termination. In one embodiment in which secure connections are supported using tunneling the secure gateway performs tunnel termination. In one embodiment tunneling is supported using at least one Internet Engineering Task Force IETF standard protocol including IPSec IP Authentication Header AH and IP Encapsulating Security Payload ESP IKE and like protocols . In general establishing an IPSec tunnel involves 1 encryption decryption of the data being exchanged supported using AH ESP and 2 maintaining security associations among the tunnel endpoints supported using IKE . In one embodiment different encryption decryption mechanisms may be used based on IPSec policies configured by the user.

In one embodiment of the present invention the secure gateway performs enterprise policy compliance assessments. In general an important feature of any network access mechanism is the ability to assess compliance with the policies defined by the enterprise of devices illustratively endpoints connecting to the network. In general such compliance typically involves ensuring that the device includes the correct version of anti virus software all the patches recommended by the system administrator and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment non compliant devices may be prevented from accessing the enterprise network. In one such embodiment a device may receive an enterprise IP address only after passing a device compliance assessment.

In one embodiment device compliance assessment may be performed using one of Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol DHCP negotiation e.g. Microsoft NAP at a layer below DHCP e.g. Cisco NAC . In general the Microsoft NAP solution is predominantly a PC oriented software solution which is well suited for connecting PCs to corporate networks via VPNs however the Microsoft NAP solution requires configuration and management of an Internet Authentication Server IAS . In general the Cisco NAC solution is primarily designed for hosts directly connecting to a corporate LAN since it requires support from all infrastructure elements like switches hubs and routers to which hosts can be attached. In one embodiment of the present invention the secure gateway supports DHCP related extensions for enforcing device compliance assessments as well as various other method of enforcing device compliance assessments.

In such embodiments support for device compliance assessment may be required at the endpoint e.g. gathering information about the device for comparison with the defined enterprise policies . Using the Microsoft NAP solution such information may be collected by a Microsoft agent called the Quarantine Agent QA which exposes an Application Programming Interface API whereby various other agents e.g. firewalls virus scanners and the like may supplement existing information with additional information. In one embodiment such information is gathered in a cooperative manner between the endpoint and software on the secure client.

In one embodiment upon establishing a secure connection with the secure gateway the endpoint or user associated with the endpoint is automatically put in a quarantine zone until the policy information is retrieved and the endpoint or associated user is deemed to be in compliance with enterprise policies. In case the endpoint is deemed non compliant the endpoint is connected to a read only store from which the required software updates patches are automatically downloaded to the endpoint using the secure connection between the secure gateway and the secure client associated with the endpoint. Following reconfiguration of the endpoint compliance of the endpoint with the enterprise policies is reassessed and in the case the endpoint is deemed compliant the endpoint is removed from the quarantine zone and placed into a standard work zone.

In one embodiment of the present invention the secure gateway supports secure connections e.g. tunnels originating within the enterprise illustratively secure tunnels originating from LEs within EC as depicted in . In one embodiment of the present invention secure connections originating from within the enterprise provide a mechanism whereby the endpoint may be assessed with respect to enterprise policy compliance prior to receiving full Intranet access. In one embodiment such compliance assessments may be performed as part of DHCP negotiation i.e. Microsoft NAP solution . In another embodiment such compliance assessments may be performed using a lower layer protocol e.g. Cisco s NAC solution .

In one embodiment if an endpoint successfully passes device assessment procedures the secure tunnel may be torn down giving the endpoint normal access to the enterprise network. In one embodiment if an endpoint does not successfully pass device assessment procedures the secure tunnel may be used to patch the endpoint for bringing the endpoint into compliance before the secure tunnel is terminated. In one embodiment the secure gateway is adapted for distinguishing between tunnel termination due to successful compliance and tunnel termination due to other reasons. In one such embodiment enhanced tunnel termination procedures may be used by the secure gateway for distinguishing between tunnel termination due to successful compliance checks and termination due to other reasons.

At step a determination is made as to whether a secure connection exists for transmitting the information from the secure client to a device in communication with a secure gateway. In one embodiment since secure clients support always on capability a secure connection may exist even if the associated endpoint is in an inactive state e.g. powered off . If a secure connection does exist method proceeds to step . In one embodiment since mobile enterprise customers may move in and out of wireless coverage areas a wireless network may not be available for supporting a secure connection between the secure client and the secure gateway. If a secure connection does not exist method proceeds to step .

At step a determination is made as to whether a network is available. In one embodiment a determination is made as to whether a wireless network is available. If a network is available method proceeds to step . In one embodiment since mobile enterprise customers may move in and out of wireless coverage areas a wireless network may not be available for supporting a secure connection between the secure client and the secure gateway. If a network is not available method proceeds to step . At step the information received from the endpoint is stored locally by the secure client. In one embodiment the information may be stored in a non volatile flash memory on the secure client. The method then proceeds to step .

At step a determination is made as to whether a network is available. In one embodiment a determination is made as to whether a wireless network is available If a network is not available method loops within step until a network is detected for establishing a secure connection for transmitting the information. If a network is available method proceeds to step . At step the information received from the endpoint is extracted from the secure client memory. The method then proceeds to step .

At step a determination is made as to whether transmission of the information received from the endpoint is delayed. In one embodiment transmission may be delayed for any of a plurality of reasons for which transmission of information using the secure connection may be delayed as described herein. For example in one embodiment requested information transfers may be analyzed for distinguishing between transfers requiring instant responses e.g. audio conversations and transfers not requiring instant responses e.g. email transfers data backup transfers and the like any information transfers not requiring instant responses may be delayed in response to various conditions e.g. delayed until wireless signal quality satisfies a threshold delayed when a threshold number of other clients are being served and the like . If transmission of the information is not delayed method proceeds to step . If transmission of information is delayed method proceeds to step .

At step the information received from the endpoint is stored locally by the secure client. In one embodiment the information may be stored in a non volatile flash memory on the secure client. The method then proceeds to step . At step a determination is made as to whether transmission criteria are satisfied. For example in an embodiment in which requested information transfers are analyzed for distinguishing between delay sensitive information transfers and delay insensitive information transfers the delay insensitive information transfers are delayed until transmission criteria are satisfied e.g. until wireless signal quality satisfies a threshold until a threshold number of other clients are being served and the like . If the transmission criteria are not satisfied method loops within step until the transmission criteria are satisfied. If the transmission criteria are satisfied method proceeds to step . At step the information received from the endpoint is extracted from the secure client memory. The method then proceeds to step .

At step information is transmitted from the secure client using the secure connection between the secure client and the secure gateway. In one embodiment of the present invention since the secure client is adapted for maintaining the secure connection with the secure gateway independent of the power state e.g. independent of active power states such as wake up mode powered on and the like independent of inactive power states such as sleep mode powered off and the like and independent of any other valid power states of the endpoint associated with the secure client the secure client is adapted for transmitting the information independent of the power state of the endpoint associated with the secure client. The method then proceeds to step where method ends.

At step a determination is made as to whether the endpoint associated with the secure client is active. If the endpoint associated with the secure client device is active method proceeds to step . If the endpoint associated with the secure client device is not active e.g. the endpoint associated with the client device is in sleep mode powered off and the like method proceeds to step . At step the information received at the secure client is stored locally by the secure client. In one embodiment the information may be stored in a non volatile flash memory on the secure client. The method then proceeds to step .

At step a determination is made as to whether the endpoint associated with the secure client is active. If the endpoint associated with the secure client device is not active method loops within step until the secure client detects that the endpoint associated with the secure client is active e.g. until the secure client detects that the endpoint transitions from an inactive state e.g. sleep mode powered off and the like to an active state e.g. wake up mode powered on and the like . If the endpoint associated with the secure client device is active method proceeds to step . At step the information received and stored by the secure client is extracted from the secure client memory. The method then proceeds to step .

At step information is transferred from the secure client to the associated endpoint. In one embodiment of the present invention since the secure client is adapted for maintaining the secure connection with the secure gateway independent of the power state e.g. powered on sleep mode powered off and the like of the endpoint associated with the secure client the secure client is adapted for receiving various information e.g. email messages enterprise pushed software patches and the like while the associated endpoint is inactive and then delivering the information to the endpoint in response to detecting that the endpoint has transitioned from an inactive state to an active state. The method then proceeds to step where method ends.

As described herein the present invention provides a secure system enabling enterprise users to securely access an enterprise network while increasingly utilizing broadband wireless networks. In one embodiment of the present invention the always on capability of the secure client device enables constant communication between the endpoint device and the enterprise network. The secure always on system enables support of various features benefiting end users and system administrators. The features enabled by the secure always on system may include application acceleration features remote management features wireless network optimization features and like features as well as various combinations thereof.

In one embodiment the secure system described herein ensures that in an endpoint including a secure client the only available IP network access for that endpoint is via the enterprise internal network. In one such embodiment the secure system described herein ensures that when an endpoint is outside the enterprise the only IP network access for that endpoint is via a secure tunnel terminating inside the enterprise. In accordance with one embodiment of the present invention adapted for supporting such security objectives the secure system ensures that a user not logged in on the endpoint or logged into a non privileged account on the endpoint is unable to defeat the primary security objective by any means including various combinations of inserting removing the secure client power cycling the endpoint performing operations using the keyboard mouse and removable storage media on the host PC and the like.

In one embodiment the secure system described herein ensures that the endpoint is unusable without a corresponding secure client associated with that endpoint. In one embodiment the secure system detects and reports any attempts successful or not to breach the secure system. As such even if the user of an endpoint obtains administrative privileges attempts to evade the limitations enforced by the secure solution are likely to fail. Furthermore even if the secure system is attacked by an advanced software or hardware hacker an attempt to evade the limitations enforced by the secure system are detected and reported and successful exploits are closed by updates pushed from a management system to the secure client using a secure connection between the secure gateway and the secure client.

As described herein secure connections in accordance with the secure system of the present invention may be implemented using secure tunnels. In one such embodiment secure tunnels originate on secure clients and terminate on secure gateways. In one such embodiment the endpoint associated with the secure client ensures that all network communications traverse the secure client. In order to establish a secure tunnel according to one embodiment of the present invention i.e. for supporting various functions of the present invention various actions are performed including selecting a host interface obtaining an IP address and selecting a secure gateway with which the secure tunnel is established.

In general a computing device may have multiple network interfaces possibly of different types . In addition to the network interfaces potentially supported by an endpoint the secure client associated with the endpoint supports a wireless network interface. As such the associated user has various options for establishing a network connection. In order to support the always on functionality of the present invention the secure client wireless network interface is always connected to the wireless network and as such is accessible from the endpoint. In one embodiment of the present invention all traffic associated with the endpoint will pass through the secure client. The secure client performs IPSec processing for all interfaces in the endpoint including the wireless network interface in the secure client.

In one embodiment a combination of endpoint and secure client components cooperate for obtaining an IP address responding to device compatibility assessment procedures and establishing a secure tunnel to the secure gateway. In order to communicate on the Internet a computing device must have an IP address and other information such as a default gateway domain name service DNS servers and the like. This information is typically obtained through static assignment on the computer via a server using the DHCP protocol and the like. In a normal setting a user is free to access the Internet once an IP address i.e. a non Enterprise IP address is obtained.

In this embodiment after obtaining the non enterprise IP address the secure client attempts to establish a secure tunnel with the secure gateway. In one embodiment in which an enterprise deploys a single secure gateway an enterprise IP address is then obtained from the secure gateway. In another embodiment in which an enterprise deploys a plurality of secure gateways the secure gateway with which the secure tunnel is established must be selected. In this embodiment selection of the secure gateway to which the secure tunnel is established may be based on at least one of preconfigured static information dynamic information facilitating a notion of load balancing and the like. In one embodiment selection of the secure gateway may be used during secure gateway failure scenarios in addition to initial secure tunnel establishment.

In this embodiment following obtaining of the non enterprise IP address and identifying the secure gateway to which the secure tunnel should be established the secure client obtains an IP address i.e. enterprise IP address from the secure gateway. The endpoint applications may only access the network through the enterprise IP address i.e. endpoint applications cannot access the network through the non enterprise IP address . In one embodiment negotiation e.g. using DHCP for obtaining a non enterprise IP address and subsequent establishment of the secure tunnel is performed by the secure client and hidden from the endpoint.

In this embodiment following obtaining of the enterprise IP address a secure tunnel is established between the secure client card and the secure gateway. In one such embodiment tunnel establishment is performed using standard IPSec procedures including IKE . In one embodiment authentication is performed as a portion of tunnel establishment with the secure gateway. In one embodiment authentication may be based on user identification such as a pass phrase or digitized finger print and a secret key produced by an associated VPN keycard hence compromising only the user identification or the VPN card will not compromise the system. In general a VPN keycard is uniquely associated with a user. The secure client card performs user identification in cooperation with endpoint software. In one embodiment following establishment of the secure tunnel and before use of the secure tunnel by the endpoint software a device check may be performed in a coordinated manner by the endpoint software the secure client and the secure server.

In one embodiment following establishment of the secure tunnel the secure client and secure gateway cooperate to maintain the secure tunnel in a manner both transparent to the user associated with the endpoint and efficient in terms of wireless network resources. For example in one embodiment in which a wireless network becomes unavailable and the user places the endpoint in a powered off mode upon detecting availability of a wireless network the secure client may reestablish a secure tunnel with the secure gateway. As such in one embodiment of the present invention the secure client may transmit stored information obtained from the associated endpoint and stored locally by the secure client while wireless network connectivity is unavailable and receive and store information obtained from the enterprise Intranet and stored locally by the secure client while the endpoint is powered off using the secure connection even though the endpoint is powered off.

As described herein the secure system including the secure client and secure gateway of the present invention supports application acceleration functions. In general enterprise users have become accustomed to high quality high speed connectivity at work and at home and expect the same experience from remote connectivity. The present invention includes various application acceleration functions for providing high quality high speed remote connectivity. In one embodiment of the present invention application acceleration functions may include caching functions e.g. for background transfers traffic filtering functions e.g. at the secure client secure gateway and the like compression functions e.g. data compression protocol header compression and the like tunnel address translation functions protocol optimization functions and the like as well as various combinations thereof.

In one embodiment the present invention provides caching on the secure client. In one such embodiment the secure client includes an in line bidirectional transparent application caching proxy. The caching proxy resides above the IPSec layer and caches data in both directions i.e. from the endpoint toward the network and from the network toward the endpoint . In one embodiment the secure client caches user credentials although a limited amount of credential caching may be done in the volatile memory without compromising security. In one embodiment the secure client caches application data in both directions for applications such as email calendar i.e. Microsoft Exchange web feeds e.g. RSS 2.0 and like applications as well as various combinations thereof.

Since the secure client remains active even when the endpoint is powered off e.g. in a sleep state various data transfers may be performed using the cache while the endpoint is powered off. In one embodiment since the secure client maintains a secure connection with the network the cache on the secure client may be used for storing data received from the network using the secure connection. In one further embodiment upon detecting activation of the endpoint associated with the client device at least a portion of the cached network data may be transferred to the endpoint memory. In one embodiment since the secure client maintains a secure connection with the network the cache on the secure client may be used for uploading via the secure connection with the network data buffered using the cache on the secure client.

In one embodiment in order to conserve wireless bandwidth especially when the radio link is in the dormant mode the present invention provides application traffic filtering for eliminating unnecessary traffic. The application traffic filtering may be performed by at least one of the secure client the secure gateway and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment at least a portion of broadcast traffic e.g. RIP OSPF ARP and the like may be filtered. For example since routing updates are unnecessary for the user ARP may be suppressed using proxy ARP at either end of the secure tunnel. In one embodiment NetBIOS may be filtered. In one embodiment at least a portion of the filtered traffic may be proxied using cache data.

In one embodiment in addition to or in place of application traffic filtering the present invention may operate various applications according to different operating parameters. In one embodiment applications may be run with a reduced update frequency. For example email and RSS feeds may be polled every five minutes rather than every thirty seconds. In one embodiment application requests may be bunched together. For example for TCP connections keepalive requests may be bunched into one interval proxied at either end of the secure tunnel and the like. Although primarily described herein with respect to application data filtering and modification of application operating parameters various other method of conserving wireless bandwidth according to one embodiment of the present invention may be used.

In one embodiment the present invention provides compression capabilities in support of application acceleration. In one embodiment application data may be compressed. In one such embodiment application data compression may be performed using the IPCOM compression standard in conjunction with IPSec. It should be noted that while such compression may be useful for textual data e.g. XML such compression is less useful for binary files e.g. GIF ZIP EXE MPEG and the like which are typically already compressed. In one embodiment protocol headers may be compressed. In one such embodiment protocol headers may be compressed using VJ compression for User Datagram Protocol UDP Transmission Control Protocol TCP and Internet Protocol IP inner header compression.

In one embodiment the present invention provides tunnel address translation TAT capabilities in support of application acceleration. In general tunnel address translation is a distributed Network Address Translation NAT operation whereby a tunneled header can be NATed at one end of a tunnel and deNATed at the other end of the tunnel. In conventional tunneling an additional UDP IP header is affixed to the original TCP IP or UDP IP header of the packet. As a result each packet is associated with two source IPs two destination IPs two source ports and two destination ports i.e. one for the outer header and one for the inner header . In one embodiment TAT implementation requires flow initiation and flow termination detection which may be performed using flow filtering application snooping e.g. snoop on SIP INVITE payloads and the like.

In this embodiment by noting that for all flows the outer header addresses and ports are invariant and in addition for a given flow the inner header addresses and ports are invariant each flow may be remapped to a new single header which encapsulates both the outer and inner headers. In this embodiment a TCP flow would need a TCP IP header and a UDP flow would need a UDP IP header. For example considering UDP flows e.g. audio conversations and video streaming eliminating the inner UDP IP header would eliminate twenty eight bytes for each packet considerably improving the wireless link efficiency. Similarly for TCP flows eliminating the outer UDP IP header would eliminate twenty eight bytes of overhead per packet.

In one embodiment the present invention provides protocol optimization capabilities in support of application acceleration. In one embodiment protocol optimization includes TCP optimization. In one such embodiment TCP optimization may include retransmitting TCP segments proactively in response to link loss. In one embodiment since wireless bandwidth is a scarce resource protocol optimization may include application prioritization including packet scheduling according to application prioritization for restricting the available bandwidth of low priority applications. For example audio traffic may be configured to have a high priority while email may be configured to have a low priority.

As described herein the secure system including the secure client and secure gateway of the present invention supports remote system administration functions. In one embodiment since secure clients operate irrespective of the state of the endpoint in which the secure client is disposed i.e. secure clients support always on capabilities a system administrator may remotely access secure clients irrespective of the state of the endpoint in which the secure client is disposed. In one embodiment the secure gateway with which the secure client maintains a secure connection supports remote access of the secure client by the system administrator.

In one embodiment remote access of a secure client by a system administrator enables the system administrator to perform various secure client maintenance and control activities. In one such embodiment a system administrator may determine the current software versions of the secure client and the associated endpoint determine inventories of software upgrades patches for secure client software and endpoint software including latest versions of antivirus or other software installed in the secure client or endpoint access and read network activity logs e.g. up time and down time information determine whether the user associated with the endpoint has attempted to violate any of the policies e.g. removing the secure client driver from the endpoint removing the endpoint driver from the endpoint and the like .

In one embodiment remote access of a secure client by a system administrator enables the system administrator to push software updates to the secure client. In one embodiment since secure clients support always on capabilities system administrators may push updates to secure clients while the associated endpoints are powered off. In this embodiment information e.g. software updates emails and the like received by the secure client while the associated endpoint is powered off results in storage of the received information in the local flash memory of the secure client. In this embodiment the information stored in the flash memory of the secure client is transferred from the secure client to the endpoint i.e. becomes immediately available to the user when the endpoint is powered on.

In one embodiment remote access of a secure client by a system administrator enables the system administrator to push software updates to the secure client in response to detected conditions. For example if the remote enterprise user is participating in an important meeting requiring immediate access to information and the endpoint cannot be used until software updates are loaded i.e. the endpoint becomes virtually unusable due to consumption of endpoint and bandwidth resources required for downloading the installing the software updates the productivity of mobile workers is affected. In one such embodiment the present invention enables system administrators to push information to secure clients in response to a determination that the endpoint functionality associated with the secure client is not being used e.g. one or more endpoint processes is idle the endpoint is in sleep mode the endpoint is powered off and the like .

In one embodiment remote access of secure clients enables remote system upgrades and patches on the secure clients. In one embodiment an enterprise system administrator pushes system image software module including dynamic loadable device driver modules upgrades and patches from a management system illustratively MS depicted in to the secure client memory e.g. using at least one of DRAM flash memory and the like depending on the size of the software via an established secure tunnel. In one embodiment associated software upgrade and patch commands may be executed on the secure client embedded system remotely after the required software is downloaded onto the secure client.

In one embodiment secure client software upgrades and patches are performed in a manner transparent to the associated enterprise user using the associated endpoint. In another embodiment in order to minimize the interruption of endpoint usage by an enterprise user an endpoint user dialogue interface may be implemented for instructing the secure client system of the resource intensive upgrade patch process. In one such embodiment endpoint user dialogue interface may present selectable options enabling the enterprise user associated with the endpoint to initiate e.g. upgrade now or postpone e.g. upgrade in one hour the upgrade patch process.

In one embodiment secure client software upgrades and patches include various capabilities for upgrading and patching secure client configurations security parameters security policies and the like as well as various combinations thereof. In one embodiment the secure client embedded system includes a file download manager that balances the upgrade and patch software download and normal network interface usage to improve user experience. The download manager uses segmented file download technology to handle network interruption disconnect and reconnect large file download in low speed network environment and the like as well as various combinations thereof.

In one embodiment remote access of endpoints enables remote system upgrades and patches on the endpoints. In one embodiment a management system performs remote operating system and software upgrades and patches anti virus software definition updates enterprise system policy updates and the like as well as various combinations thereof on the endpoint. Since many such tasks are supported in existing enterprise IT infrastructure such as Microsoft System Management Server SMS or third party vendor solutions the management system may utilize the existing solutions for performing these and similar tasks using secure connections e.g. an enterprise VPN .

In one embodiment the management system improves execution of endpoint software upgrades and patches tasks by promptly scheduling the critical upgrades and patches download and utilizing a client file download manger for completing the tasks more efficiently thereby minimizing endpoint interference. As described herein flash memory on the secure client may be used to buffer the download files such that no endpoint resources are consumed before the download is finished. In one embodiment endpoint software device driver and profile upgrades and patches may be intergraded into existing enterprise solutions.

As described herein the secure system including the secure client and secure gateway of the present invention supports wireless network optimization functions. In one embodiment wireless network optimization is performed by prioritizing application data transfers in accordance with application response time requirements. In one such embodiment data transmissions associated with applications which do not require instant response time e.g. email data backup and the like are delayed. In one embodiment secure clients distinguish between delay sensitive information transfers and delay insensitive information transfers and request that associated base stations only initiate delay insensitive information transfers 1 if the wireless signal quality satisfies a threshold and 2 if the base station satisfies a threshold number of customers requiring service. In one embodiment of the present invention such optimization enables significant wireless network capacity improvements thereby introducing significant cost benefits for wireless service providers.

Although various embodiments which incorporate the teachings of the present invention have been shown and described in detail herein those skilled in the art can readily devise many other varied embodiments that still incorporate these teachings.

