---

title: Inorganic polymers and use of inorganic polymers for detecting nitroaromatic compounds
abstract: A method for detecting an analyze that may be present in ambient air, bound to a surface or as part of complex aqueous media that includes providing a metallole-containing polymer or copolymer, exposing the polymer or copolymer to a suspected analyze or a system suspected of including the analyze, and measuring a quenching of photoluminescence of the metallole-containing polymer or copolymer exposed to the system. Also included is a solid state inorganic-organic polymer sensor for detecting nitroaromatic compounds that includes a substrate and a thin film of a metallole-containing polymer or copolymer deposited on said substrate.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07927881&OS=07927881&RS=07927881
owner: The Regents of the University of California
number: 07927881
owner_city: Oakland
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050825
---
This invention was made with Government assistance under NSF Grant No. CHE 0111376 and AFOSR MURI Grant No. F49620 02 1 0288. The Government has certain rights in this invention.

A field of the invention is analyte detection. The instant invention is directed to inorganic polymers and use of inorganic polymers namely photoluminescent metallole containing polymers and copolymers for detection of nitroaromatic compounds based on photoluminescence quenching.

Use of chemical sensors to detect ultra trace analytes from explosives has been the focus of investigation in recent years owing to the critical importance of detecting explosives in a wide variety of areas such as mine fields military bases remediation sites and urban transportation areas Detecting explosive analytes also has obvious applications for homeland security and forensic applications such as the examination of post blast residue. Typically these chemical sensors are small synthetic molecules that produce a measurable signal upon interaction with a specific analyte.

Chemical sensors are preferable to other detection devices such as metal detectors because metal detectors frequently fail to detect explosives such as in the case of the plastic casing of modern land mines. Similarly trained dogs are both expensive and difficult to maintain. Other detection methods such as gas chromatography coupled with a mass spectrometer surface enhanced Raman nuclear quadrupole resonance energy dispersive X ray diffraction neutron activation analysis and electron capture detection are highly selective but are expensive and not easily adapted to a small low power package.

Conventional chemical sensors have drawbacks as well. Sensing TNT and picric acid in groundwater or seawater is important for the detection of buried unexploded ordnance and for locating underwater mines but most chemical sensor detection methods are only applicable to air samples because interference problems are encountered in complex aqueous media. Thus conventional chemical sensors are inefficient in environmental applications for characterizing soil and groundwater contaminated with toxic TNT at military bases and munitions production and distribution facilities. Also conventional chemical sensors such as highly conjugated porous organic polymers are commonly used as chemical sensors and can be used to detect vapors of electron deficient chemicals but require many steps to synthesize and are not selective to explosives.

Furthermore many conventional chemical sensing methods are not amenable to manufacture as inexpensive low power portable devices. Additionally these methods are limited to vapor phase detection which is disadvantageous given the low volatility of many explosives. For example the vapor pressure of TNT which is approximately 5 ppb at room temperature may be up to six times lower when enclosed in a bomb or mine casing or when present in a mixture with other explosives.

Additionally current routes for synthesis of polymetalloles use hazardous reagents and are of low efficiency. For example poly tetraphenyl silole has been synthesized by Wurtz type polycondensation but the reaction yields are low.

An embodiment of the present invention is a directed device and method for detecting solid state vapor phase and solution phase nitroaromatic compounds using an inorganic polymer sensor namely photoluminescent metallole containing polymers and copolymers. The invention also includes a method for synthesizing an inorganic polymer sensor namely photoluminescent metallole containing copolymers.

Solid state sensing may be especially desirable for trace residue detection on surfaces believed to be contaminated such as for example where filter paper is used to swab or wipe a surface of interest and the filter paper is subsequently subjected to analysis. Conventional solid state detection kits such as that manufactured under the brand name ExPray by Plexus Scientific Corporation of Alexandria Va. are able to detect various explosive through a color change with sensitivity down to the tens of nanogram level.

The vapor pressure of TNT for example which is approximately 5 ppb at room temperature may be up to 6 times lower when enclosed in a bomb or mine casing or when present in mixtures with other explosives. Accordingly embodiments of the invention include the solid state detection of trace residue of nitroaromatics such as picric acid PA 2 4 6 trinitrophenol or CH NO OH nitrobenzene NB or CHNO 2 4 dinitrotoluene DNT or CHNO and 2 4 6 trinitrotoluene TNT or CHNO using thin films of luminescent metallole containing polymers. Advantageously detection limits as low as 5 ng are obtained. Polymetalloles and copolymers have the advantage of being inexpensive easily prepared and readily fielded for on site explosives detection.

For example one preferred embodiment includes a method for detecting an analyte that may be present in ambient air bound to a surface or as part of complex aqueous media that includes a metallole containing polymer or copolymer being exposed to a system suspected of containing the analyte such as on a solid surface or in an aqueous medium. By subsequently measuring the photoluminescence of the metallole containing polymer or copolymer the presence absence and approximate quantity may be determined with great sensitivity. By illuminating the polymer or copolymer with light having a wavelength of between 250 nm and 420 nm photoluminescence quenching may be observed.

Another preferred embodiment includes a metallole containing polymer sensor for sensing trace amounts of nitroaromatic compounds that includes a metallole containing polymer cast sprayed or otherwise deposited on a surface suspected of containing the nitroaromatic compounds. It is contemplated that the solid surface on which detection may occur may include a virtually boundless number of surfaces such as glass paper plastic wood porcelain or metal to name a few.

Additionally embodiments of the invention include the synthesis and use of inorganic polymers namely photoluminescent metallole containing polymers and copolymers in solid state or solution for detection of nitroaromatic compounds based on photoluminescence quenching. Inorganic organic polymers may be prepared by catalytic hydrosilation or hydrogermylation with dihydrosilole or dihydrogermole compounds and organic diynes or dialkenes. The invention includes an inexpensive and highly efficient inorganic or inorganic organic polymer sensor that can detect the existence of an analyte namely nitroaromatic compounds such as picric acid nitrobenzene DNT and TNT in air water on surfaces organic solution or other complex aqueous media.

Photoluminescent metallole polymers are stable in air water acids common organic solvents and even seawater containing bioorganisms. Therefore the inorganic polymer sensor of the instant invention includes the metallole copolymers for detection of analytes in these media. Importantly the inorganic polymer sensors of the instant invention are insensitive to organic solvents and common environmental interferents allowing the use of the sensor in a wide variety of environments and applications.

Metalloles are silicon Si or germanium Ge containing metallocyclopentadienes that include one dimensional Si Si Ge Ge or Si Ge wires encapsulated with highly conjugated organic ring systems as side chains. Silole and germole dianions RC Si and RC Ge where R Ph or Me have been studied by X ray crystallography and found to be extensively delocalized. Siloles and germoles are of special interest because of their unusual electronic and optical properties and because of their possible application as electron transporting materials in devices. Polysilanes and polygermanes containing a metal metal backbone emit in the near UV spectral region exhibit high hole mobility and show high nonlinear optical susceptibility which makes them efficient photoemission candidates for a variety of optoelectronics applications. These properties arise from a delocalization along the M M backbones and confinement of the conjugated electrons along the backbone.

Polymetalloles and metallole silane copolymers are unique in having both a M M backbone as well as an unsaturated five membered ring system. These polymers are highly photoluminescent and are accordingly useful as light emitting diodes LEDs or as chemical sensors. Characteristic features of polymetalloles and metallole silane copolymers include a low reduction potential and a low lying lowest unoccupied molecular orbital LUMO due conjugation arising from the interaction between the orbital of silicon or germanium and the orbital of the butadiene moiety of the five membered ring. In addition the M M backbones exhibit delocalization which further delocalizes the conjugated metallole electrons along the backbone. Electron delocalization in these polymers provides a means of amplification because interaction between an analyte molecule and any position along the polymer chain is communicated throughout the delocalized chain.

Detection may be accomplished by measurement of the quenching of photoluminescence of metallole copolymers by the analyte. Sensitivity of metallole copolymers to the analytes picric acid TNT DNT and NB is as follows PA TNT DNT NB. A plot of log K versus the reduction potential of analytes NB DNT and TNT for each metallole copolymer yields a linear relationship indicating that the mechanism of quenching is attributable to electron transfer from the excited metallole copolymers to the lowest unoccupied orbital of the analyte.

Excitation may be achieved with electrical or optical stimulation. If optical stimulation is used a light source containing energy that is larger than the wavelength of luminescence emission of the polymer is preferably used. This could be achieved with for example a mercury lamp a blue light emitting diode or an ultraviolet light emitting diode.

A conventional method for preparing polymetalloles and metallole copolymers is Wurtz type polycondensation. The syntheses of polygermole and polysiloles and other copolymers are analogous to one another as illustrated in equation 1 in and employ the Wurtz type polycondensation. However yields from this method of synthesis are low ca. 30 . Thus Wurtz type polycondensation is not well suited to large scale production.

Embodiments of the instant invention include alternative methods for synthesizing polymetalloles that use catalytic dehydrocoupling of dihydrosiloles with a catalyst as an attractive alternative to Wurtz type polycondensation. Bis cyclopentadienyl complexes of Group 4 have been extensively studied and shown to catalyze the dehydrocoupling of hydrosilanes to polysilanes for the formation of Si Si bonds. However only the primary organosilanes react to give polysilane. Secondary and tertiary silanes give dimers or oligomers in low yield. It has been reported that the reactivity decreases dramatically with increasing substitution at the silicon atom since reactions catalyzed by metallocenes are typically very sensitive to steric effects. Mechanisms for dehydrogenative coupling of silanes have also been extensively investigated which involves bond metathesis.

Embodiments of the instant invention include catalytic dehydrocoupling of dihydrosiloles and dihydrogermoles with a catalyst. In one embodiment the invention includes catalytic dehydrocoupling polycondensation of dihydro tetraphenyl silole or dihydro tetraphenyl germole with 1 5 mol of Wilkinson s catalyst Rh PPh Cl or Pd PPh as illustrated in or 0.1 0.5 mol of HPtCl.xHO in conjunction with 2 5 equivalents of allylamine or other alkene such as cyclohexene for example as illustrated in . The latter reactions produce the respective polysilole or polygermole in high yield ca. 80 90 . By H NMR spectroscopy the monomer dihydrometallole was completely consumed in the reaction. Molecular weights M of 4000 6000 are obtained similar to those obtained by the Wurtz type polycondensation ca. 30 .

Turning now to silole germole alternating copolymer 3 in which every other silicon or germanium atom in the polymer chain is also part of a silole or germole ring was synthesized from the coupling of dichloro tetraphenyl germole and dilithio tetraphenyl silole. The latter is obtained in 39 yield from dichlorotetraphenylsilole by reduction with lithium as illustrated in the equation of . The molecular weight of the silole germole copolymer M 5.5 10 M 5.0 10determined by SEC size exclusion chromatography with polystyrene standards is similar to that of polysiloles or polygermoles. All of the polymetalloles are extended oligomers with a degree of polymerization of about 10 to 16 rather than a true high Mpolymer however they can be cast into a thin film from solution and show polymer like properties.

Also illustrated in are silole silane alternating copolymers 4 5 6 7 8 which were also prepared from coupling of the silole dianion PhCSi Liwith the corresponding silanes. Germole silane alternation copolymers 9 10 11 12 were also synthesized from the coupling of the germole dianion PhCGe Liwith the corresponding silanes as illustrated in . These reactions generally employ reflux conditions in tetrahydrofuran under an argon atmosphere for about 72 hours. Some silole silane copolymers have been synthesized previously and shown to be electroluminescent. Metallole silane copolymers were developed so that they could be easily functionalized along the backbone by hydrosilation. The molecular weight of metallole silane copolymers M 4.1 10 6.2 10 M 4.1 10 5.4 10determined by SEC is similar to that of the polymetalloles.

The molecular weights and polydisperity indices PDI of polymers 1 12 determined by gel permeation chromatography GPC are illustrated in Table 1 of .

Inorganic organic poly 1 4 diethynylbenzene metallole DEB type polymers may be obtained by hydrosilation of an dialkyne specifically DEB with a dihydrometallole using a catalyst such as chloroplatinic acid. illustrate the reaction whereby the DEB type polymers are obtained according to embodiments of the invention. A reasonable extension of this principle includes hydrosilation and hydrogermylation of any organic diyne. A reasonable interpolation of this principle includes hydrosilation and hydrogermylation of organic dialkenes to obtain less conjugated polymers.

The UV vis absorption and fluorescence spectral data for polymers 1 12 are also illustrated in Table 1 of . The poly tetraphenyl metalloles 1 3 and tetraphenylmetallole silane copolymers 4 12 exhibit three absorption bands which are ascribed to the transition in the metallole ring and the and transitions in the M M backbone. illustrates a schematic energy level diagram for polymetalloles and metallole silane copolymers.

UV vis absorption in THF solid line and fluorescence spectra in toluene dotted line for poly tetraphenygermole 2 silole silane copolymer 4 and germole silane copolymer 9 are shown in . Absorptions at a wavelength of about 370 nm for the poly tetraphenylmetallole s 1 3 and tetraphenylmetallole silane copolymers 4 12 are ascribed to the metallole transition of the metallole moiety which are about 89 to 95 nm red shifted relative to that of oligo 1 1 2 3 4 5 tetramethylsilole 275 nm and are about 75 to 81 nm red shifted relative to that of oligo 1 1 2 5 dimethyl 3 4 diphenylsilole 289 nm . These red shifts are attributed to an increasing main chain length and partial conjugation of the phenyl groups to the silole ring.

Polymetallole 1 2 and silole silane copolymers 4 7 exhibit one emission band 486 to 513 nm when excited at 340 nm whereas the others exhibit two emission bands with of 480 510 nm and 385 402 nm. The ratios of the two emission intensities are not concentration dependent which indicates that the transition does not derive from an excimer. Emission peaks for germole silane copolymers 9 12 are only 2 to 33 nm blue shifted compared to the other polymers. shows fluorescence spectra of the poly tetraphenyl silole in toluene solution solid line and in the solid state dotted line . The bandwidth of the emission spectrum in solution is slightly larger than in the solid state. There is no shift in the maximum of the emission wavelength. This suggests that the polysilole exhibits neither stacking of polymer chains nor excimer formation.

The angles of C M C of dihydro tetraphenyl silole and dihydro tetraphenyl germole are 93.11 on C Si C and 89.760 on C Ge C respectively. Polymerization might take place since the tetraphenylmetalloles have small angles at C M C in the metallocyclopentadiene ring which results in less steric hindrance at the metal center. In addition the bulky phenyl groups of silole might prevent the formation of cyclic hexamer which is often problematic in polysilane syntheses. Cyclic polymetallole product formation was not observed.

The method of detection of the instant invention includes using a chemical sensor namely a variety of photoluminscent copolymers having a metalloid metalloid backbone such as Si Si Si Ge or Ge Ge or alternatively an inorganic organic metallole containing copolymer. While polymetalloles in various forms may be used to detect analytes one embodiment includes casting a thin film of the copolymers is employed in detecting the analyte e.g. picric acid DNT TNT and nitrobenzene. Detection is achieved by measuring the quenching of the photoluminescence of the copolymer by the analyte. Accordingly the instant invention contemplates use of the polymetallole polymers and copolymers in any form susceptible to measurement of photoluminescence quenching. For example since it is possible to measure fluorescence of solutions other embodiments of the instant method of detection may optionally include a polymetallole in solution phase where powdered bulk polymer is dissolved in solution. Yet another embodiment includes producing a colloid of the polymer which is a liquid solution with the polymer precipitated and suspended as nanoparticles.

The detection method involves measurement of the quenching of photoluminescence of the polymetalloles 1 3 and metallole silane copolymers 4 12 by the analyte such as a toluene solution using a Perkin Elmer LS 50B fluorescence spectrometer 340 nm excitation wavelength . For example turning now to when used to detect TNT fluorescence spectra of a toluene solution of the metallole copolymers were obtained upon successive addition of aliquots of TNT. Photoluminescence quenching of the polymers 1 12 in toluene solutions were also measured with nitrobenzene DNT TNT and nitrobenzene. The relative efficiency of photoluminescence quenching of metallole copolymers is unique for TNT DNT and nitrobenzene respectively as indicated in by the values of K determined from the slopes of the steady state Stern Volmer plots. demonstrates that each copolymer has a unique ratio of quenching efficiency to the corresponding analyte.

The purity of the TNT sample was found to be important to obtain reproducible results. It was synthesized by nitration of dinitrotoluene and recrystallized twice from methanol. A third recrystallization produces the same results as the twice recrystallized material. When the quenching experiment was undertaken without recrystallization of TNT higher ca. 10 quenching percentages are obtained. Presumably impurities with higher quenching efficiencies are present in crude TNT.

The Stern Volmer equation which is I I 1 K A is used to quantify the differences in quenching efficiency for various analytes. In this equation Iis the initial fluorescence intensity without analyte and I is the fluorescence intensity with added analyte of concentration A and Kis the Stern Volmer constant.

Photoluminescence may arise from either a static process by the quenching of a bound complex or a dynamic process by collisionally quenching the excited state. For the former case Kis an association constant due to the analyte preassociated receptor sites. Thus the collision rate of the analyte is not involved in static quenching and the fluorescence lifetime is invariant with the concentration of analyte. With dynamic quenching the fluorescence lifetime should diminish as quencher is added.

A single mean characteristic lifetime for polymetalloles and metallole silane copolymers 1 12 has been measured and summarized in Table 1 of . Luminescence decays were not single exponential in all cases. Three lifetimes were needed to provide an acceptable fit over the first few nanoseconds. The amplitudes of the three components were of comparable importance the solvent blank made no contribution . These features suggest that the complete description of the fluorescence is actually a continuous distribution of decay rates from a heterogeneous collection of chromophore sites. Because the oligomers span a size distribution this behavior is not surprising. The mean lifetime parameter reported is an average of the three lifetimes determined by the fitting procedure weighted by their relative amplitudes. This is the appropriate average for comparison with the amount of light emitted by different samples under different quenching conditions as has been treated in the literature. Given this heterogeneity possible long lived luminescence that might be particularly vulnerable to quenching has been a concern. However measurements with a separate nanosecond laser system confirmed that there were no longer lived processes other than those captured by the time correlated photon counting measurement and incorporated into Table 1 of .

It is notable that polysilole 1 and silole silane copolymers 4 8 have about 3 to 11 times longer fluorescence lifetimes than polygermole 2 and germole silane copolymers 9 12. Fluorescence lifetimes in the thin films solid state for polysilole 1 and polygermole 2 are 2.5 and 4.2 times longer than in toluene solution respectively. The fluorescence lifetimes as a function of TNT concentration were also measured and are shown in the inset of for polymers 1 2 and 8. No change of mean lifetime was observed by adding TNT indicating that the static quenching process is dominant for polymetalloles and metallole silane copolymers 1 12 . Some issues with such analyses have been discussed in the literature. This result suggests that the polymetallole might act as a receptor and a TNT molecule would intercalate between phenyl substituents of the metallole moieties .

For chemosensor applications it is useful to have sensors with varied responses. Each of the 12 polymers exhibits a different ratio of the photoluminescence quenching for picric acid TNT DNT and nitrobenzene and a different response with the same analyte. The use of sensor arrays is inspired by the performance of the olfactory system to specify an analyte. FIG. displays the Stern Volmer plots of polymers 1 2 4 5 and 6 for TNT indicating that the range of photoluminescence quenching efficiency for TNT is between 2.05 10and 4.34 10M. The relative efficiencies of photoluminescence quenching of poly tetraphenylmetallole s 1 3 and tetraphenyl metallole silane copolymers 4 12 were obtained for picric acid TNT DNT and nitrobenzene as indicated by the values of Ksv determined from the slopes of the steady state Stern Volmer plots and summarized in Table 1 of . Polymer 13 which is illustrated in is an organic pentiptycene derived polymer for comparison. The metallole copolymers are more sensitive to TNT than the organic pentiptycene derived polymers in toluene solution. For example polysilole 1 4.34 10M has about a 370 better quenching efficiency with TNT than organic pentiptycene derived polymer 1.17 10M .

The trend in Stern Volmer constants usually reflects an enhanced charge transfer interaction from metallole polymer to analyte. For example the relative efficiency of photoluminescence quenching of polysilole 1 is about 9.2 3.6 2.0 1.0 for picric acid TNT DNT and nitrobenzene respectively. Although polysilole 1 shows best photoluminescence quenching efficiency for picric acid and TNT polymer 9 and 5 exhibit best quenching efficiency for DNT and nitrobenzene respectively. Polygermole 2 has the lowest quenching efficiency for all analytes. Since the polymers 1 12 have similar molecular weights the range of quenching efficiencies with the same analyte would be expected to be small. Polysilole 1 11.0 10Mand 4.34 10Me exhibits 164 and 212 better quenching efficiency than polygermole 2 6.71 10Mand 2.05 10M with picric acid and TNT respectively. Polymer 9 2.57 10M has 253 better quenching efficiency than polymer 2 1.01 10M with DNT. Polymer 5 1.23 10M has 385 better quenching efficiency than metallole polymer 2 0.32 10M with nitrobenzene. illustrates how an analyte might be specified using an array of multi sensors.

An important aspect of the metallole copolymers is their relative insensitivity to common interferents. Control experiments using both solutions and thin films of metallole copolymers deposited on glass substrates with air displayed no change in the photoluminescence spectrum. Similarly exposure of metallole copolymers both as solutions and thin films to organic solvents such as toluene THF and methanol or the aqueous inorganic acids HSOand HF produced no significant decrease in photoluminescence intensity. shows that the photoluminescence spectra of polysilole 1 in toluene solution display no quenching of fluorescence with 4 parts per hundred of THF. The ratio of quenching efficiency of polysilole 1 with TNT vs benzoquinone is much greater than that of polymer 13. The Ksv value of 4.34 10Mof polysilole 1 for TNT is 640 greater than that for benzoquinone Ksv 674 M The organic polymer 13 however only exhibits a slightly better quenching efficiency for TNT Ksv 1.17 10M ca. 120 compared to that Ksv 998 M for benzoquinone. This result indicates that polysilole 1 exhibits less response to interferences and greater response to nitroaromatic compounds compared to the pentiptycene derived polymer 13.

This corresponds to an extrapolated detection limit of 1.5 ppt for instant detection with our fluorescence spectrometer at the 95 confidence limit. Of course this is for solution data and with a spectrometer which is not optimized for detection at a single wavelength.

All synthetic manipulations were carried out under an atmosphere of dry dinitrogen gas using standard vacuum line Schlenk techniques. All solvents were degassed and purified prior to use according to standard literature methods diethyl ether hexanes tetrahydrofuran and toluene purchased from Aldrich Chemical Co. Inc. were distilled from sodium benzophenone ketal. Spectroscopic grade of toluene from Fisher Scientific was used for the fluorescent measurement. NMR grade deuteriochloroforrn was stored over 4 molecular sieves. All other reagents Aldrich Gelest were used as received or distilled prior to use. NMR data were collected with Varian Unity 300 400 or 500 MHz spectrometers 300.1 MHz for H NMR 75.5 MHz for C NMR and 99.2 MHz for Si NMR and all NMR chemical shifts are reported in parts per million ppm downfield shifts are reported as positive values from tetramethylsilane TMS as standard at 0.00 ppm. The H and C chemical shifts are reported relative to CHCl 77.0 ppm as an internal standard and the Si chemical shifts are reported relative to an external TMS standard.

NMR spectra were recorded using samples dissolved in CDCl unless otherwise stated on the following instrumentation. C NMR were recorded as proton decoupled spectra and Si NMR were recorded using an inverse gate pulse sequence with a relaxation delay of 30 seconds. The molecular weight was measured by gel permeation chromatography using a Waters Associates Model 6000A liquid chromatograph equipped with three American Polymer Standards Corp. Ultrastyragel columns in series with porosity indices of 10 10 and 10 using freshly distilled THF as eluent.

The polymer was detected with a Waters Model 440 ultraviolet absorbance detector at a wavelength of 254 nm and the data were manipulated using a Waters Model 745 data module. Molecular weight was determined relative to calibration from polystyrene standards. Fluorescence emission and excitation spectra were recorded on a Perkin Elmer Luminescence Spectrometer LS 50B. Monomers 1 1 dichloro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylsilole 1 1 dichloro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylgermole 1 1 dilithio 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylsilole and 1 1 dilithio 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylgermole were synthesized by following the procedures described in the literature. All reactions were performed under Ar atmosphere.

Stirring of 1 1 dichloro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylsilole 5.0 g 11.0 mmol with lithium 0.9 g 129.7 mmol in TEF 120 mL for 8 h at room temperature gave a dark yellow solution of silole dianion. After removal of excess lithium 1 mol equiv of corresponding silanes RRSiCl 11.0 mmol was added slowly to a solution of tetraphenylsilole dianion and stirred at room temperature for 2 hours. The resulting mixture was refluxed for 3 days. The reaction mixture was cooled to room temperature and quenched with methanol. Then the volatiles were removed under reduced pressure. THF 20 mL was added to the residue and polymer was precipitated by slow addition of the solution into 700 mL of methanol. The third cycle of dissolving precipitation followed by freeze drying gave the polymer as yellow powder.

For silole SiMeH SiPhH each 5.5 mmol of SiMeHCland SiPhHClwere slowly added into a THF solution of silole dianion. In case of silole SiH after addition of the xylene solution of SiHCl 11.0 mmol the resulting mixture was stirred for 3 days at room temperature instead of refluxing.

Selected data for silole SiMeH 4 Yield 2.10 g 44.5 H NMR 300.134 MHz CDCl 0.88 0.60 br. 3H Me 3.06 4.89 br. 1H Si 6.16 7.45 br. 20H Ph CH NMR 75.469 MHz CDCl 0.61 1.69 br. Me 123.87 131.75 137.84 145.42 153.07 156.73 br. m Ph Si NMR 71.548 MHz inversed gated decoupling CDCl 29.22 br. silole 66.61 br. MeH . GPC Mw 4400 Mw Mn 1.04. Fluorescence conc. 10 mg L 492 nm at 340 nm.

Selected data for silole SiPhH 5 Yield 2.00 g 37.0 H NMR 300.134 MHz CDCl 3.00 4.00 br. 1H Si 6.02 7.97 br. 20H Ph CH NMR 75.469 MHz CDCl 123.64 143.98 152.60 157.59 br. m Ph Si NMR 71.548 MHz inversed gated decoupling CDCl 37.51 br. silole 71.61 br. PhH . GPC Mw 4500 Mw Mn 1.09 determined by SEC with polystyrene standards Fluorescence conc. 10 mg L 487 nm at 340 nm.

Selected data for silole SiMeH SiPhH 6 Yield 2.10 g 41.5 H NMR 300.134 MHz CDCl 0.67 0.40 br. 3H Me 3.08 4.98 br. 2H SiH 6.00 7.82 br. 55H Ph CH NMR 75.469 MHz CDCl 0.85 1.76 br. Me 122.06 147.25 153.11 157.26 br. m Ph Si NMR 71.548 MHz inversed gated decoupling CDCl 28.61 br. silole 59.88 br. MeH and PhH . GPC Mw 4800 Mw Mn 1.16 determined by SEC with polystyrene standards Fluorescence conc. 10 mg L 490 nm at 340 nm.

Selected data for silole SiH 8 Yield 2.05 g 44.9 H NMR 300.134 MHz CDCl 3.00 4.96 br. 2H Si 6.12 7.72 br. 20H Ph CH NMR 75.469 MHz CDCl 122.08 132.78 136.92 146.25 152.81 160.07 br. m Ph Si NMR 71.548 MHz inversed gated decoupling CDCl 30.95 br. silole 51.33 br. H . ratio of n m 1.00 0.80 GPC Mw 4600 Mw Mn 1.14 determined by SEC with polystyrene standards Fluorescence conc. 10 mg L 499 nm at 340 nm.

Selected data for silole SiPh 7 Yield 2.93 g 47.0 H NMR 300.134 MHz CDCl 6.14 7.82 br. 20H Ph CH NMR 75.469 MHz CDCl 122.08 146.25 br. m Ph 152.81 160.07 silole ring GPC Mw 5248 Mw Mn 1.05 determined by SEC with polystyrene standards Fluorescence conc. 10 mg L 492 nm at 340 nm.

The procedure for synthesizing all germole silane copolymers was similar to that for silole silane copolymers. For germole SiMeH SiPhH each 5.0 mmol of SiMeHCland SiPhHClwere added slowly into a THF solution of germole dianion. The resulting mixture was stirred for 3 days at room temperature.

Selected data for germole SiMeH 9 Yield 2.03 g 43 H NMR 300.134 MHz CDCl 0.21 0.45 br. 2.4H Me 5.14 5.40 br. 0.8H Si 6.53 7.54 br. 20H Ph CH NMR 75.469 MHz CDCl 9.70 8.15 br. Me 125.29 130.94 139.08 148.12 151.29 152.88 br. m Ph Si NMR 71.548 MHz inversed gated decoupling CDCl 50.40 br. MeH GPC Mw 4900 Mw Mn 1.12 determined by SEC with polystyrene standards UV conc. 10 mg L 296 368 nm Fluorescence conc. 10 mg L 401 481 nm at 340 nm.

Selected data for germole SiPhH 10 Yield 2.13 g 40 H NMR 300.134 MHz CDCl 4.71 br. 1.0H Si 6.30 7.60 br. 25H Ph CH NMR 75.469 MHz CDCl 125.50 144.50 151.50 153.00 br. m Ph Si NMR 71.548 MHz inversed gated decoupling CDCl 56.81 br. PhH GPC Mw 4400 Mw Mn 1.06 determined by SEC with polystyrene standards UV conc. 10 mg L 294 362 nm Fluorescence conc. 10 mg L 401 486 nm at 340 nm.

Selected data for germole SiMeH SiPhH 11 Yield 2.01 g 40 H NMR 300.134 MHz CDCl 0.04 0.42 br. 3H Me 4.94 br. 2H Si 6.33 7.66 br. 25H Ph CH NMR 75.469 MHz CDCl 124.31 130.66 138.43 152.54 br. m Ph Si NMR 71.548 MHz inversed gated decoupling CDCl 63.01 br. MeH and PhH 0.71 GPC Mw 4100 Mw Mn 1.06 determined by SEC with polystyrene standards UV conc. 10 mg L 290 364 nm Fluorescence conc. 10 mg L 399 483 nm at 340 nm.

Selected data for germole SiPh 12 Yield 3.23 g 48 H NMR 300.134 MHz CDCl 6.21 7.68 br. 30H Ph CH NMR 75.469 MHz CDCl 125.15 141.40 br. m Ph 151.12 153.99 germole ring carbon GPC Mw 5377 Mw Mn 1.09 determined by SEC with polystyrene standards UV conc. 10 mg L 298 366 nm Fluorescence conc. 10 mg L 400 480 nm at 340 nm.

Preparations for other metallole silane and metallole germane copolymers such as tetraalkylmetallole silane copolymers and tetraarylmetallole germane copolymers can be prepared by the above method described.

Preparation of polymetallole 1 1 dihydro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylsilole or germole were prepared from the reduction of 1 1 dichloro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylsilole or germole with 1 mol equiv of LiAlH. Additionally an alternate method to prepare the dihydrometallole is to add dichlorosilane 25 in xylenes to an solution of tetraphenylbutadiene dianion in ether as described in the literature. Reaction conditions for preparing the polygermole are the same as those for polysilole. 1 1 dihydro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylsilole 1.0 g 2.59 mmol and 1 5 mol of RhCl PPh or Pd PPh in toluene 10 mL were placed under an Ar atmosphere and degassed through 3 freeze pump thaw cycles. The reaction mixture was vigorously refluxed for 72 h. The solution was passed rapidly through a Florisil column and evaporated to dryness under Ar atmosphere. 1 mL of THF was added to the reaction mixture and the resulting solution was then poured into 10 mL of methanol. Poly tetraphenyl silole 1 was obtained as a pale yellow powder after the third cycle of dissolving precipitation followed by freeze drying. An alternative method for poly tetraphenyl silole preparation is as follows. 1 1 dihydro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylsilole 1.0 g 2.59 mmol and 0.1 0.5 mol HPtCl.xHO and 2 5 mol equivalents of allylamine in toluene 10 mL were vigorously refluxed for 24 hours. The solution was passed through a sintered glass frit and evaporated to dryness under an Ar atmosphere. Three dissolving precipitation cycles with THF and methanol were performed as stated above to obtain 1. The molecular weights of polymers were obtained by GPC. 1 1 dihydro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylsilole with RhCl PPh 1 isolated yield 0.81 g 82 M 4355 M Mn 1.02 determined by SEC with polystyrene standards 1 1 dihydro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylsilole with Pd PPh 1 0.84 g 85 M 5638 M M 1.10 . 1 1 dihydro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylgermole with RhCl PPh poly tetraphenyl germole 0.80 g 81 M 3936 M M 1.01 1 1 dihydro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylgermole with Pd PPh poly tetraphenyl germole 0.81 g 82 M 4221 M M 1.02 H NMR 300.133 MHz CDCl 6.30 7.90 br m Ph C H NMR 75.403 MHz CDCl 77.00 124 130 br m Ph 131 139 germole carbons . If less vigorous reflux conditions are used with the RhCI PPh and Pd PPh catalysts then corresponding dimers form along with lesser amounts of polymer. The dimer is less soluble and crystallizes from toluene.

1 1 dihydro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylsilole 250 mg 0.65 mmol 1 4 diethynylbenzene 100 mg 0.80 mmol and 0.1 0.5 mol HPtCl.xHO were vigorously refluxed in toluene 10 mL under argon for 4 hours. The dark orange solution was passed through a sintered glass frit and evaporated to dryness. The remaining solid was dissolved in 1 ml of THF precipitated with 10 ml of methanol and collected by filtration on a sintered glass frit. The precipitation was repeated twice more and the polymer was obtained as a yellow solid 0.17 g 51 . The molecular weight of the polymer was determined by GPC with polystyrene standards. M 6 198 M M 1.822 H NMR 300.075 MHz CDCl 6.60 7.20 br 24H silole Ph CH Si And CH Ph 7.40 br 4H phenylene Ph UV conc. 20 mg L 302 378 nm Fluorescence conc. 20 mg L 500 nm 360 nm .

1 1 dihydro 2 3 4 5 tetraphenylgermole 100 mg 0.23 mmol 1 4 diethynylbenzene 34 mg 0.26 mmol and 0.1 0.5 mol HPtCl.xHO were vigorously refluxed in toluene 10 mL under argon for 12 hours. The catalyst was removed by filtration and the filtrate then evaporated to dryness. The remaining solid was dissolved in THF 1 mL and precipitated by subsequent addition of methanol 10 mL . The polymer was collected by filtration and dried to afford the yellow powder 0.095 g 73 . Molecular weights determined by GPC M 4800 M M 1.6 H NMR 300.075 MHz CDCl 6.50 7.60 br silole Ph CH Ge and CH Ph phenylene H UV Vis Toluene 290 362 nm Fluorescence Toluene 475 nm 360 nm .

1 1 dihydrosilafluorene 0.25 g 1.37 mmol 1 4 diethynylbenzene 0.19 g 1.51 mmol and 0.1 0.5 mol HPtCl.xHO were vigorously refluxed in toluene 3 mL under argon for 24 hours. The dark orange red solution was filtered and evaporated to dryness. The remaining solid was dissolved in 4 ml of THF precipitated with 40 ml of methanol. The white solid 0.17 g 34 was collected by filtration on a sintered glass frit. The molecular weight of the polymer was determined by GPC with polystyrene standards. M 1 957 M M 1.361 H NMR 300.075 MHz CDCl 6.00 8.00 br 16H silafluorene H Ph CH Si and CH Ph UV conc. 20 mg L 292 nm Fluorescence conc. 0.2 mg L 341 353 nm at 292 nm.

The high energy of the excited state in the UV luminescent polysilafluorene offers an increased driving force for electron transfer to the explosive analyte and improved detection limits by electrontransfer quenching which should be applicable for any UV emitting conjugated organic or inorganic polymer.

1 1 dihydrosilafluorene 500 mg 2.7 mmol and 0.5 mol HPtCl.xHO were stirred in toluene 3 mL at 80 C. under argon for 24 hours. The orange brown solution was filtered while warm and evaporated to dryness. The remaining solid was dissolved in 3 mL of THF and precipitated with the addition of 30 mL of methanol. The resulting light orange white solid was collected by vacuum filtration 0.101 g 20 . The molecular weight of the polymer was determined by GPC with polystyrene standards. M 576 M M 1.074 H NMR 300.075 MHz CDCl 6.60 7.90 br 8H silafluorene H Ph 4.62 weak s terminal Si H UV conc. 20 mg L 392 nm Fluorescence conc. 0.2 mg L 342 354 nm at 292 nm.

Detection limits of trinitrotoluene TNT dinitrotoluene DNT picric acid PA 2 2 dimethyl 2 2 dinitrobutane DMNB orthomononitrotoluene OMNT and paramononitrotoluene PMNT were determined by fluorescence quenching of polysilole polyDEBsilole polygermole polyDEBgermole PSF polyDEBSF and ExPray. DEB diethynylbenzene. The emission of PSF is centered in the UV so detection limits with a UV camera are expected to be even better than those determined visually.

1 1 dihydrogermafluorene 0.1 g 0.44 mmol and 0.5 mol HPtCl.xHO were refluxed in toluene 4 mL under argon for 24 hours. The thick orange solution was filtered while warm and evaporated to dryness. The remaining solid was dissolved in 2 mL of THF and precipitated with 22 mL of methanol. The resulting light orange white solid was collected by vacuum filtration 0.010 g 10 . The molecular weight of the polymer was determined by GPC with polystyrene standards. M 890 M M 1.068 H NMR 300.075 MHz CDCl 6.40 7.90 br 8H silafluorene H Ph .

1 1 dihydrogermafluorene 0.15 g 0.66 mmol 1 4 diethynylbenzene 0.092 g 0.73 mmol and 0.1 0.5 mol HPtCl.xHO were vigorously refluxed in toluene 4 mL under argon for 24 hours. The dark orange red solution was filtered and evaporated to dryness. The remaining solid was dissolved in 4 ml of THF and precipitated with 40 ml of methanol. The light orange solid 0.021 g 15 was collected by filtration on a sintered glass frit. The molecular weight of the polymer was determined by GPC with polystyrene standards. M 1 719 M M 1.872 H NMR 300.075 MHz CDCl 6.00 8.00 br 16H germafluorene H Ph CH Si and CH Ph .

The method of explosives detection is through luminescence quenching of the metallole containing polymers by the nitroaromatic analyte. Three common explosives were tested Trinitrotoluene TNT 2 4 dinitrotoluene DNT and picric acid PA . Stock solutions of the explosives were prepared in toluene. Aliquots 1 5 L of the stock containing 5 to 100 ng analyte were syringed onto either Whatman filter paper or a CoorsTek porcelain spot plate and allowed to dry completely. The spots were between 3 and 10 mm in diameter producing a surface concentration of not more than 64 ng cmand not less than 17 ng cm. Solutions of the polymers 0.5 1 w v were prepared in acetone PSi PGe 1 1 toluene acetone PDEBGe 2 1 toluene acetone PDEBSi or toluene PDEBSF . A thin film of a polymer was applied to the substrate by spray coating a polymeric solution onto the substrate and air drying. The coated substrates were placed under a black light to excite the polymer fluorescence. Dark spots in the film indicate luminescence quenching of the polymer by the analyte. The process was carried out for each of the three explosive analytes with each of the six polymers on both substrates.

Nitroaromatic explosives may be visually detected in nanogram quantities by fluorescence quenching of photoluminescent metallole containing polymers. Detection limits depend on the nitroaromatic analyte as well as on the polymer used.

In all cases the detection limit of the explosives was as low or lower on the porcelain than on paper likely because the solvated analyte may be carried deep into the fibers of the paper during deposition thus lowering the surface contamination after solvent evaporation. Less explosive would be present to visibly quench the thin film of polymer on the surface. This situation is less pronounced in actuality when explosives are not deposited via drop casting from an organic solution but handled as the solid. Illumination with a black light 360 nm excites the polymer fluorescence near 490 510 nm for the siloles 470 500 for germoles. The silafluorene luminescence which peaks at 360 nm is very weak in the visible region but it is sufficient for visible quenching.

The method of detection is through electron transfer luminescence quenching of the polymer luminescence by the nitroaromatic analytes. Consequently the ability of the polymers to detect the explosives depends on the oxidizing power of the analytes. The oxidation potentials of the analytes follow the order TNT PA DNT. Both TNT and PA have three nitro substituents on the aromatic ring which account for their higher oxidizing potential relative to DNT which has only two nitroaromatic substituents. PA has a lower oxidation potential than TNT due to the electron donating power of the hydroxy substituent. The molecular structure accounts for the lowest detection limit for TNT followed by PA and DNT.

Luminescence quenching is observed immediately upon illumination. The polymers are photodegradable however and luminescence begins to fade after a few minutes of continual UV exposure. Nevertheless these polymers present an inexpensive and simple means to detect low nanogram level of nitroaromatic explosives.

While various embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described it should be understood that modifications substitutions and alternatives are apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. Such modifications substitutions and alternatives can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention which should be determined from the appended claims.

