---

title: Liquid materials for use in electrochemical cells
abstract: Disclosed is the use of liquid precursor materials to prepare a processible polymeric electrolyte, which can be used to form a proton exchange membrane for use in an electrochemical cell. Also disclosed is the use of liquid precursor materials to prepare a processible catalyst ink composition, which can be conformally applied to a proton exchange membrane and an electrode material for use in an electrochemical cell. Also disclosed is the use of a photocurable perfluoropolyether (PFPE) material to form a microfluidic electrochemical cell.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07435495&OS=07435495&RS=07435495
owner: The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
number: 07435495
owner_city: Chapel Hill
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050121
---
This application is based on and claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 538 706 filed Jan. 23 2004 and U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 538 878 filed Jan. 23 2004 both of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

This invention was made with U.S. Government support from the Office of Naval Research Grant No. N00014210185 and the Science and Technology Center program of the National Science Foundation under Agreement No. CHE 9876674. The U.S. Government has certain rights in the invention.

Fuel cells are a safe environmentally friendly source of electric energy for portable devices vehicles including hybrid vehicles generators and aerospace and military applications. The current technology of fuel cells however has not made a significant impact on the mainstream market due to cost size and the lack of an immediate need to replace current power sources such as batteries and gasoline or diesel powered internal combustion engines. The long term need to find alternative power sources has become increasingly evident however. For example the byproducts of gasoline and diesel powered internal combustion engines are environmentally harmful. In contrast the byproducts of fuel cells are clean and in some cases comprise only water.

Further with portable electronic devices such as cell phones laptops and handheld personal organizers becoming smaller the need for smaller power sources such as micro fuel cells becomes evident. Present fuel cell technology however typically requires large fuel cell stacks comprising high cost flat proton exchange membranes PEMs .

Additionally consumer products require power sources that operate for an extended period of time without the need for recharging. Micro fuel cells typically provide a longer lasting energy output with one cartridge of fuel. For example the chemical fuels used in micro fuel cells promise to power devices up to ten times as long as batteries on a single charge. Further once the energy source becomes low the energy level can be restored by merely replacing the fuel cartridge.

Most fuel cells employ a copolymer of tetrafluoroethylene TFE and a perfluorinated monomer comprising sulfonic acid groups such as perfluorosulfonyl fluoride ethoxy propyl vinyl ether PSEPVE . One such copolymer is available as NAFION E. I. duPont de Nemours and Co. Wilmington Del. United States of America or a similar commercially available material. These materials often are provided as a membrane in final form e.g. a non thermoplastic form having a flat rectangular or square geometry for subsequent use. If the membrane is flat and smooth i.e. non patterned the catalyst layer also must be flat. Further such membranes typically must be of at least a certain minimum thickness to be handleable. Additionally the power density or conductivity is usually directly proportional to the membrane thickness that is the thicker the membrane the lower the power density.

Additionally Lu et al. 49 821 828 2003 have described silicon based materials for use in a micro direct methanol fuel cell. Silicon based micro direct fuel cells are rigid brittle devices that typically are expensive and time consuming to manufacture. Also incorporating actuating valves in silicon based materials is difficult or impossible due to the rigid nature of the material. Further the silicon based micro direct methanol fuel cell described by Lu et al. has a ratio of active area versus macroscopic area equal to about one.

Also in currently available fuel cell technologies it is imperative to have good contact between the electrode proton exchange membrane PEM and catalyst. High power densities rely on conformal contact between the electrode the catalyst and the PEM. Much research has been invested in developing new PEMs and new catalysts but little has been investigated in terms of a new catalyst ink composition. Conventional catalyst inks or tie layers typically consist of a catalyst such as platinum an electrode material such as carbon black and a dispersion of NAFION water and alcohol.

Further PEMs currently available in the art consist of one equivalent weight EW which gives rise to a trade off between power density and methanol permeability.

Thus there is a need in the art for an improved electrochemical cell in particular a micro fuel cell that is capable of providing power to small portable electronic devices as well as a need for improved electrochemical cell components.

The presently disclosed subject matter describes liquid materials for use in an electrochemical cell such a fuel cell a chlor alkali cell a battery and the like. Accordingly in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a composition for a polymeric electrolyte and a method for preparing a polymeric electrolyte. In some embodiments the method comprises a providing a 100 solids liquid precursor material wherein the 100 solids liquid precursor material comprises from about 70 by weight to about 100 by weight of polymerizable materials and b treating the liquid precursor material to form a polymeric electrolyte.

In some embodiments the 100 solids liquid precursor material comprises a material selected from the group consisting of a proton conductive material a precursor to a proton conductive material and combinations thereof. In some embodiments the 100 solids liquid precursor material comprises a material selected from the group consisting of a monomer an oligomer a macromonomer an ionomer and combinations thereof. In some embodiments at least one of the monomer the oligomer the macromonomer and the ionomer comprises a functionalized perfluoropolyether PFPE material.

In some embodiments the functionalized perfluoropolyether PFPE material comprises a backbone structure selected from the group consisting of 

In some embodiments the ionomer is selected from the group consisting of a sulfonic acid material and a phosphoric acid material. In some embodiments the sulfonic acid material comprises a derivative of a sulfonic acid material. In some embodiments the derivative of a sulfonic acid material comprises a material comprising a perfluoro 2 2 fluorosulfonylethoxy propyl vinyl ether PSEPVE of the following formula 

In some embodiments the derivative of a sulfonic acid material comprises a material selected from the group consisting of 

Ris selected from the group consisting of alkyl substituted alkyl hydroxyl alkoxyl fluoroalkenyl cyano and nitro 

Thus in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a polymeric electrolyte comprising a 100 solids liquid precursor material wherein the 100 solids liquid precursor material comprises from about 70 by weight to about 100 by weight polymerizable materials.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for preparing a patterned polymeric electrolyte the method comprising 

In some embodiments the liquid precursor material comprises a material selected from the group consisting of a proton conducting material a precursor to a proton conducting material and combinations thereof. In some embodiments the patterned polymeric electrolyte has a surface area greater than the macroscopic surface area of the patterned substrate.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for preparing a polymeric electrolyte comprising a plurality of equivalent weights the method comprising 

In some embodiments the method comprises repeating steps c through d with a predetermined plurality of liquid precursor materials comprising a plurality of equivalent weights to form a polymeric electrolyte comprising a plurality of equivalent weights.

In some embodiments the first liquid precursor material the second liquid precursor material and the plurality of liquid precursor materials are selected from the group consisting of a proton conducting material a precursor to a proton conducting material and combinations thereof. In some embodiments the first equivalent weight is greater than the second equivalent weight. In some embodiments the second equivalent weight is greater than the plurality of equivalents weights. Thus a gradient of equivalent weights is provided along the cross section of the polymeric electrolyte.

The presently disclosed subject matter also provides a method for forming a membrane electrode assembly MEA . In some embodiments the method for forming a membrane electrode assembly MEA comprises 

In some embodiments the presently disclosed method for forming a membrane electrode assembly comprises 

In some embodiments the liquid precursor material is selected from the group consisting of a proton conducting material a precursor to a proton conducting material and combinations thereof.

The presently disclosed subject matter also provides a method for forming an electrochemical cell. In some embodiments the method comprises 

Further in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for operating an electrochemical cell. Accordingly the presently disclosed electrochemical cells can be used to operate portable electronic devices such as but not limited to a portable electrical generator a portable appliance a power tool an electronic device such as a consumer electronic device and a military electronic device a roadway or traffic sign a backup power supply and a personal vehicle such as an automobile.

Accordingly it is an object of the presently disclosed subject matter to provide a novel liquid material for use in electrochemical cells. This and other objects are achieved in whole or in part by the presently disclosed subject matter.

An object of the presently disclosed subject matter having been stated hereinabove other aspects and objects will become evident as the description proceeds when taken in connection with the accompanying Drawings and Examples as best described herein below.

The presently disclosed subject matter describes the use of liquid materials in electrochemical cells such as fuel cells chlor alkali cells and batteries. Accordingly the presently disclosed subject matter describes liquid materials for preparing a polymeric electrolyte such as a proton exchange membrane for use in an electrochemical cell including proton exchange membranes comprising a gradient of equivalent weights. The presently disclosed subject matter also describes improved electrochemical cell technologies incorporating patterned membranes and electrodes. Further the presently disclosed subject matter describes liquid materials for preparing a membrane electrode assembly in which an enhanced conformal contact between the electrochemical cell components is demonstrated. Thus the presently disclosed subject matter also describes liquid materials for preparing processible liquid catalyst ink compositions for use in electrochemical cells. Additionally the presently disclosed subject matter describes a photocurable perfluoropolyether for fabricating a microfluidic device for use in electrochemical cells such as micro direct methanol and hydrogen fuel cells. The presently disclosed subject matter also describes a method for operating an electrochemical cell.

The presently disclosed subject matter will now be described more fully hereinafter with reference to the accompanying Examples and Drawings in which representative embodiments are shown. The presently disclosed subject matter can however be embodied in different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth herein. Rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the scope of the embodiments to those skilled in the art.

Unless otherwise defined all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which this presently described subject matter belongs. All publications patent applications patents and other references mentioned herein are incorporated by reference in their entirety.

Throughout the specification and claims a given chemical formula or name shall encompass all optical and stereoisomers as well as racemic mixtures where such isomers and mixtures exist.

The presently disclosed subject matter describes liquid pourable precursor materials that are processible i.e. can be formed into different shapes or can conform to different shapes and can be used to prepare a high surface area PEM. In some embodiments as provided in more detail herein below the liquid precursor materials can be patterned by a patterned substrate e.g. a mold and treated such as but not limited to cured into solids to form a patterned PEM.

As used herein the term 100 solids liquid precursor material refers to a liquid polymeric precursor material in which essentially all of the components are polymerized when treated e.g. cured. Thus in some embodiments a 100 solids liquid precursor material is essentially free of non polymerizable materials. This property of a 100 solids liquid precursor material distinguishes this material from a solution or dispersion of a liquid precursor material known in the art in which the liquid material can comprise between about 80 by weight to about 98 by weight of solvent or other non polymerizable material. For example one perfluorinated liquid composition commonly used in the art to prepare ion exchange membranes comprises from about 2 by weight to about 18 by weight of the polymeric material and about 82 by weight to about 98 by weight of solvent which is non polymerizable. See U.S. Pat. No. 4 433 082 to Grot which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

Accordingly in some embodiments the 100 solids liquid material comprises from about 70 by weight to about 75 by weight of polymerizable material. In some embodiments the 100 solids liquid material comprises from about 75 by weight to about 80 by weight of polymerizable material. In some embodiments the 100 solids liquid material comprises from about 80 by weight to about 85 by weight of polymerizable material. In some embodiments the 100 solids liquid material comprises from about 85 by weight to about 90 by weight of polymerizable material. In some embodiments the 100 solids liquid material comprises from about 90 by weight to about 95 by weight of polymerizable material. In some embodiments the 100 solids liquid material comprises from about 95 by weight to about 98 by weight of polymerizable material. In some embodiments the 100 solids liquid material comprises from about 98 by weight to about 100 by weight of polymerizable material. Thus in some embodiments the 100 solids liquid material comprises from about 70 by weight to about 100 by weight of polymerizable material.

Further in some embodiments the liquid precursor material comprises a fluorinated system. In some embodiments the fluorinated system comprises a perfluoropolyether PFPE material. In some embodiments the PFPE material comprises a vinyl functionalized material including but not limited to a vinyl methacrylate.

In some embodiments the liquid precursor material comprises species including vinyl acids such as perfluoro 2 2 fluorosulfonylethoxy propyl vinyl ether PSEPVE that enhance proton conductivity. As used herein the term proton conductive material refers to a material within which a proton can be transported. For example in some embodiments a proton is transported from an anode through a proton conductive material to a cathode. Proton conductivity can be measured for example by alternating current AC impedance methods known in the art and is typically reported in units of Siemens cm S cm . Such proton conductive materials typically have a proton conductivity of greater than about 0.01 S cm.

In some embodiments the liquid precursor material comprises other species that regulate the physical properties of the material including modulus permeability of methanol and other liquids wetting tensile strength toughness flexibility and thermal properties among others. For exemplary synthesis methods for preparing the liquid precursor materials disclosed herein see Examples 1 6.

In some embodiments the 100 solids liquid precursor material comprises a material selected from the group consisting of a proton conductive material a precursor to a proton conductive material and combinations thereof.

In some embodiments the 100 solids liquid precursor material comprises a material selected from the group consisting of a monomer an oligomer a macromonomer an ionomer and combinations thereof.

As used herein the term monomer refers to a molecule that can undergo polymerization thereby contributing constitutional units i.e. an atom a group of atoms and or groups of atoms to the essential structure of a macromolecule or polymer. The term oligomer refers to a molecule of intermediate relative molecular mass the structure of which comprises a small plurality of constitutional units derived from molecules of lower relative molecular mass. The term macromonomer refers to a macromolecule or polymer that comprises a reactive end group which enables the macromonomer to act as a monomer and contribute a monomeric unit to a chain of the final macromolecule or polymer. The term ionomer refers to a macromolecule in which a plurality of the constitutional units comprise ionizable groups ionic groups and combinations thereof.

In some embodiments at least one of the monomer the oligomer the macromonomer and the ionomer comprises a functionalized perfluoropolyether PFPE material. In some embodiments the functionalized perfluoropolyether PFPE material comprises a backbone structure selected from the group consisting of 

In some embodiments the ionomer is selected from the group consisting of a sulfonic acid material and a phosphoric acid material. In some embodiments the ionomer comprises sulfonic acid groups derivatives of sulfonic acid groups carboxylic acid groups derivatives of carboxylic acid groups phosphonic acid groups derivatives of phosphonic acid groups phosphoric acid groups derivatives of phosphoric acid groups and or combinations thereof.

In some embodiments the sulfonic acid material comprises a derivative of a sulfonic acid material. In some embodiments the sulfonic acid material comprises a material comprising a perfluoro 2 2 fluorosulfonylethoxy propyl vinyl ether PSEPVE of the following formula 

In some embodiments the derivative of a sulfonic acid material comprises a material selected from the group consisting of 

Ris selected from the group consisting of alkyl substituted alkyl hydroxyl alkoxyl fluoroalkenyl cyano and nitro 

Accordingly in some embodiments the ionomer can comprise a commercially available acidic material such as NAFION E. I. duPont de Nemours and Co. Wilmington Del. United States of America or a similar material including but not limited to XUS Dow Chemical Company Midland Mich. United States of America ACIPLEX Asahi Chemical Industry Co. Tokyo Japan BAM3G Ballard Advanced Materials Burnaby British Columbia Canada or acid functionalized perfluorocyclobutane polymers as described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 559 237 to Mao et al. and acid functionalized fluoropolymers as described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 833 412 to Hamrock et al. each of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

As used herein the term alkyl refers to Cinclusive linear i.e. straight chain branched or cyclic saturated or at least partially and in some cases fully unsaturated i.e. alkenyl and alkynyl hydrocarbon chains including for example methyl ethyl propyl isopropyl butyl isobutyl tert butyl pentyl hexyl octyl ethenyl propenyl butenyl pentenyl hexenyl octenyl butadienyl propynyl butynyl pentynyl hexynyl heptynyl and allenyl groups. Branched refers to an alkyl group in which a lower alkyl group such as methyl ethyl or propyl is attached to a linear alkyl chain. Lower alkyl refers to an alkyl group having 1 to about 8 carbon atoms i.e. a Calkyl e.g. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 or 8 carbon atoms. Higher alkyl refers to an alkyl group having about 10 to about 20 carbon atoms e.g. 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 or 20 carbon atoms. In certain embodiments alkyl refers in particular to Cstraight chain alkyls. In other embodiments alkyl refers in particular to Cbranched chain alkyls.

Alkyl groups can optionally be substituted with one or more alkyl group substituents which can be the same or different. The term alkyl group substituent includes but is not limited to alkyl halo arylamino acyl hydroxyl aryloxyl alkoxyl alkylthio arylthio aralkyloxyl aralkylthio carboxyl alkoxycarbonyl oxo and cycloalkyl. There can be optionally inserted along the alkyl chain one or more oxygen sulfur or substituted or unsubstituted nitrogen atoms wherein the nitrogen substituent is hydrogen lower alkyl also referred to herein as alkylaminoalkyl or aryl.

 Cyclic and cycloalkyl refer to a non aromatic mono or multicyclic ring system of about 3 to about 10 carbon atoms e.g. 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 or 10 carbon atoms. The cycloalkyl group can be optionally partially unsaturated. The cycloalkyl group can be also optionally substituted with an alkyl group substituent as defined herein oxo and or alkylene. There can be optionally inserted along the cyclic alkyl chain one or more oxygen sulfur or substituted or unsubstituted nitrogen atoms wherein the nitrogen substituent is hydrogen lower alkyl or aryl thus providing a heterocyclic group. Representative monocyclic cycloalkyl rings include cyclopentyl cyclohexyl and cycloheptyl. Multicyclic cycloalkyl rings include adamantyl octahydronaphthyl decalin camphor camphane and noradamantyl.

 Alkylene refers to a straight or branched bivalent aliphatic hydrocarbon group having from 1 to about 20 carbon atoms e.g. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 or 20 carbon atoms. The alkylene group can be straight branched or cyclic. The alkylene group can be also optionally unsaturated and or substituted with one or more alkyl group substituents. There can be optionally inserted along the alkylene group one or more oxygen sulfur or substituted or unsubstituted nitrogen atoms also referred to herein as alkylaminoalkyl wherein the nitrogen substituent is alkyl as previously described. Exemplary alkylene groups include methylene CH ethylene CH CH propylene CH cyclohexylene CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH N R CH wherein each of q and r is independently an integer from 0 to about 20 e.g. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 or 20 and R is hydrogen or lower alkyl methylenedioxyl O CH O and ethylenedioxyl O CH O . An alkylene group can have about 2 to about 3 carbon atoms and can further have 6 20 carbons.

The term aryl is used herein to refer to an aromatic substituent that can be a single aromatic ring or multiple aromatic rings that are fused together linked covalently or linked to a common group such as a methylene or ethylene moiety. The common linking group also can be a carbonyl as in benzophenone or oxygen as in diphenylether or nitrogen as in diphenylamine. The term aryl specifically encompasses heterocyclic aromatic compounds. The aromatic ring s can comprise phenyl naphthyl biphenyl diphenylether diphenylamine and benzophenone among others. In particular embodiments the term aryl means a cyclic aromatic comprising about 5 to about 10 carbon atoms e.g. 5 6 7 8 9 or 10 carbon atoms and including 5 and 6 membered hydrocarbon and heterocyclic aromatic rings.

The aryl group can be optionally substituted with one or more aryl group substituents which can be the same or different where aryl group substituent includes alkyl aryl aralkyl hydroxyl alkoxyl aryloxyl aralkyloxyl carboxyl acyl halo nitro alkoxycarbonyl aryloxycarbonyl aralkoxycarbonyl acyloxyl acylamino aroylamino carbamoyl alkylcarbamoyl dialkylcarbamoyl arylthio alkylthio alkylene and NR R where R and R can be each independently hydrogen alkyl aryl and aralkyl.

Specific examples of aryl groups include but are not limited to cyclopentadienyl phenyl furan thiophene pyrrole pyran pyridine imidazole benzimidazole isothiazole isoxazole pyrazole pyrazine triazine pyrimidine quinoline isoquinoline indole carbazole and the like.

The term arylene refers to a bivalent group derived from a monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbon or a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon by removal of a hydrogen atom from two carbon atoms on the aromatic ring s . Examples of an arylene group include but are not limited to 1 2 phenylene 1 3 phenylene and 1 4 phenylene.

As used herein the terms substituted alkyl substituted cycloalkyl substituted alkylene substituted aryl and substituted arylene include alkyl alkylene and aryl groups as defined herein in which one or more atoms or functional groups of the alkyl alkylene aryl or arylene group are replaced with another atom or functional group including for example halogen aryl alkyl alkoxyl hydroxyl nitro amino alkylamino dialkylamino sulfate and mercapto.

 Alkoxyl or alkoxyalkyl refer to an alkyl O group wherein alkyl is as previously described. The term alkoxyl as used herein can refer to Cinclusive linear branched or cyclic saturated or unsaturated oxo hydrocarbon chains including for example methoxyl ethoxyl propoxyl isopropoxyl butoxyl t butoxyl and pentoxyl.

In some embodiments the treating of the precursor material comprises a process selected from the group consisting of a a curing process b a chemical modification process c a network forming process and d combinations thereof. In some embodiments the curing process comprises a process selected from the group consisting of a thermal process a photochemical process and an irradiation process. In some embodiments the irradiation process comprises irradiating the liquid precursor material with radiation wherein the radiation is selected from the group consisting of gamma rays and an electron beam. In some embodiments the chemical modification process comprises a crosslinking process. Methods for the radiolysis of fluoropolymers including perfluoropolyether materials are provided in J. S. Forsvthe et al. 25 101 136 2000 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

Further Published PCT International Application WO 99 61141 to Mao et al. describes a method of making crosslinked polymers suitable for use in ion conductive membranes such as a proton exchange membrane by a crosslinking a polymer having pendant acid halide groups with a crosslinker which bonds to two or more acid halide groups or b crosslinking a polymer having pendant amide groups with a crosslinker which bonds to two or more amide groups. Also Buchi et al. 142 9 3004 1995 discloses proton exchange membranes made by sulfonating a crosslinked polyolefin polystyrene copolymer which is crosslinked during polymerization by addition of divinyl benzene. U.S. Pat. No. 5 438 082 to Helmer Metzmann et al. discloses a method of crosslinking a sulfonated aromatic polyether ketone with a crosslinker comprising an amine functional group. Further U.S. Pat. No. 5 468 574 to Ehrenberq et al. and Published PCT International Patent Application No. WO 97 19 480 to Graham et al. disclose that certain sulfonated polymers will form direct bonds between sulfonate groups upon heating however this method appears to sacrifice sulfonic acid groups thereby resulting in the loss of acidity in the membrane. The above mentioned patents publications and published patent applications are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

Thus in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a polymeric electrolyte comprising a 100 solids liquid precursor material as defined hereinabove wherein the 100 solids liquid precursor material comprises from about 70 by weight to about 100 by weight polymerizable materials.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed polymeric electrolyte has an equivalent weight wherein the equivalent weight is selected from the group consisting of an equivalent weight less than about 1500 and greater than about 1000 an equivalent weight less than about 1000 and greater than about 800 an equivalent weight less than about 800 and greater than about 500 and an equivalent weight below about 500.

Further in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides an electrochemical cell comprising the polymeric electrolyte prepared from a 100 solids liquid precursor. In some embodiments the electrochemical cell is selected from the group consisting of a fuel cell a chlor alkali cell and a battery.

Further NAFION and other PEM materials perform best when relative humidity values are high for example above about 90 . Incorporation of an alcohol into a NAFION like material makes the material more hydrophilic which can result in good conductivity at lower relative humidities and or reduced water loss at higher temperatures. An example is provided in Scheme 11 which provides a method for polymerizing components of a NAFION like material with vinyl acetate. Simple hydrolysis reactions convert the acetate to the alcohol while obtaining a sulfonic acid group on the proton conducting compound. Post fluorination on the material can provide chemical and thermal stability of a perfluorinated material.

Another limitation of NAFION is its low acid content. The acid content of NAFION can not be much higher than is currently available in commercial grades since increasing the acid content lowering the equivalent weight by increasing the fraction of PSEPVE incorporated into the TFE PSEPVE copolymer leads to molecular weight reduction because of the propensity of fluorinated vinyl ethers to undergo scission reactions during polymerization. See Romack T. J. and DeSimone. J. M. 28 8429 8431 1995 which is incorporated by reference in its entirety. Thus as the acid content of NAFION is increased the molecular weight of the polymer decreases and the mechanical properties are compromised. Such a linear low molecular weight high acid containing NAFION like material has poor film forming qualities and becomes water soluble an unacceptable property. This limitation in the reaction chemistry used to make NAFION limits commercial suppliers to selling grades of NAFION that do not contain a high enough acid content necessary for very high proton conductivity. Indeed the most widely studied commercial grade of NAFION has an equivalent weight of 1100 with a proton conductivity of only 0.083 S cm at room temperature under fully hydrated conditions. See Mauritz. K. A. and Moore. R. B. 104 4535 4585 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. The presently disclosed materials address these deficiencies and generate new PEMs that have much higher conductivities are more thermally stable more selective more mechanically robust and incorporate a modular design that will allow for independent control of membrane properties.

Without being bound to any one particular theory it is believed that the high conductivity in the presently disclosed materials is due to a fundamentally different proton conduction mechanism than is operative in NAFION . According to most reports see e. g. Mauritz K. A. and Moore R. B. 104 45354585 2004 the morphology of NAFION can be considered as isolated clusters of acid groups embedded in a Teflon like matrix. Protons can hop from acid group to acid group within the clusters but in order for a proton to macroscopically transport across the PEM it must migrate in the form of a hydronium ion through hydrophilic channels from one acid cluster to the next. That is in order for NAFION to be highly proton conductive the presence of a threshold amount of water is a requirement. This requirement for NAFION to be hydrated in order for it to be highly proton conductive see Mauritz K. A. and Moore. R. B. 104 4535 4585 2004 presents a real implementation barrier for the use of NAFION based fuel cells at temperatures above the boiling point of water. Again without being bound to any one particular theory it is believed that the very high acid contents achievable in the presently disclosed liquid precursors to cross linked PEMs results in a continuum of acid groups that are within proton hopping distances of each other. As such protons can macroscopically transport through the film without the required water content associated with commercial grades of NAFION or any other emerging PEM material that has equivalent weights 550.

In sum the presently disclosed materials can be used in traditional electrochemical cell applications such as automotive applications as well as portable power for example for electronic devices. In some embodiments the presently disclosed materials exhibit an improved mechanical stability at elevated temperatures. In some embodiments the presently disclosed materials exhibit a decreased permeability for alkyl alcohols such as methanol. In some embodiments the presently disclosed materials provide an increased electrochemical cell performance at lower relative humidity and an increase in the hydrophilicity of the proton exchange membrane.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for preparing a patterned proton exchange membrane. One such embodiment is provided in .

Referring now to a patterned substrate e.g. mold is provided. Mold can comprise a material selected from the group consisting of an inorganic material an organic material and combinations thereof. In some embodiments mold has a predetermined geometry wherein predetermined geometry has a macroscopic area . For example as depicted in predetermined geometry comprises a rectangular substrate with a first planar surface wherein first planar surface further comprises a plurality of structural features which are depicted in as a plurality of pegs extending from first planar surface .

Further as would be appreciated by one of ordinary skill in the art upon a review of the present disclosure the plurality of structural features can take any form including but not limited to a peg a fluted peg a roll up cylinder a pattern a wall and an interdigitated surface not shown . Accordingly the proton exchange membranes made by the presently disclosed method can be made in various geometries can have numerous pathways and or can comprise a controlled or a variable surface area.

In some embodiments the proton exchange membranes prepared by the presently disclosed method have a greater active surface area compared to macroscopic surface area. Thus in some embodiments predetermined geometry comprises a plurality of structures having a surface area which is greater than the macroscopic area of mold . In some embodiments the plurality of structures has a surface area ranging from at least about two times to about 100 times the macroscopic surface area of mold . In some embodiments predetermined geometry comprises a plurality of structures having a surface area at least two times greater than the macroscopic surface area of mold . In some embodiments predetermined geometry comprises a plurality of structures having a surface area at least five times greater than the macroscopic surface area of mold . In some embodiments predetermined geometry comprises a plurality of structures having a surface area at least twenty times greater than the macroscopic surface area of mold . In some embodiments predetermined geometry comprises a plurality of structures having a surface area at least eighty times greater than the macroscopic surface area of mold .

Referring now to a liquid precursor material is contacted with mold . Liquid precursor material can comprise any of the liquid precursor materials disclosed hereinabove that is liquid precursor material can comprise a proton conducting material a precursor to a proton conducting material and combinations thereof. Liquid precursor material is treated by a treating process Tto form a treated liquid precursor material as depicted in .

In some embodiments treating process Tcomprises a process selected from the group consisting of a curing process a chemical modification process a network forming process a solvent evaporation process and combinations thereof. In some embodiments the curing process comprises a process selected from the group consisting of a thermal process a photochemical process and an irradiation process. Further in some embodiments the irradiation process comprises irradiating the liquid material with radiation wherein the radiation is selected from the group selected from gamma rays and an electron beam. In some embodiments the chemical modification process comprises a crosslinking process.

Referring now to treated liquid precursor material is removed from mold to provide a freestanding proton exchange membrane comprising a plurality of structural features which correspond to the plurality of structural features of mold . In some embodiments the plurality of structures and have a dimension of less than 10 mm. In some embodiments the plurality of structures and have a dimension of less than 1 mm. In some embodiments the plurality of structures and have a dimension of less than 100 m. In some embodiments the plurality of structures and have a dimension of less than 10 m. In some embodiments the plurality of structures and have a dimension of less than 1 m. Said another way in some embodiments the individual structures comprising the plurality of structures and can have a height having a dimension ranging from less than about 10 mm to less than about 1 m and or a width having a dimension ranging from less than about 10 mm to less than about 1 m.

Thus in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for preparing a patterned polymeric electrolyte the method comprising 

In some embodiments the liquid precursor material comprises a material selected from the group consisting of a proton conducting material a precursor to a proton conducting material and combinations thereof.

In some embodiments the patterned substrate comprises a material selected from the group consisting of an inorganic material an organic material and combinations thereof.

In some embodiments the predetermined geometry comprises a non planar geometry. In some embodiments the non planar geometry comprises features having a predetermined dimension selected from the group consisting of a dimension less than about 10 mm and greater than about 1 mm a dimension less than about 1 mm and greater than about 100 m a dimension less than about 100 m and greater than 10 m a dimension less than about 10 m and greater than about 1 m and a dimension less than about 1 m.

In some embodiments the predetermined geometry is defined by one of a catalyst layer and an electrode material comprising a membrane electrode assembly. In some embodiments the predetermined geometry is defined by a membrane electrode assembly. In some embodiments the predetermined geometry comprises a structure selected from the group consisting of a pattern a peg a wall an interdigitated surface and a roll up cylinder.

In some embodiments the predetermined geometry comprises a structure having a surface area greater than the macroscopic surface area of the patterned substrate. In some embodiments the structure has a surface area ranging from at least about two times to about 100 times the macroscopic surface area of the patterned substrate.

In some embodiments the treating of the liquid precursor material comprises a process selected from the group consisting of a a curing process b a chemical modification process c a network forming process d a solvent evaporation process and e combinations thereof.

Thus in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a patterned proton exchange membrane prepared by the presently disclosed method. In some embodiments the patterned proton exchange membrane comprises a material having an equivalent weight wherein the equivalent weight is selected from the group consisting of an equivalent weight less than about 1500 and greater than about 1000 an equivalent weight less than about 1000 and greater than about 800 an equivalent weight less than about 800 and greater than about 500 and an equivalent weight below about 500.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides an electrochemical cell comprising the presently disclosed patterned proton exchange membrane. In some embodiments the electrochemical cell is selected from the group consisting of a fuel cell a chlor alkali cell and a battery.

An example of a proton exchange membrane prepared by the presently disclosed method is provided in which show a scanning electron micrograph of a PEM with a shark skin pattern before hydrolysis and a scanning electron micrograph of a PEM with a shark skin pattern after hydrolysis respectively. The shark skin pattern was prepared as described in Example 7. The feature size of the shark skin pattern i.e. a structure as described immediately hereinabove in this particular example is about 2 m in width and about 8 m in height. By employing the shark skin patterns the surface area of the patterned PEM is about five times greater than the surface area of a flat unpatterned PEM of the same macroscopic dimensions. As indicated by the scanning electron micrograph provided in high fidelity structural features are obtained by the presently disclosed method. Further as shown by the scanning electron micrograph provided in the patterns swell after the PEM undergoes hydrolysis but the structural features are still evident.

In some embodiments the predetermined geometry of mold e.g. element of and thus the geometry of the PEM formed therein is defined by a catalyst tie layer as provided in herein below and or an electrode material of a membrane electrode assembly. Further because the presently disclosed liquid precursor material e.g. liquid precursor material of is a liquid it is pourable. Thus liquid precursor material can be poured into existing structures such as a structure defined by electrode materials.

For example referring now to a first electrode material and a second electrode material are operationally positioned in a spatial arrangement such that a gap is created therein between. A liquid precursor material is poured into gap . Liquid precursor material can comprise any of the liquid precursor materials disclosed hereinabove. Liquid precursor material is then treated by a treating process Tto form a proton exchange membrane which in some embodiments remains in a functional position between first electrode material and second electrode material . Thus in some embodiments the liquid precursor material e.g. is infused directly into the preconfigured cavity e.g. gap formed between first electrode material and second electrode material followed by treating process T.

Referring once again to in some embodiments the first electrode material is coated with a first catalyst material and second electrode material is coated with a second catalyst material before liquid precursor material is poured into gap .

In some embodiments proton exchange membrane comprises a material having an equivalent weight wherein the equivalent weight is selected from the group consisting of an equivalent weight less than about 1500 and greater than about 1000 an equivalent weight less than about 1000 and greater than about 800 an equivalent weight less than about 800 and greater than about 500 and an equivalent weight below about 500. The conductivities of representative PEMs prepared from the presently disclosed liquid materials having different equivalent weights at fully hydrated conditions are provided in .

Further the synthetic methods of the liquid precursor materials disclosed herein can be varied to produce a gradient of compositions to tailor the properties and to improve the performance of the presently disclosed PEMs. Current PEMs typically comprise materials having one equivalent weight EW a property that results in a trade off between power density and methanol permeability. For example NAFION based high equivalent weight PEMs are less permeable to methanol. Such materials however exhibit a relatively low conductivity. Low EW PEMs give higher conductivity values relative to those with higher EW materials of comparable components but allow for high methanol permeability which results in a drastic decrease in power density.

The presently disclosed subject matter provides a PEM having a gradient of equivalent weights. With a gradient of EWs as disclosed herein optimum performance in both areas methanol permeability and conductivity can be achieved. For example the use of a material with a higher EW at the anode provides a PEM with a low methanol permeability whereas inclusion of materials having a lower EW throughout the cross section of the PEM provides for a higher power density.

Referring now to the preparation of a proton exchange membrane with a plurality of liquid materials is disclosed. In this embodiment plurality of liquid materials comprise a plurality of liquid materials through . In some embodiments liquid materials through comprise a high glass transition temperature T NAFION like material. Liquid materials through are not restricted to a high Tmaterial however and in some embodiments liquid materials through comprise a fluorinated or perfluorinated elastomer based material or any material disclosed herein.

In some embodiments each liquid material e.g. and has a different equivalent weight e.g. EW EW EW EW EW and EW respectively not shown . As used herein the term equivalent weight refers to the mass of an acidic material that contains one equivalent of acid functional groups. Thus the equivalent weight of a polymeric electrolyte as disclosed herein is the number of acidic group equivalents in the polymeric electrolyte divided by the weight of the polymeric electrolyte. Further as used herein the term different equivalent weight refers to an equivalent weight e.g. EWthat varies about 50 g mol from another equivalent weight e.g. EW. For example an equivalent weight of about 800 would be considered to be different from an equivalent weight of about 750.

Referring again to the liquid material closest in proximity to the anode i.e. layer has a higher EW as compared to liquid materials through . In some embodiments the equivalent weights of liquid materials through follow the trend of EW EW EW EW EW EW with liquid material which is closest in proximity to cathode having the lowest equivalent weight.

In some embodiments at least one of liquid materials and has an equivalent weight below 1500. In some embodiments at least one of liquid materials and has an equivalent weight below 1000. In some embodiments at least one of liquid materials and has an equivalent weight below 800. In some embodiments at least one of liquid materials and has an equivalent weight below 500. The conductivities of representative PEMs prepared from the presently disclosed liquid materials having different equivalent weights at fully hydrated conditions are provided in .

Referring now to in some embodiments to decrease the methanol permeability of PEM at anode a high EW liquid material e.g. having an equivalent weight EW is disposed e.g. applied or spin coated onto a substrate e.g. anode to form a layer of liquid material on anode followed by treating with treating process Tto form treated liquid material . Treated liquid material is coated with a lower EW liquid material e.g. with an equivalent weight EW which is then treated to form treated liquid material not shown . This procedure is repeated as often as desired to form PEM comprising a gradient of equivalent weights e.g. EWthrough EW. Thus in some embodiments the treated liquid material e.g. not shown closest in proximity with cathode has the lowest EW e.g. EW. Accordingly the presently disclosed method can provide for a decrease in methanol permeability at anode and can promote increasingly facile proton transport through the cross section of PEM .

Thus in some embodiments PEM comprises a plurality of layers of a polymeric electrolyte wherein the plurality of layers of a polymeric electrolyte comprises at least a first layer of a first polymeric electrolyte comprising a material having a first equivalent weight and at least a second layer of a second polymeric electrolyte comprising a material having a second equivalent weight. In some embodiments the plurality of layers of a polymeric electrolyte comprises a gradient of equivalent weights.

Thus in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides method for preparing a polymeric electrolyte comprising a plurality of equivalent weights the method comprising 

In some embodiments the first liquid precursor material and the second liquid precursor material are selected from the group consisting of a proton conducting material a precursor to a proton conducting material and combinations thereof. In some embodiments the first equivalent weight is greater than the second equivalent weight.

In some embodiments the substrate is selected from the group consisting of an anode and a cathode. In some embodiments the treating of the first liquid precursor material the second liquid precursor material and the plurality of liquid precursor materials is selected from the group consisting of a curing process a chemical modification process a network forming process a solvent evaporation process and combinations thereof.

In some embodiments the method comprises repeating steps c through d with a predetermined plurality of liquid precursor materials comprising a plurality of equivalent weights to form a polymeric electrolyte comprising a plurality of equivalent weights wherein the plurality of liquid precursor materials are selected from the group consisting of a proton conducting material a precursor to a proton conducting material and combinations thereof. In some embodiments the second equivalent weight is greater than the plurality of equivalents weights.

Thus in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a polymeric electrolyte comprising a plurality of equivalent weights prepared by the presently disclosed method. In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides an electrochemical cell comprising the presently disclosed polymeric electrolyte comprising a gradient of equivalent weights. In some embodiments the electrochemical cell is selected from the group consisting of a fuel cell a chlor alkali cell and a battery.

The performance of the presently disclosed proton exchange membranes can be evaluated by measuring the conductivity power density durability and longevity among others.

The presently disclosed subject matter also provides a method for preparing a membrane electrode assembly MEA . In some embodiments the method for preparing a membrane electrode assembly comprises preparing a processible catalyst ink composition using the presently described liquid precursor materials. Further in some embodiments the method for preparing a membrane electrode assembly comprises providing a proton exchange membrane prepared by the presently disclosed methods coating the proton exchange membrane with a processible catalyst ink composition to form a coated proton exchange membrane and in some embodiments applying an electrode material to the coated proton exchange membrane.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter describes a method for preparing a processible catalyst ink composition the method comprising 

In some embodiments the liquid precursor material comprises a liquid perfluoropolyether material. In some embodiments the liquid perfluoropolyether material comprises end groups wherein the end groups are chemically stable after curing. In some embodiments the chemically stable end groups are selected from one of aryl end groups and fluorinated vinyl ether end groups. In some embodiments the aryl end groups comprise styrenyl end groups.

In some embodiments the method further comprises mixing the liquid precursor material with a monomer such as a vinyl monomer and a crosslinking agent. In some embodiments the vinyl monomer comprises a proton conducting species. In some embodiments the proton conducting species is selected from one of an acidic material and a precursor to an acidic material.

In some embodiments the processible catalyst ink composition comprises a catalyst. In some embodiments the catalyst comprises a metal selected from the group consisting of platinum ruthenium molybdenum chromium and combinations thereof. In some embodiments the catalyst is selected from one of a platinum catalyst and a platinum alloy catalyst. In some embodiments the processible catalyst ink composition comprises an electrode material. In some embodiments the electrode material comprises carbon black.

In some embodiments the method comprises treating the processible catalyst ink composition. In some embodiments the treating of the processible catalyst ink composition comprises a treating process selected from the group consisting of a curing process a chemical modification process a network forming process a solvent evaporation process and combinations thereof.

Thus in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a processible catalyst ink composition prepared by the method described herein.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for applying a processible catalyst ink composition to a substrate. In some embodiments the substrate comprises an electrode material. In some embodiments the substrate comprises a proton exchange membrane.

Referring now to in some embodiments a processible catalyst ink composition as described immediately above is applied to an electrode material . In some embodiments electrode material comprises carbon cloth. In some embodiments electrode material comprises carbon paper. Processible catalyst ink composition is subsequently treated by a treating process Tto form a catalyst tie layer not shown which provides for good contact with electrode material .

Referring now to in some embodiments processible catalyst ink composition is applied to a patterned proton exchange membrane . Processible catalyst ink composition is subsequently treated by a treating process Tto form a catalyst tie layer not shown which provides for good contact with proton exchange membrane .

The method used to coat one of or both of electrode and proton exchange membrane can be selected from the group including but not limited to chemical vapor deposition CVD electrospray electric field desorption rf plasma enhanced CVD flame spray deposition ink jet printing or pulse laser desorption. In some embodiments the method comprises treating the processible catalyst ink composition. In some embodiments the treating of the processible catalyst ink composition comprises a treating process selected from the group consisting of a curing process a chemical modification process a network forming process solvent evaporation process and combinations thereof.

The presently described methods can be performed independently for use in different membrane electrode assemblies. That is in one membrane electrode assembly the presently disclosed method can be used to coat an electrode material whereas in another membrane electrode assembly the presently disclosed method can be used to coat a proton exchange membrane. Further both of these methods e.g. the methods described in and respectively can be used to prepare the same membrane electrode assembly.

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for conformally coating a proton exchange membrane with at least one of a processible catalyst ink composition and an electrode material. By conformally coating it is meant that the coating of for example the processible catalyst ink composition and or the electrode material is in conductive contact with the features comprising for example the proton exchange membrane and thereby conforms to the geometry of the features thereof.

Referring now to in some embodiments a patterned PEM is coated conformally with a processible catalyst ink composition followed by coating with an electrode material such as carbon black to form a planarized surface of electrode material . In some embodiments processible catalyst ink composition is then treated by a treating process T. When operationally positioned in a membrane electrode assembly not shown the planarized coating of the electrode material allows the membrane electrode assembly to have a flat surface on at least one side.

Referring now to in some embodiments patterned PEM is coated conformally with processible catalyst ink composition followed by coating with electrode material to form a conformal surface of electrode material . In some embodiments processible catalyst ink composition is then treated by a treating process T.

Referring now to in some embodiments patterned PEM is coated conformally with processible catalyst ink composition to form a planarized surface of processible catalyst ink composition . This step is followed by coating with electrode material to form a planarized surface of electrode material . In some embodiments processible catalyst ink composition is then treated by a treating process T. When operationally positioned in a membrane electrode assembly not shown the planarized coating of the electrode material allows the membrane electrode assembly to have a flat surface on at least one side.

Accordingly in some embodiments the method comprises conformally applying the processible catalyst ink composition to at least one of the proton exchange membrane and the electrode material.

By way of example scanning electron micrographs of a patterned PEM conformally coated with a catalyst by using an electrospray deposition technique are shown in . Further a scanning electron micrograph of a patterned PEM conformally coated with a catalyst by using a vapor deposition technique is shown in . The preparation of each of these PEMs is described in Example 8.

The presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for preparing a membrane electrode assembly. In some embodiments the method for preparing a membrane electrode assembly comprises at least one of the presently disclosed methods for preparing a proton exchange membrane preparing a processible catalyst ink composition applying a processible catalyst ink composition to a substrate and conformally coating a proton exchange membrane.

Referring now to an embodiment of the presently disclosed method for forming a membrane electrode assembly is provided. Continuing with a proton exchange membrane is provided. In some embodiments proton exchange membrane comprises a three dimensional geometry as depicted in . In some embodiments a first catalyst material and a second catalyst material are conformally contacted with proton exchange membrane . A first electrode material is conformally contacted with first catalyst material . A second electrode material is contacted with second catalyst material . In some embodiments first electrode material and second electrode material comprise a planar geometry. In some embodiments the components of the membrane electrode assembly can be treated by a treating process Tto provide good contact between the components and mechanical stability.

Thus the presently disclosed subject matter provides a membrane electrode assembly comprising a three dimensional proton exchange membrane and a two dimensional electrode with conformal catalyst loading. By three dimensional it is meant that for example the proton exchange membrane comprises features that extend from a planar surface see for example the plurality of structural features of . By two dimensional it is meant that for example the electrode material comprises a planar surface which is in conductive communication with the proton exchange membrane see for example first electrode material and second electrode material of .

Referring now to a proton exchange membrane is provided. In some embodiments proton exchange membrane comprises a three dimensional geometry as depicted in wherein the three dimensional geometry comprises a plurality of recesses . In some embodiments a first catalyst material and a second catalyst material are operationally disposed within recesses . A first electrode material is conformally contacted with first catalyst material . A second electrode material is contacted with second catalyst material . In some embodiments first electrode material and second electrode material comprise a planar two dimensional geometry. In some embodiments the components of the membrane electrode assembly can be treated by a treating process Tto provide good contact between the components and mechanical stability. Thus the presently disclosed subject matter provides a membrane electrode assembly comprising a three dimensional proton exchange membrane and a two dimensional electrode with non conformal catalyst loading.

Referring now to a proton exchange membrane is provided. In some embodiments proton exchange membrane comprises a three dimensional geometry comprising a plurality of recesses . In some embodiments a first catalyst material and a second catalyst material are conformally contacted with proton exchange membrane . In some embodiments a first electrode material is disposed in recesses and is operationally contacted with first catalyst material . In some embodiments a second electrode material is disposed in recesses and is operationally contacted with catalyst material . In some embodiments the components of the membrane electrode assembly can be treated by a treating process Tto provide good contact between the components and mechanical stability. Thus the presently disclosed subject matter provides a three dimensional membrane electrode assembly comprising a three dimensional proton exchange membrane and three dimensional electrode materials with a conformal catalyst loading.

In some embodiments the proton exchange membrane e.g. of and of is preformed by a method described herein. In some embodiments the proton exchange membrane is formed by operationally disposing a liquid precursor material between two electrode materials e.g. first electrode material and second electrode material of and then treating the liquid precursor material.

Thus in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for preparing a membrane electrode assembly the method comprising

In some embodiments the liquid precursor material is selected from the group consisting of a proton conducting material a precursor to a proton conducting material and combinations thereof.

Further in some embodiments at least one of the first catalyst material and the second catalyst material comprises a processible catalyst ink composition. In some embodiments the method further comprises applying the processible catalyst ink composition to the proton exchange membrane. In some embodiments the method comprises applying the processible catalyst ink composition to at least one of the first and the second electrode material. In some embodiments the method comprises applying the processible catalyst ink composition to the proton exchange membrane and at least one of the first electrode material and the second electrode material.

In some embodiments the processible catalyst ink composition is applied by a process selected from the group including but not limited to a chemical vapor deposition CVD process an electrospray process an electric field desorption process a rf plasma enhanced CVD process a flame spray deposition process an ink jet printing process and a pulse laser desorption process.

In some embodiments the electrode material is selected from the group consisting of carbon cloth carbon paper and carbon black. In some embodiments the electrode material comprises a patterned electrode material.

Thus in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a membrane electrode assembly MEA prepared by the methods described herein.

In some embodiments the electrode material e.g. carbon cloth carbon paper and or carbon black is treated to increase its surface area to increase the power density of the electrochemical cell within which the electrode material is operationally disposed. Referring now to an electrode material is provided. Electrode material can be patterned to form a patterned electrode material using traditional lithography technologies not shown or patterned directly using an electron beam e.g. the etching agent EA of . In some embodiments electrode material can further comprise a photoresist for example for use in electron beam lithography. In some embodiments a mask can be provided for example for use in plasma etching such as oxygen reactive ion etching.

Thus in some embodiments the electrode material is patterned by a process selected from the group including but not limited to 

In some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter provides a method for forming an electrochemical cell such as a fuel cell. Referring now to a proton exchange membrane is provided. Proton exchange membrane can be prepared from the presently disclosed liquid precursor materials by the methods described herein. Proton exchange membrane is operationally positioned between and contacted with a first catalyst material and a second catalyst material . In some embodiments first catalyst material and second catalyst material each independently comprise a metal selected from the group consisting of platinum ruthenium molybdenum chromium and combinations thereof.

Continuing with first catalyst material is operationally contacted with a first electrode material . In some embodiments first electrode material comprises a first surface and a second surface . Thus in some embodiments at least one of first surface and second surface is operationally contacted with first catalyst material . In some embodiments at least one of first surface and second surface are coated with first catalyst material . In some embodiments at least one of first surface and second surface is impregnated with first catalyst material .

Continuing with second catalyst material is operationally contacted with second electrode material . In some embodiments second electrode material comprises a first surface and a second surface . Thus in some embodiments at least one of first surface and second surface is operationally contacted with second catalyst material . In some embodiments at least one of first surface and second surface are coated with second catalyst material . In some embodiments at least one of first surface and second surface is impregnated with second catalyst material .

Continuing with membrane electrode assembly is thus formed by operationally positioning proton exchange membrane first catalyst layer first electrode material second catalyst layer and second electrode material . Membrane electrode assembly can be operationally positioned in an electrochemical cell such as a fuel cell.

Continuing on with a first outer layer and a second outer layer are provided. In some embodiments first outer layer and second outer layer are comprised of a perfluoropolyether PFPE material as described herein. First outer layer can further comprise a plurality of microfluidic channels through which fuel Fcan be introduced and second outer layer can further comprise a plurality of microfluidic channels through which fuel Fcan be introduced.

In some embodiments first electrode material comprises an anode and is in fluid communication with fuel F which in some embodiments comprises an anodic fuel. In some embodiments the anodic fuel e.g. fuel F is selected from the group consisting of H an alkane an alkyl alcohol a dialkyl ether and a glycol. In some embodiments the alkane is selected from the group consisting of methane ethane propane and butane. In some embodiments the alkyl alcohol is selected from the group consisting of methanol ethanol propanol butanol pentanol and hexanol. In some embodiments the alkyl alcohol comprises methanol. In some embodiments the dialkyl ether comprises dimethyl ether. In some embodiments the glycol comprises ethylene glycol.

In some embodiments second electrode material comprises a cathode and is in fluid communication with fuel F which in some embodiments comprises a cathodic fuel. In some embodiments the cathodic fuel e.g. fuel F comprises an oxygen O containing gas such as air. In some embodiments the cathodic fuel comprises an air water mixture.

Referring now to in some embodiments the plurality of microfluidic channels comprises at least one inlet aperture . In some embodiments inlet aperture is in fluid communication with a fuel source . In some embodiments fuel source comprises fuel F. In some embodiments fuel Fis selected from the group consisting of an anodic fuel and a cathodic fuel.

Continuing with in some embodiments the plurality of microfluidic channels comprises at least one inlet aperture . In some embodiments inlet aperture is in fluid communication with a fuel source . In some embodiments fuel source comprises fuel F. In some embodiments fuel Fis selected from the group consisting of an anodic fuel and a cathodic fuel.

In some embodiments the plurality of microfluidic channels comprises an outlet aperture . In some embodiments outlet aperture is in fluid communication with a fuel recirculation channel . In some embodiments the outlet aperture is in fluid communication with a waste exhaust port .

In some embodiments the plurality of microfluidic channels comprises an outlet aperture . In some embodiments outlet aperture is in fluid communication with a fuel recirculation channel . In some embodiments the outlet aperture is in fluid communication with a waste exhaust port .

In some embodiments the plurality of microfluidic channels comprises a plurality of valves e.g. and . In some embodiments plurality of valves and comprise a pressure actuated valve not shown . In some embodiments the plurality of microfluidic channels comprises a plurality of valves e.g. and . In some embodiments plurality of valves and comprise a pressure actuated valve not shown .

In some embodiments the plurality of microfluidic channels and the plurality of microfluidic channels each comprise a network of microfluidic channels not shown .

In some embodiments the microfluidic device is produced by a soft lithography process. As used herein the term soft lithography refers to a process by which micrometer and sub micrometer features are transferred to a substrate through the use of elastomeric stamps. Soft lithography has emerged as an alternative to traditional photolithography processes for producing feature sizes smaller than about 100 nm. As used herein the term soft lithography encompasses several processes including but not limited to imprint lithography IL replica molding microcontact printing MCP micromolding in capillaries MIMIC and solvent assisted micromolding SAMIM .

Referring now to a schematic representation of an embodiment of the presently disclosed method for forming a layer of perfluoropolyether PFPE material comprising a plurality of microfluidic channels is shown. A substrate having a patterned surface comprising a raised protrusion is depicted. Accordingly the patterned surface of the substrate comprises at least one raised protrusion which forms the shape of a pattern. In some embodiments the patterned surface of the substrate comprises a plurality of raised protrusions which form a complex pattern.

As best seen in a polymeric precursor is disposed on patterned surface of substrate . Polymeric precursor can comprise a perfluoropolyether. As shown in polymeric precursor is treated by a treating process T for example irradiation with ultraviolet light to form a patterned layer of a photocured perfluoropolyether as shown in .

As shown in the patterned layer of the photocured perfluoropolyether comprises a recess that is formed in the bottom surface of the patterned layer . The dimensions of recess correspond to the dimensions of the raised protrusion of patterned surface of substrate . In some embodiments recess comprises at least one channel which in some embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter comprises a microscale channel. Patterned layer is removed from patterned surface of substrate to yield microfluidic device . Thus in some embodiments the soft lithography process comprises contacting a liquid precursor material with a patterned substrate e.g. a silicon wafer. In some embodiments the process further comprises treating the liquid precursor material to form a crosslinked polymer. In some embodiments the treating process is selected from the group consisting of a curing process a chemical modification process a network forming process and combinations thereof.

In some embodiments the process further comprises of removing the crosslinked polymer from the substrate thereby creating a stamp of the desired pattern.

A poly dimethyl siloxane PDMS elastomeric material typically is used in such microfluidic devices. The swelling of the PDMS material however limits its use in direct methanol fuel cells and fuel cells comprising other organic liquids due to the disruption of the micrometer sized features. Further PDMS materials typically also are unstable to acids and bases.

The presently disclosed subject matter addresses the above mentioned problems with PDMS elastomers in whole or in part by using a photocurable PFPE material. In some embodiments the PFFE material comprises a fluorinated functionalized PFPE material which in some embodiments has liquid like viscosities and can be cured into durable elastomers that exhibit the chemical resistance of typical fluoropolymers.

Thus in some embodiments the presently disclosed subject matter comprises cured PFPE based materials. In some embodiments the curing method comprises a free radical cured method. In some embodiments the free radical cured method further comprises adding other monomers and macromonomers to the PFPE resin. The addition of other monomers and macromonomers to the PFPE resin allows the physical properties including but not limited to modulus flexural strength wetting characteristics permeability adhesion and reactivity to be regulated.

The presently disclosed subject matter also provides a method for operating an electrochemical cell such as a fuel cell. In some embodiments the method comprises 

In some embodiments the proton exchange membrane of the electrochemical cell comprises a polymeric electrolyte prepared from a liquid precursor material as described herein.

In some embodiments the first electrode reactant is selected from the group consisting of H an alkane an alkyl alcohol a dialkyl ether and a glycol. In some embodiments the alkane is selected from the group consisting of methane ethane propane and butane. In some embodiments the alkyl alcohol is selected from the group consisting of methanol ethanol propanol butanol pentanol and hexanol. In some embodiments the alkyl alcohol comprises methanol. In some embodiments the dialkyl ether comprises dimethyl ether. In some embodiments the glycol comprises ethylene glycol. In some embodiments the second electrode reactant comprises an oxygen O containing gas such as an air and in some embodiments an air water mixture.

In some embodiments the method comprises extracting the electrical output generated by the electrochemical cell. In some embodiments the electrical output ranges from about 100 milliwatts to about 20 watts.

In some embodiments the method for operating an electrochemical cell further comprises supplying electrical power to a device. In some embodiments the device comprises a stationary device. In some embodiments the stationary device comprises an electrical generator. In some embodiments the device comprises a portable device. In some embodiments the portable device is selected from the group consisting of a portable electrical generator a portable appliance a power tool an electronic device a roadway or traffic sign a backup power supply and a personal vehicle. In some embodiments the electronic device is selected from one of a consumer electronic device and a military electronic device. In some embodiments the device comprises an automotive device.

The following Examples have been included to provide guidance to one of ordinary skill in the art for practicing representative embodiments of the presently disclosed subject matter. In light of the present disclosure and the general level of skill in the art those of skill can appreciate that the following Examples are intended to be exemplary only and that numerous changes modifications and alterations can be employed without departing from the scope of the presently disclosed subject matter.

Styrene linkages are added to both chain ends of poly tetrafluoroethylene co difluoroethylene oxide a w diol ZDOL PFPE Average Mn ca. 3800 g mol by an interfacial reaction. In a typical synthesis PFPE 20 g 5.26 mmol solcane 10 mL and tetrabutylammonium hydrogen sulfate 1.0 g 2.95 mmol are added into a round bottom flask. KOH 10 g 0.18 mol is dissolved in deionized water 20 mL and the aqueous KOH solution is then added to the round bottom flask. After addition of 4 vinylbenzyl chloride 2 mL 12.8 mmol the reaction mixture is allowed to stir vigorously at 45 C. for 48 h. The product is passed through a 0.22 m filter to remove the resulting brown solid. The solution is then extracted by deionized water three times and stirred with carbon black for 1 h to remove any impurities. The mixture is passed through a 0.22 m filter to remove the carbon black and vacuum dried at room temperature to remove the solvent. The resulting product S PFPE is a clear viscous liquid.

A representative scheme for the synthesis and photocuring of functional PFPEs is provided in Scheme 1.

Perfluoropolyether materials of the presently disclosed subject matter include but are not limited to perfluoropolyether materials comprising a backbone structure as follows 

A strong acid and a multifunctional monomer are crosslinked free radically or via a different chemical mechanism. The multifunctional monomer can be a strong acid and can have a functionality of at least two. An example of a strong acid that can be used in these crosslink systems for electrochemical cell applications is perfluoro 2 2 fluorosulfonylethoxy propyl vinyl ether PSEPVE . Other superacids that can function either as the strong acid or as a multifunctional monomer are sulfonimide based compounds.

The strong acid and multifunctional monomer are mixed in a round bottom flask under argon with fluorinated or perfluorinated solvent as needed. The ratios of the two components are varied for desired crosslink density and equivalent weight. Reaction conditions such as temperature and reaction time can vary depending on the particular components and ease of mixing.

A liquid precursor comprising the reaction mixture is poured onto a glass slide or a patterned substrate such as a mold. A standard steel spacer is used to control the membrane thickness. The liquid precursor is chemically crosslinked by irradiation with UV light or thermally under nitrogen purge. The mechanism of chemically crosslinking depends on the initiator used. Once crosslinked networks are prepared hydrolysis using base and acid converts any remaining conducting site into the acid for increased proton conduction.

Nonconducting difunctional monomers when reacted with strong acid result in a mechanically stable proton conducting network. Commercially available compounds with a functionality of two or more such as 4 4 bis 4 trifluorovinyloxy biphenyl Compound 1 are reacted with a strong acid such as PSEPVE. In a liquid precursor state the reaction mixture takes on the shape of the surface mold and crosslinks free radically upon addition of initiator thermally or photochemically in an inert atmosphere.

Liquid precursors lend themselves to be patternable if a crosslinking mechanism is viable. Free radical curing with trifunctional monomers provide a chemically crosslinked network available for proton conduction when cured with a strong acid. An example of a trifunctional monomer is tris trifluorovinyl benzene Compound 2 that is prepared using 1 3 5 tribromobenzene see Scheme 2 . The starting material in Scheme 2 can also represent a trifunctional monomer for subsequent crosslinking with a strong acid. An example of a strong acid is PSEPVE. The reaction mixture in a liquid precursor state can be crosslinked as described in Example 2.2.

A difunctional macromonomer which also is a superacid reacts with another strong acid such as PSEPVE to achieve a highly conducting mechanically stable network. In a liquid precursor form this reaction takes on the shape of any mold prior to crosslinking. Subsequent crosslinking results in high surface area highly conductive membranes. An example of a superacid used as a difunctional macromonomer is a bis PSEPVE based sulfonimide Compound 3 which is prepared via sulfonimide chemistry see Schemes 3 and 4 . The reaction mixture can be cured under the conditions described in Example 2.2.

Using a strong acid such as PSEPVE and a disulfonyl fluoride a bisvinylether disulfonimide is prepared using sulfonimide chemistry to obtain this crosslinkable superacid monomer Compound 4 Scheme 6 . The disulfonyl fluoride can be prepared using a diiodoalkane such as diiodoperfluoroalkane Scheme 5 . The bisvinylether disulfonimide is reacted with another strong acid such as PSEPVE to form a highly conducting membrane. The reactants can be cured under the conditions described in Example 2.2.

A terpolymer comprising a fluoroolefin and strong acid and a cure site monomer CSM of low molecular weight is polymerized. An example of a fluoroolefin is tetrafluoroethylene TFE and for a strong acid perfluoro 2 2 fluorosulfonylethoxy propyl vinyl ether PSEPVE is chosen. A typical polymerization can be loaded with 40 solids. The solvent chosen for TFE based polymerizations is optionally carbon dioxide CO . The initiator concentration tunes the desired molecular weight. Higher initiator concentration will lead to lower relative molecular weight whereas a lower initiator concentration would result in higher relative molecular weight. The polymerization is conducted free radically with a thermal initiator. Reaction times are varied upon desired conversion. The polymerizations are preferably performed using cure site monomers that are commonly used in fluoroelastomer and perfluoroelastomer technologies. For example the cure site monomers can include cyanovinyl ethers bromine containing monomers bromine containing olefins bromine containing vinyl ethers iodine containing monomers iodine containing olefins iodine containing vinyl ethers fluorine containing olefins having a nitrile group fluorine containing vinyl ethers having a nitrile group 1 1 3 3 3 pentafluoropropene perfluoro 2 phenoxypropyl vinyl ether and non conjugated dienes.

Terpolymers formed by the polymerization of a fluoroolefin a strong acid and a cure site monomer CSM can be crosslinked after polymerization prior to hydrolysis of the terpolymers. The polymerization product comprises a gum or liquid with Mooney viscosities of 160 and lower. The terpolymers are poured onto a mold of a desired pattern or onto a glass slide in an inert atmosphere. A standard steel spacer is used to control the membrane thickness between glass slides. The terpolymer takes on the shape of the patterned mold. Curing chemistry is optionally conducted as in fluoroelastomer and perfluoroelastomer technologies. The liquid precursor is chemically crosslinked by various cure systems including thermal or gamma radiation. Depending on the CSM peroxide based or bisphenolic cure systems also can be implemented. A chemically crosslinked membrane is created with higher active surface area than the geometric surface area occupied by the mold. Subsequent hydrolysis with base and acid results in a patterned proton conducting membrane with high mechanical integrity.

A cure site monomer containing a bromine is selected for the polymerization of a terpolymer comprising a fluoroolefin and strong acid and a cure site monomer. Bromine containing compounds used as cure site monomers can include vinyl bromide 1 bromo 2 2 difluoroethylene perfluoroallyl bromide 4 bromo 1 1 2 trifluorobutene 4 bromoperfluoro 1 butene 4 bromo 3 3 4 4 tetrafluoro 1 butene bromotrifluoroethylene and perfluorobromo vinyl ether.

A cure site monomer containing a cyanovinyl ether is selected for the polymerization of a terpolymer comprising a fluoroolefin and strong acid and a cure site monomer. Cyanovinyl ether containing compounds used as cure site monomers can include perfluoro 8 cyano 5 methyl 3 6 dioca 1 octene and perfluoro 9 cyano 5 methyl 3 6 dioxa 1 octene .

To a round bottom flask 4 vinyl benzenesulfonyl chloride 37.5 mmol 3 3 4 4 5 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 8 tridecafluoro 1 octanol 37.5 mmol triethylamine 10 mL and pyridine 20 mL are added under Ar flow. The resulting slurry is stirred at room temperature for 20 hours h . The reaction mixture is then poured into excess hydrochloric acid ice bath to quench triethylamine. The aqueous solution is extracted with diethyl ether three times and the combined ether layer is washed with water 10 NaOH solution and 10 NaCl solution sequentially. The ether solution is then dried over MgSOfor 1 h. MgSOis then filtered out and diethyl ether is removed by vacuum evaporation. The resulting styrene sulfonate ester is a yellow solid with a melting temperature around 40 C.

To a round bottom flask 4 vinyl benzenesulfonyl chloride 37.5 mmol 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 5 6 6 7 7 7 tridecafluoro 1 heptanol 37.5 mmol triethylamine 10 mL and pyridine 20 mL are added under Ar flow. The resulting slurry is stirred at room temperature for 20 h. The reaction mixture is then poured into excess hydrochloric acid ice bath to quench triethylamine. The aqueous solution is extracted with diethyl ether three times and the combined ether layer is washed with water 10 NaOH solution and 10 NaCl solution sequentially. The ether solution is then dried over MgSOfor 1 h. MgSOis then filtered out and diethyl ether is removed by vacuum evaporation.

70 wt S PFPE and 30 wt styrene sulfonate ester are mixed at room temperature. The mixture is heated above 40 C. and becomes a homogeneous yellow liquid. The liquid precursor is poured onto a preheated glass slide. A standard steel spacer is used to control the membrane thickness. The liquid precursor is chemically crosslinked by irradiation with UV light 365 nm for 10 min under nitrogen purge. The resulting membrane is in the ester form transparent and slightly yellow.

To convert the sulfonate ester group into sulfonic acid the membrane is immersed in a mixture of 30 NaOH aqueous solution and methanol 5 6 by volume overnight and then refluxed for 10 h. The membrane is then rinsed with water and stirred with fresh 20 wt HCl solution four times over 24 h. The resulting membrane is in the acid form. Residual HCl is removed by washing with water. The produced PEM has an equivalent of 1900 g mol. The conductivity of the PEM at fully hydrated conditions is measured by AC impedance and the results are shown in .

60 wt S PFPE and 40 wt styrene sulfonate ester are mixed at room temperature. The mixture is heated above 40 C. and became a homogeneous yellow liquid. The liquid precursor is poured onto a preheated glass slide. A standard steel spacer is used to control the membrane thickness. The liquid precursor is chemically crosslinked by irradiation with UV light 365 nm for 10 min under nitrogen purge. The resulting membrane is in the ester form transparent and slightly yellow.

To convert the sulfonate ester group into sulfonic acid the membrane is immersed in a mixture of 30 NaOH aqueous solution and methanol 5 6 by volume overnight and then refluxed for 10 h. The membrane is then rinsed with water and stirred with fresh 20 wt HCl solution four times over 24 h. The resulting membrane is in the acid form. Residual HCl is removed by washing with water. The produced PEM has an equivalent of 1250 g mol. The conductivity of the PEM at fully hydrated conditions is measured by AC impedance and the results are shown in .

50 wt S PFPE and 50 wt styrene sulfonate ester are mixed at room temperature. The mixture is heated above 40 C. and becomes a homogeneous yellow liquid. The liquid precursor is poured onto a preheated glass slide. A standard steel spacer is used to control the membrane thickness. The liquid precursor is chemically crosslinked by irradiation with UV light 365 nm for 10 min under nitrogen purge. The resulting membrane is in the ester form transparent and slightly yellow.

To convert the sulfonate ester group into sulfonic acid the membrane is immersed in a mixture of 30 NaOH aqueous solution and methanol 5 6 by volume overnight and then refluxed for 10 h. The membrane is then rinsed with water and stirred with fresh 20 wt HCl solution four times over 24 h. The resulting membrane is in the acid form. Residual HCl is removed by washing with water. The produced PEM has an equivalent of 850 g mol. The conductivity of the PEM at fully hydrated conditions is measured by AC impedance and the results are shown in .

40 wt S PFPE and 60 wt styrene sulfonate ester are mixed at room temperature. The mixture is heated above 40 C. and becomes a homogeneous yellow liquid. The liquid precursor is poured onto a preheated glass slide. A standard steel spacer is used to control the membrane thickness. The liquid precursor is chemically crosslinked by irradiation with UV light 365 nm for 10 min under nitrogen purge. The resulting membrane is in the ester form transparent and slightly yellow.

To convert the sulfonate ester group into sulfonic acid the membrane is immersed in a mixture of 30 NaOH aqueous solution and methanol 5 6 by volume overnight and then refluxed for 10 h. The membrane is then rinsed with water and stirred with fresh 20 wt HCl solution four times over 24 h. The resulting membrane is in the acid form. Residual HCl is removed by washing with water. The produced PEM has an equivalent of 660 g mol. The conductivity of the PEM at fully hydrated conditions is measured by AC impedance and the results are shown in .

30 wt S PFPE and 70 wt styrene sulfonate ester are mixed at room temperature. The mixture is heated above 40 C. and became a homogeneous yellow liquid. The liquid precursor is poured onto a preheated glass slide. A standard steel spacer is used to control the membrane thickness. The liquid precursor is chemically crosslinked by irradiation with UV light 365 nm for 10 min under nitrogen purge. The resulting membrane is in the ester form transparent and slightly yellow.

To convert the sulfonate ester group into sulfonic acid the membrane is immersed in a mixture of 30 NaOH aqueous solution and methanol 5 6 by volume overnight and then refluxed for 10 h. The membrane is then rinsed with water and stirred with fresh 20 wt HCl solution four times over 24 h. The resulting membrane is in the acid form. Residual HCl is removed by washing with water. The produced PEM has an equivalent of 550 g mol. The conductivity of the PEM at fully hydrated conditions is measured by AC impedance and the results are shown in .

S PFPE and styrene sulfonate ester are mixed in desired ratios. The mixture is heated above 40 C. and became a homogeneous yellow liquid. The liquid precursor is poured onto a preheated silicon wafer with shark skin patterns. A standard steel spacer is used to control the membrane thickness. The liquid precursor is chemically crosslinked by irradiation with UV light 365 nm for 10 min under nitrogen purge. The patterned membrane is released from the silicon wafer after curing. The resulting membrane is in the ester form transparent and slightly yellow.

To convert the sulfonate ester group into sulfonic acid the membrane is immersed in a mixture of 30 NaOH aqueous solution and methanol 5 6 by volume overnight and then refluxed for 10 h. The membrane is then rinsed with water and stirred with fresh 20 wt HCl solution four times over 24 h. The resulting membrane is in the acid form. Residual HCl is removed by washing with water.

Scanning electron micrographs of the PEMs with shark skin pattern before and after hydrolysis are shown in . The feature size of the shark skin pattern is 2 m in width and 8 m in height. By employing the shark skin patterns the surface area of the patterned PEMs is about five times bigger than corresponding flat PEMs. As indicated by the figure high fidelity patterns are easily obtained by soft litho approach. After hydrolysis the patterns are swelled due to sorption of water but the features are maintained.

A catalyst including platinum or platinum dispersed on carbon is deposited onto a three dimensional PEM with shark skin patterns by electro spray technique. show scanning electron micrographs of the PEMs with a deposited catalyst.

Platinum catalyst is deposited onto a three dimensional PEM with shark skin patterns by vapor deposition. shows a scanning electron micrograph of the PEMs with a deposited catalyst.

Example 9.1. The liquid precursor approach also provides a three dimensional membrane electrode assembly MEA and fuel cell stacks. display a schematic representation of a MEA structure based a three dimensional membrane and two dimensional electrodes with conformal or non conformal catalyst loading.

Example 9.2. The liquid precursor approach also provides a three dimensional 3 D membrane electrode assembly MEA and fuel cell stacks. displays a schematic representation of a MEA structure based a three dimensional membrane and three dimensional electrodes with conformal catalyst loading.

It will be understood that various details of the presently disclosed subject matter can be changed without departing from the scope of the presently disclosed subject matter. Furthermore the foregoing description is for the purpose of illustration only and not for the purpose of limitation.

