---

title: Activated peroxide solution with improved stability useful for the decontamination of chemical warfare agents
abstract: A chemical solution and process for the decontamination of chemical warfare agents. More particularly, a process for the decontamination of the vesicant HD by oxidation to its corresponding sulfoxide and nerve agents VX and GD by perhydrolysis to their non-toxic phosphonic acids using environmentally safe reactants, specifically a citrate/bicarbonate/molybdate peroxide solution.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07442677&OS=07442677&RS=07442677
owner: The United States of America as Represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07442677
owner_city: washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050824
---
This application claims priority from U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 604 382 filed Aug. 25 2004 herein incorporated by reference in its entirety.

The invention relates to decontamination of chemical warfare agents. More particularly the invention relates to the decontamination of mutated agents such as HD by oxidation as well as nerve agents such as VX and GD by perhydrolysis using environmentally safe activated hydrogen peroxide. The peroxide is activated at lower pH thus rendering it more stable than such prior decontaminating solutions.

Several types of toxic chemical compounds are known to be useful as chemical warfare agents. These include mustard agents or gases known as blister agents such as bis 2 chloroethyl sulfide also known as HD and nerve agents such as pinacolyl methylphosphonofluoridate which is also known as GD and O ethyl S 2 diisopropylamino ethyl methylphosphonothioate which is known as VX. HD is a colorless oily liquid that is highly insoluble in water and is a powerful vesicant which primarily affects the eyes and the lungs blisters the skin and is considered a carcinogen. HD is also cytotoxic to hematopoietic tissue and can be lethal at high doses. GD and VX are powerful nerve agents that attack the nerve cells and impair the functioning of the central nervous system.

In order to decontaminate the vesicant mustard gas to render it non toxic it is necessary to oxidize it to the corresponding sulfoxide. Nerve agents such as VX and GD are rendered non toxic by perhydrolysis to their non toxic phosphonic acids. For example the oxidation of HD to HD sulfoxide HDO renders the gas non toxic. One effective way to conduct this oxidation reaction is by reacting the agent with peroxide compounds.

Mildly basic peroxide is also known to effect the perhydrolysis of VX and GD to their non toxic phosphonic acids. Peroxides are desirable reactants for decontamination because they are non toxic and non corrosive as compared to hypochlorite based processes which are toxic and environmentally harmful. Additionally peroxides are preferable because of their extremely low freezing points. However while it is desirable to decontaminate chemical warfare agents by oxidation in a peroxide system presently known systems are inefficient decontaminates because they cause secondary oxidation of the corresponding sulfoxide to a sulfone a toxic vesicant. For example HD sulfoxide is a non vesicant while HD sulfone is a highly toxic vesicant material. Also known peroxide systems using hydrogen carbonate ions as an activator are inefficient because the oxidation reaction is very slow. However hydrogen carbonate activator is efficient at generating peroxy anion OOH for VX and GD perhydrolysis. The oxidation reaction of HD may be greatly enhanced using molybdate activator which selectively oxidizes HD to its sulfoxide while avoiding the formation of HD sulfone. Additionally molybdate does not interfere with the rapid simultaneous perhydrolysis of VX and GD. Thus bicarbonate and molybdate activators in combination with hydrogen peroxide provide for the fast and efficient decontamination of both nerve agents VX and GD and blister agent HD. However such solutions of hydrogen peroxide activated with bicarbonate and molybdate are not stable for extended periods of time as hydrogen peroxide is not stable at basic pH.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 245 957 to Wagner et al. incorporated by reference discloses a chemical warfare agent decontaminating composition of a mixture of a carbonate component a peroxide component and an alcohol component effective to degrade a chemical warfare agent.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 723 891 to Wagner et al. incorporated by reference discloses a process for the decontamination of chemical warfare agents such as a process for the decontamination of the vesicant HD by oxidation to its corresponding sulfoxide and nerve agents VX and GD by perhydrolysis to their non toxic phosphonic acids using environmentally safe reactants specifically a peroxomolybdate compound having a dominant tetraperoxomolybdate species and peroxy anion.

Applicants now have discovered a decontamination system that utilizes a citrate bicarbonate molybdate peroxide reactant system that affords increased stability over extended periods of time while maintaining excellent reactivity for nerve agents VX and GD and blister agent HD. It has a lower pKa than carbonic acid pK 10.329 pK 6.352 citric acid pK 9.2 pK 4.8 pK 3.1 to provide buffering at lower pH thus providing for increased hydrogen peroxide stability while still allowing for sufficient activation of hydrogen peroxide to peroxyanion OOH to react with nerve agents VX and GD. Citrate is also tribasic thus providing for a higher buffering capacity compared to dibasic carbonate. Applicants have further found that citrate does not interfere with the molybdate activated selective oxidation of blister agent HD to its non vesicant sulfoxide. Finally citrate is suitable for use in solvent surfactant solutions of hydrogen peroxide which provide for the ready dissolution of chemical warfare agents in particular water insoluble blister agent HD. Typical solvent surfactant solutions are disclosed by Wagner et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 245 957 and Wagner et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 723 891 each of which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Carbonate may replace or be employed in addition to bicarbonate.

The invention pertains to a process for decontaminating vesicant compounds and nerve agents used as chemical warfare agents. The chemical warfare agents are decontaminated by contacting the agent with a sufficient amount of a citrate bicarbonate molybdate solution in hydrogen peroxide solvents surfactants for a sufficient time and under conditions sufficient to produce a non toxic reaction product. As mentioned above carbonate may replace or be used in addition to bicarbonate. The present invention has a broad spectrum of reactivity toward a variety of chemical warfare agents while achieving a significant reduction in the toxic corrosive and environmentally harmful nature of other known decontaminants. The invention is useful for decontaminating vesicant mustard gases and for decontaminating G and V nerve agents having the following generic formulas G ROP O CH F wherein R is either 2 propyl GB pinacolyl GD or cyclohexyl GF V R OP O CH SR wherein R is ethyl and R is 2 diisopropylamino ethyl VX . More particularly the chemical warfare agents decontaminated herein include mustard agent bis 2 chloroethyl sulfide HD and nerve agents pinacolyl methylphosphonofluoridate GD and O ethyl S 2 diisopropylamino ethyl methylphosphonothioate VX .

The process includes forming a citrate bicarbonate molybdate solution in hydrogen peroxide and suitable aqueous and or organic solvents and surfactants. Although bicarbonate is described throughout this specification it is understood that the bicarbonate can be replaced by a carbonate even though carbonate increases pH and may decrease stability. The preferred medium is a microemulsion containing hydrogen peroxide such as described by U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 245 957 and 6 723 891 herein incorporated by reference in its entirety. Normal solutions for example those also disclosed by U.S. Pat. No. 6 245 957 are also suitable in the present invention. The peroxide component is preferably present in the microemulsion at from about 1 to about 25 weight percent more preferably from about 5 to about 20 weight percent and most preferably from about 8 to about 15 weight percent. When preferred ratios of ingredients i.e. activator salts hydrogen peroxide surfactant water and solvents are present the microemulsion appears as a clear homogeneous solution.

In general a microemulsion is a transparent or translucent thermodynamically stable isotropic dispersion of two immiscible liquids with microdomains of one or both liquids stabilized by an interfacial film of surface active molecules. It typically comprises water at least one organic solvent oil at least one surfactant and in most cases at least one co solvent. The surfactant may be anionic cationic non ionic amphoteric or zwitterionic. The water in oil microemulsions are roughly spherical water microdroplets coated by an interfacial film of a surfactant e.g. sodium dodecyl sulfate SDS and a co solvent e.g. butanol BuOH and dispersed in a continuous phase of oil e.g. hexane. Other suitable surfactants non exclusively include cetyl trimethylammonium chloride CTAC and polyoxyethylene ethers such as polyoxyethylene 10 isooctylphenyl ether TRITON X 100 . Of these polyoxyethylene ethers are preferred. Other suitable co solvents non exclusively include 2 propanol 2 methyl 1 propanol and propylene carbonate. Of these propylene carbonate is preferred. The microemulsion may also further include at least one carbonate and or bicarbonate activator as described above. The hydrogen peroxide is generally added in batches to the medium. It generates O but also some water as a side product derived both from the disproportionation and from the water of dilution of hydrogen peroxide.

The microemulsion should ideally be designed to meet three requirements no phase separation during storage and during the oxidation reaction high solubility of the reactants e.g. peroxide and molybdate components and simple recovery of the oxidized product surfactant and catalyst molybdate compound at the end of the reaction. The water surfactant medium may include any of the surfactants described above and may further include one or more co solvents from the list described above.

In the preferred embodiment of the invention the microemulsion exhibits stability at a temperature of from about 49 C. to about 25 C. more preferably from about 35 C. to about 10 C. and most preferably from about 25 C. to about 0 C. Additionally the microemulsion is preferably maintained at a pH of from about 7 to about 12 more preferably from about 7.5 to about 11 and most preferably from about 8 to about 9.

In use the compound mixture or emulsion may be applied in the form of a spray a vapor a liquid a solid and or other physical forms of mixtures that incorporate the peroxide and molybdate components of the decontaminant. Preferably the compound is present as a liquid or as a spray. For the compound to be applied in a liquid form it is necessary to disperse the compound in a suitable medium. In one preferred embodiment of the invention the compound is dispersed in a water oil microemulsion. In this embodiment the oil preferably comprises non toxic propylene carbonate.

The citrate component of the invention may be comprised of an alkali metal citrate salt. The alkali metal preferably comprises a metal selected from the group consisting of Li Na K Rb Cs Fr. More preferably the alkali metal comprises either lithium Li sodium Na or potassium K . Most preferably the citrate component comprises a citrate potassium salt particularly CHKO. The citrate component is preferably present in the microemulsion at a concentration of from about 0.001 M to about 2.0 M more preferably from about 0.01 M to about 1.0 M and most preferably from about 0.1 M to about 0.8 M.

The reaction of the citrate component and the peroxide component may be further activated with carbonate bicarbonate and or molybdate activators. Carbonate activators are described by U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 245 957 and 6 723 891. Molybdate activators are described by U.S. Pat. No. 6 723 891. Such activators are preferably added to the solution and are incorporated into the emulsion.

The carbonate bicarbonate activators work to enhance the perhydrolysis of nerve agents VX and GD to their corresponding phosphonic acids. The molybdate activator serves to enhance the oxidation of blister agent HD selectively to the non vesicant sulfoxide. The carbonate and or bicarbonate activator preferably is present in the microemulsion in an amount of from about 0.01 M to about 2.0 M more preferably from about 0.1 M to about 1.0 M and most preferably from about 0.2 M to about 0.8 M. The molybdate activator preferably is present in the microemulsion in an amount of from about 0.0001 M to about 0.1 M more preferably from about 0.001 M to about 0.05 M and most preferably from about 0.005 M to about 0.02 M. Preferably the amount of molybdate is about 0.01 M to 0.02 M.

The peroxide component may be any suitable source of peroxide for example those disclosed by U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 245 957 and 6 723 891.

In use the citrate bicarbonate molybdate hydrogen peroxide microemulsion may be applied in the form of a spray a vapor a liquid a solid and or other physical forms of mixtures that incorporate the peroxide and citrate bicarbonate molybdate components of the decontaminant. Preferably the microemulsion is present as a liquid or as a spray. For the citrate bicarbonate molybdate activators to be applied in a liquid form it is necessary to disperse the compound in a suitable medium. In one preferred embodiment of the invention the citrate bicarbonate molybdate activators are dispersed in a microemulsion. An example of a suitable microemulsion is described by U.S. Pat. No. 6 723 891.

Once the citrate bicarbonate molybdate activators are blended with hydrogen peroxide in a suitable medium the resulting solution or solution incorporated into a microemulsion is contacted with at least one chemical warfare agent having a formula described above. The contact may be accomplished by immersing a chemical warfare agent covered article into the solution microemulsion spraying the solution microemulsion onto an article or other means for reacting the solution microemulsion with the chemical warfare agent. The agent is contacted with the solution microemulsion for a time and under conditions sufficient to neutralize the agent into non toxic product s . For example when the blister agent mustard gas HD bis 2 chloroethyl sulfide is contacted with the solution microemulsion of the invention it is oxidized to its corresponding sulfoxide.

Potassium citrate monohydrate KHCO KMoO propylene glycol propylene carbonate TRITON X 100 and 35 by weight aqueous HOwere all obtained from commercial sources. Microemulsions MEs were mixed by first dissolving the solid ingredients e.g. potassium citrate monohydrate KHCOand KMoO in water. To this a mixture of propylene glycol TRITON X 100 and propylene carbonate was added. Finally 35 HOwas added. The vessel holding the components was capped and vigorously shaken to mix. The decontamination solution thus formed was used to decontaminate VX HD and GD in stirred reactors using a 50 mL amount of decontaminant and a 1 mL challenge of agent. The rates of neutralization for HD VX and GD agents are shown in Table 1 for a decontaminating solution containing 10 vol propylene carbonate 20 vol propylene glycol 10 vol TRITON X 100 30 vol hydrogen peroxide 35 aqueous solution used and 30 vol of an aqueous solution of potassium citrate monohydrate potassium bicarbonate and potassium molybdate such that the final concentrations of these activators in the decontaminating solution were 0.25 M 0.5 M and 0.02 M respectively. The amount of agent HD VX AND GD initially present to decontaminant is 1 50 or 2 vol. .

Three stirred reactors e.g. R1 R2 and R3 run in triplicate in room temperature. The percentage of the amount of original agent remaining over time is reported.

As can be clearly seen by the data in Table 1 all three agents including blister agent HD and both nerve agents VX and GD are rapidly neutralized at room temperature.

While the present invention as been particularly shown and described with reference to preferred embodiments it will be readily appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art that various changes and medications may be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. It is intended that the claims be interpreted to cover the disclosed embodiment those alternatives which have been discussed above and all equivalents thereto.

