---

title: Secure telephony service appliance
abstract: Secure telephony service appliances are created from computing devices. The computing devices have restricted access to their hardware and software. The computing devices perform VOP functions to other devices such as phones, modems, and adapters. Security vulnerabilities are reduced by implementing the computing devices as secure appliances for IP telephony.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08132001&OS=08132001&RS=08132001
owner: Sprint Communications Company L.P.
number: 08132001
owner_city: Overland Park
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051019
---
Internet protocol IP telephony is a process of commoditization and collapsing of the traditional data and voice networks. Commoditization occurs whereby proprietary systems that traditionally performed the processing and transmission of voice traffic are being replaced with computing devices that are nodes in an IP network. The computing devices use application programming interfaces APIs to perform the processing and transmission of voice traffic. Collapsing occurs whereby the proprietary hardware and software that once resided on proprietary network infrastructures are now being replaced by standard implementations which eliminates the need for separate networks to carry both data and voice traffic. It also eliminates the requirement for separate software development infrastructures for the environments. This process is known as convergence where the processing and transmission of voice and data and the software development process of both merge into one.

While convergence may mean a significant cost savings it also opens a whole new area for security vulnerability not experienced before in the voice environment. Devices that previously had a limited amount of intelligence such as traditional analog telephones are now being replaced by voice over packet VOP hardware phones or computing devices running VOP phone software. The VOP hardware phones and the computing devices running VOP phone software are computing devices that support many of the same standard IP services that traditional computing devices support. Along with this increased functionality comes increased security vulnerabilities.

Voice over packet VOP is a process for sending voice or video signals over the Internet or other communications networks such as intranets. If the telephone signal is in analog form voice or fax the signal is first converted to a digital form. Packet routing information is then added to the digital voice signal so the voice signal can be routed through the Internet or other data networks. VOP may include voice over internet protocol VoIP voice over asynchronous transfer mode ATM voice over frame relay and VoIP over a wireless local area network LAN . It may also include other protocols where voice may be transported over the protocol.

In addition to the increased security risks at the phone level there are additional security risks for the exchanges that operate with the phones since they are also being replaced by computing devices running software that emulates exchange functionality. The trend is a migration towards computing devices or devices that may interact with other devices in a computing environment or network.

With this migration of functionality to commodity equipment or common devices the security risks become more acute as software developers and others have access to voice elements in IP telephony for malicious purposes. Whereas software developers and others did not have this type of access to voice elements with a public switched telephone network PSTN and voice and data was separate with convergence both voice and data are exposed to security risks from software developers and others who want to do malicious harm.

In a security sensitive environment where confidentiality integrity and non repudiation of data is important to an organization standard services such as virtual private network VPN and encryption may be employed. However due to the nature of VOP being both real time and time sensitive the standard services may not be able to be employed in the traditional manner. A measure of research may have to be performed in order to provide some modifications to these services in order for them to work properly.

In addition to the issues discussed above since the voice infrastructure functionality is being emulated from start to finish by computing devices in software standard IP support servers such as domain name system DNS dynamic host configuration protocol DHCP trivial file transfer protocol TFTP simple network time protocol SNTP web services etc. are being used in IP telephony to process voice calls but are also encountering security risks. The security risks of these IP support servers are well known in the data transmission environment and with the advent of convergence all of these security risks will have to be mitigated for the VOP environment. As computing devices the IP support servers are susceptible to any number of malicious attacks and this could greatly impact a network operating IP telephony.

For the reasons discussed above it is important to examine the elements of an IP telephony environment to determine the security risks for each element. The IP telephony environment is dependent on IP network services. And while voice and data may coexist in the same network they are not the same and some of the data protection techniques used in the past may not work now. Voice has a significant amount of exposure to security risks due to the commoditization of computing devices to perform many of the voice processing functions. It also has a significant amount of exposure to security risks from being connected to an open network like the Internet. With the public switched telephone network PSTN the problems encountered now did not exist or existed minimally. The PSTN was and still is a proprietary or limited access network.

A solution is needed that may evaluate the problems discussed above and make the computing devices more secure for IP telephony. The computing devices would become secure appliances in that they would perform their functions with a restricted and controlled access to their hardware and software. The idea is to isolate these computing devices associated with voice processing to reduce or mitigate security risks.

This disclosure describes among other things systems and a computer readable medium for implementing a secure appliance for IP telephony.

In accordance with the present invention a computer system having a processor and a memory to execute a method for implementing a secure appliance for IP telephony is provided that includes providing an operating system with a restricted access. The operating system is embedded in the processor. A set of services is implemented in the appliance in an embedded platform. A set of security mitigation features is applied to the set of services. A modification in the appliance is performed to the operating system or the set of services through secure interfaces. The set of services is provided to a set of registered devices.

In another aspect computer readable media having computer readable instructions embodied thereon for causing a computing device to perform a method for implementing a secure appliance for IP telephony is provided that includes providing an operating system with a restricted access. The operating system is embedded in a processor. A set of services is implemented in the appliance in an embedded platform. A set of security mitigation features is applied to the set of services. A modification in the appliance is performed to the operating system or the set of services through secure interfaces. The set of services is provided to a set of registered devices.

In yet another aspect a system for implementing a secure appliance for IP telephony is provided that includes an appliance operating in a packet network associated with IP telephony. The appliance provides an operating system with a restricted access. The operating system is embedded in a processor. The appliance implements a set of services in an embedded platform in the appliance. A set of security mitigation features is applied to the set of services. The appliance receives a modification to the operating system or the set of services through secure interfaces. The appliance provides the set of services to a set of registered devices.

In yet another aspect a system for implementing a secure network for IP telephony services is provided that includes computing devices operating in a packet network associated with a voice over packet VOP call. The computing devices operate to communicate with each other or to communicate with a set of registered devices. The computing devices provide an operating system with a restricted access. The operating system is embedded in a processor. The computing devices implement a set of services in an embedded platform. A set of security mitigation features is applied to the set of services. The computing devices receive a modification to the operating system or the set of services through secure interfaces. The computing devices provide the set of services to the set of registered devices.

The present invention will be better understood from the detailed description provided below and from the accompanying drawings of various embodiments of the invention which describe for example systems and a computer readable medium for providing secure internet protocol IP telephony service appliances. The detailed description and drawings however should not be read to limit the invention to the specific embodiments. Rather these specifics are provided for explanatory purposes that help the invention to be better understood.

Specific hardware devices programming languages components processes and numerous details including operating environments and the like are set forth to provide a thorough understanding of the present invention. In other instances structures devices and processes are shown in block diagram form rather than in detail to avoid obscuring the present invention. But an ordinary skilled artisan would understand that the present invention may be practiced without these specific details. Computer systems servers work stations and other machines may be connected to one another across a communication medium including for example a network or networks.

The present invention may be embodied as among other things a method system computer program product or combinations thereof. Accordingly the present invention may take the form of a hardware embodiment a software embodiment or an embodiment combining software and hardware. In one embodiment the present invention takes the form of a computer program product that includes computer useable instructions embodied on one or more computer readable media.

Computer readable media include both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media and contemplate media readable by a machine database or various other network devices.

Computer storage media or machine readable media include media implemented in any method or technology for storing information. Examples of stored information include computer useable instructions data structures program modules and other data representations. Computer storage media include but are not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile discs DVD holographic media or other optical disc storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage and other magnetic storage devices. These memory components can store data momentarily temporarily or permanently.

To help explain the invention without obscuring its functionality an embodiment will now be referenced in connection with a computing network. Although the present invention can be employed in connection with a computing network environment it should not be construed as limited to the exemplary applications provided here for illustrative purposes.

A secure environment is desired for IP telephony service although IP telephony operates in conjunction with or as part of the Internet. An assessment may be performed to provide an idea of the components involved to create the desired secure environment. Various components provide a variety of services to make IP telephony service work. Some of those components may be combined into several platforms or they may operate with their individual functions. Regardless of their configuration the components are susceptible to security vulnerabilities which may be assessed by doing the following Identifying network components to be assessed determining an operating environment for each component like the operating system or firmware insuring component is in compliance with industry or organizational standards for best practices in security mitigation and tracking the applications services operating on the components to determine their security risks to the network.

An assessment and an operation of the above mentioned components may be combined into one scheme to implement an embodiment of the present invention. Also the assessment may be decoupled from the operation of the components. In either case embodiments of the present invention may be implemented as shall be described below.

In a block diagram of an operating network is shown with various components. The block diagram may be divided into three groups. In a first group an IP telephony network a DNS a SNTP a DHCP a TFTP a web services an IP PBX a media gateway a VOP phone and a softphone are shown operating together. In a second group a switch a PSTN and an analog phone are shown operating together with a connection between switch and media gateway . In a third group a router VOP phone an Internet an adapter and analog phone are shown operating together with a connection between router and IP telephony network .

A majority of the detailed discussion of shall involve the first group. Additional discussion may include the second and third groups with regards to their relationship to the first group. The second and third groups are shown to provide an expansive view of an exemplary operating network.

In various computing devices operate to provide IP telephony. Those computing devices may be implemented as secure appliances to operate in IP telephony network to create a secure environment. Secure appliances in this context are computing devices that restrict or control access to their hardware and software. The computing devices may have their operating system restricted in such a way as to reduce security vulnerabilities. The operating system may be embedded into the hardware of the computing device to secure it from vulnerabilities such as computer viruses. The operating system may be embedded in the computing device s electrically erasable programmable read only memory EEPROM .

In addition to the attributes above the computing devices may have secure interfaces to control the flow of information to and from the computing devices. For example a computing device may need an update to the computing software from time to time. In order to update the computing software an administrator may access the computing device over a secure channel and perform the update or modification to the computing device. Because the computing device is functioning as a secure appliance the administrator may use security measures to access the computing device as well as implement special procedures to perform the update or modification. As an example encryption techniques may be used so that security vulnerabilities may be reduced. The secure interface may be restricted to an offline procedure with a direct connection to the computing device. Or the connection may be accomplished over the Internet using various encryption techniques with other security measures. In addition to the discussion above a similar method may be used to update or modify the applications operating on the computing device. The applications operate as a set of services that may be updated or modified on a periodic basis.

As a security appliance the physical access to the computing device may be restricted or not exist except for entry points used by the secure interface. The computing device may be implemented without a hard drive external storage CDROM or floppy disk. The idea is to provide the computing device as a self contained environment with reduced physical access to reduce a possibility of tampering with the computing device. If the computing device does not contain a hard drive external storage CDROM floppy disk or other physical device attached to it then a reduction in security vulnerability from a physical standpoint may be achieved. For example computing software may not be manipulated if there is no hard drive and also cannot be loaded into the computing device s memory if there is no hard drive. However the computing software may be embedded into the computing device s EEPROM which may be accessed in a controlled manner by the administrator. Access to the computing software is restricted and may not be accessed as in the case of most computing devices.

The computing device may implement security mitigation features on a periodic basis to prevent or remove security vulnerabilities such as computer viruses. One of those features may suggest that the administrator implement an organization s security best practice. Another may suggest that the administrator implement security policies based on an industry standard for the computing device. In either case the security best practice or security policies may be implemented as an embodiment of the present invention to mitigate security vulnerabilities.

When operating as security appliances the computing devices may perform various functions. The functions may vary across the computing devices or different functions may be found operating in one computing device. The functions relate to providing IP telephony and may include DNS functions SNTP functions DHCP functions TFTP functions web services functions media gateway functions or IP PBX functions. These functions may include other functions not listed here but capable of operating in the computing devices. An implementer may provide the functions or a subset of them as desired in implementing embodiments of the present invention.

In the secure appliance operating with DNS functions is shown as DNS . The secure appliance operating with SNTP functions is shown as SNTP . The secure appliance operating with DHCP functions is shown as DHCP . The secure appliance operating with TFTP functions is shown as TFTP . The secure appliance operating with web services functions is shown as web services . The secure appliance operating as an IP PBX is IP PBX . The secure appliance operating as a media gateway is media gateway .

As one of ordinary skill art may see if the computing devices are secure a concern may shift to other devices operating in IP telephony network such as phones. An embodiment of the present invention may be implemented such that VOP phone and softphone may operate through a registry. The registry may contain a list of registered devices that may interact together. For example the administrator may create in a secure environment a list of registered devices including the phones terminal adapters and the computing devices. The list may be used to identify the devices that may communicate together in a restricted environment. For example if a VOP phone is added to IP telephony network without registering the VOP phone the computing devices may not recognize the VOP phone to provide it with service. Therefore DNS may not provide service to the phone. Likewise if a new computing device is added to IP telephony network without registering the registered devices may not recognize the new computing device. One way to register a new device for IP telephony network may be to have the list pushed or downloaded to the existing computing devices through a set of updates or modifications. The updates or modifications may occur manually or automatically depending on the implementation of the embodiment of the present invention.

By securing the devices that operate in IP telephony network security vulnerabilities may be reduced. However connections may be maintained with other networks through such devices as switch and router . Switch and router represent connections to the second and third groups discussed above. A phone call over a packet network may need to terminate in PSTN . It is assumed that if IP telephony is secure switch and PSTN may be secure by virtue of their proprietary nature. For a call terminating in Internet like adapter and analog phone it is assumed that by implementing embodiments of the present invention these devices may become secure by communicating with secure appliances and communicating only with the registered devices. For example VOP phone connected to Internet may be vulnerable to malicious activities that may occur in the packet network including susceptibility to computer viruses. However VOP phone may have a reduced vulnerability in that it communicates with secure appliances and only to those secure appliances that are registered devices as created by the administrator for the IP telephony network.

Turning now to a block diagram of various attributes of a security appliance are shown in a computing device . Computing device may include an operating system a set of services a set of security mitigation features a secure interface and a restricted access . By implementing the attributes listed above or a subset of them computing device may become a secure appliance. As discussed in operating system may operate on computing device in a restricted environment. In it was shown in an example that operating system may be embedded into the EEPROM rather than stored on a hard disk or external storage. The set of services may be embedded into the EEPROM as well. Services may include the list of functions discussed above for DNS SNTP DHCP TFTP web services IP PBX and media gateway provided to the registered devices such as VOP phone adapter and modems. Security mitigation features include the security best practices or security policies that may be implemented on computing device . Secure interface may be a secure or encrypted connection to allow for a transfer of information to and from computing device . Secure interface may be controlled by the administrator or other authorized personnel. Restricted access relates to the physical attributes of the secure appliance. Restricted access illustrates that computing device has no hard drive no external storage no CDROM and no floppy disk to reduce security vulnerabilities. Restricted access may relate to additional restrictions or a subset of the ones listed above in implementing other embodiments of the present invention.

In a process for implementing a secure appliance is shown in a method . Method illustrates a secure appliance created from a computing device such as computing device . The computing device may include computers servers workstation or other devices capable of being connected to Internet . Method takes the computing device in a step and provides an operating system operating system with a restricted access in a step . The operating system may come from a commercial vendor like the brands of the WINDOWS Operating System of the Microsoft Corporation of Redmond Wash. and the MACINTOSH OPERATING SYSTEM and the MACINTOSH OPERATING SYSTEM X of the Apple Corporation of Cupertino Calif. The operating systems may be specially tailored to execute on computing device . In addition the operating system may be embedded in the hardware of computing device in the EEPROM as discussed in .

In a step computer software applications in the form of services are implemented in computing device . As discussed above the services correspond to various functions that occur when providing IP telephony in the packet network and may vary among the different computing devices operating in IP telephony network . In a step security mitigation features are applied to the services as discussed in . Computer software updates or modifications to the operating system or the services may occur in a step . As discussed above in the updates or modifications may occur over a secure connection. In addition the updates or modifications may include information pertaining to the list of registered devices capable of communicating in IP telephony network . As long as the registered devices are identified computing device may provide the services to the registered devices as shown in a step . The services correspond to the list of functions discussed in .

In it is possible to have several computing devices operating in IP telephony network that may become secure appliances. The computing devices may have different functions to provide to the registered devices. The computing devices may implement variations of the attributes discussed in and in becoming secure appliances. illustrates a process for implementing secure appliances in a packet network in a method . Method may have several computing devices operating in the packet network associated with a VOP call in a step . The computing devices may be the same as computing device or a variation thereof. The computing devices communicate with each other and to the registered devices in a step to provide IP telephony service. As discussed above the registered devices may be VOP phone adapter or a modem. Adapter may include analog terminal adapters to allow connections to analog phones such as analog phone in .

In a step method is executed for the computing devices. In a step the computing devices provide services to the registered phones adapters and modems. The services include TFTP DNS DHCP SNTP web services media gateways and IP PBXs. As discussed above embodiments of the present invention may be implemented with the computing devices performing all of the service or a subset thereof. Furthermore different computing devices may perform different services and the different computing devices may communicate with each other.

The prior discussion is only for illustrative purposes to convey exemplary embodiments. The steps discussed in may be executed without regards to order. Some steps may be omitted and some steps may be executed at a different time than shown. For example step may be executed before step . Step may be executed before step . The point here is to convey that the figures are merely exemplary for the embodiments of the present invention and that other embodiments may be implemented for the present invention.

As shown in the above scenarios the present invention may be implemented in various ways. From the foregoing it will be appreciated that although specific embodiments of the invention have been described herein for purposes of illustration various modifications may be made without deviating from the spirit and scope of the invention. Accordingly the invention is not limited except as by the appended claims.

