---

title: Capacitively coupled resonator drive
abstract: An apparatus and method for a micro-machined device having a movable mass rotatably suspended from a frame by one or more hinges for rotation relative thereto frame. A DETF resonator is suspended between the frame and reaction mass, and a capacitor is provided between the frame and movable mass for transmitting a drive signal to the DETF resonator.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07467553&OS=07467553&RS=07467553
owner: Honeywell International Inc.
number: 07467553
owner_city: Morristown
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051222
---
The invention described herein was made in the performance of work under U.S. Government Contract No. F29601 03 C 0124 awarded by the Air Force Research Laboratories AFRL .

The present invention relates to micro machined sensor and actuator devices and methods and in particular to micro machined sensor and actuator devices having tuning fork resonators.

Micro machined sensor and actuator devices having tuning fork resonators are generally well known. See for example which illustrates a sensor device of the type taught by U.S. Pat. No. 6 145 380 SM MAUIEAMP which is incorporated herein by reference and is further co owned by the assignee of the present application. U.S. Pat. No. 6 145 380 teaches an integrated sensor package having an acceleration sensor formed for example as a double ended tuning fork DETF resonator based acceleration sensor. A typical DETF resonator based acceleration sensing mechanism includes a frame formed of a suitable substrate material for example silicon or quartz. A reaction mass or proof mass is rotatably suspended from frame by one or more hinges for rotation about hinge axis . One or more force sensing DETF resonator is suspended between frame and reaction mass . As reaction mass rotates relative to frame in response to a force experienced along input axis DETF resonator experiences either a compressive or tensile force along its longitudinal axis . In other words DETF resonator is either compressed or stretched between frame and reaction mass when reaction mass is displaced or rotated away from a null position relative to frame . The natural frequency of DETF resonator changes when it is compressed or stretched the natural frequency decreases below a nominal resonance frequency when DETF resonator is compressed and increases above a nominal resonance frequency when DETF resonator is stretched. The resulting change in frequency is proportional to the force or acceleration applied to reaction mass . This push pull phenomenon is extensively described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 005 413 which is incorporated herein by reference.

In a typical state of the art micro machined sensor and actuator devices such as acceleration sensor DETF resonator is typically suspended by mounting tabs between frame and reaction mass across hinge . Tines are adapted to vibrate or oscillate at their respective natural frequencies in response to an electronic drive signal applied by a drive circuit.

In an alternate configuration not shown DETF resonator may be manufactured having four tines. In a four tine resonator the sensing circuit may have two pair of driven and sensed tines each pair having an inner tine and an outer tine as described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 367 217 and 5 331 242 both incorporated herein by reference.

Alternatively in an electrostatic or capacitive drive vibratory system as illustrated in . As described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 145 380 tine oscillation may be driven by inducing alternating or oscillating electrostatic forces between electrically conductive surfaces on tines and adjacent conductors mounted on frame adjacent to and coextensive with conductive surfaces on tines . Force transducers based upon electrostatically driven DETF resonators are known in the art and are disclosed by example and without limitation in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 901 586 5 456 111 and 6 745 627 all commonly assigned to the assignee of the present application and all incorporated herein by reference. Other examples of micro machined silicon acceleration sensors which may be used with the present invention are described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 766 768 and 5 241 861 both commonly assigned to the assignee of the present application and both incorporated herein by reference.

However in configurations having DETF resonator suspended between frame and reaction mass across hinge with both ends of the DETF resonator being driven damping loads developed in the physical connection may generate errors in resonator output.

Therefore devices and methods for overcoming these and other limitations of typical state of the art micro machined sensor and actuator devices such as typical state of the art MEMS accelerometer devices are desirable.

The present invention overcomes limitations of the prior art by providing an apparatus and method for a micro machined device formed of a frame and pendulous mass formed of a substrate having first and second opposing substantially parallel spaced apart planar surfaces. The pendulous mass is formed substantially coplanar with and spaced away from the frame by a gap. A hinge is coupled between the frame and pendulous mass and rotationally suspends the pendulous mass for relative rotational motion about a hinge axis in response to a force experienced along an input axis.

A DETF resonator is suspended between the frame and the reaction mass. A capacitor is arranged between the frame and pendulous mass. An electronic drive circuit is coupled to the capacitor and is structured to apply an alternating current electronic drive signal to the capacitor via an electrically conductive path between the capacitor and the DETF resonator.

According to one aspect of the invention the capacitor includes a body mounted on the frame and spanning the gap between the frame and pendulous mass. Furthermore a pair of spaced apart capacitor plates are formed between the body and pendulous mass.

According to another aspect of the invention the capacitor is further positioned between the first and second spaced apart planar surfaces of the substrate of which the frame and pendulous mass are formed.

According to yet other aspects of the invention a method is provided for forming an apparatus of the invention.

The Figures illustrate the method and apparatus of the present invention for micro machined sensor and actuator devices having tuning fork resonators.

Accordingly as pendulous reaction mass rotates relative to frame in response to a force experienced along input axis DETF resonator experiences either a compressive or tensile force along its longitudinal axis . DETF resonator is either compressed or stretched when reaction mass is displaced or rotated away from a null position relative to frame . The natural frequency of DETF resonator changes when it is compressed or stretched the natural frequency decreases below a nominal resonance frequency when DETF resonator is compressed and increases above a nominal resonance frequency when DETF resonator is stretched. The resulting change in frequency is proportional to the force or acceleration applied to reaction mass .

A capacitor is coupled across a gap between frame and reaction mass . Capacitor capacitively couples an alternating current AC electronic drive signal applied by a drive circuit . Capacitor thereby provides electrical coupling of the drive signal to DETF resonator without physical contact that could introduce errors. By example and without limitation capacitor includes two spaced apart capacitor plates mounted on movable mass and capacitor body respectively with capacitor body spanning gap . Capacitor body is electrically coupled to an electrically conductive path formed on frame and connected to drive circuit . Capacitor is thereby coupled for receiving AC electrical drive signals from drive circuit and transmitting the drive signals to capacitor plate . Capacitor transmits the drive signals across capacitor gap between the two spaced apart capacitor plates whereby the drive signals are received at reaction mass . Thereafter the drive signals are carried over an electrically conductive path to DETF resonator .

According to one embodiment of the invention frame and reaction mass are optionally formed of semiconductor silicon material substrate and having first and second opposing substantially parallel spaced apart planar surfaces . Frame and reaction mass are integrally formed in substrate using conventional and well known fabrication techniques with reaction mass substantially coplanar with and spaced away from frame . Hinges are integrally formed between frame and reaction mass positioned substantially intermediate between spaced apart surfaces .

According to one embodiment of the invention capacitor is optionally mounted on respective side surfaces of frame and reaction mass between opposing surfaces in a plane substantially perpendicular to both hinge axis and input axis . Capacitor is spaced away from the hinge axis along the input axis toward either of spaced apart surfaces so that capacitor operates with a substantial moment arm relative to the neutral hinge axis .

By example and without limitation DETF resonator is formed as a two tine vibrating beam DETF resonator having two substantially parallel and spaced apart tines attached between opposite mounting tabs .

Opposite mounting tabs of DETF resonator are mounted on frame and reaction mass respectively. For example one mounting tab is bonded or otherwise physically coupled to frame and opposite mounting tab is bonded or otherwise physically coupled to reaction mass . Tines are adapted to vibrate or oscillate at their respective natural frequencies in response to an electronic drive signal applied by drive circuit . When DETF resonator is of a type that resonates in response to an induced oscillation capacitor provides electrical coupling of the drive signal to DETF resonator without physical contact that could introduce errors.

In an alternate configuration not shown DETF resonator may be manufactured having four tines. In a four tine DETF resonator the sensing circuit may have two pair of driven and sensed tines each pair having an inner tine and an outer tine as described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 367 217 and 5 331 242 both incorporated herein by reference.

DETF resonator may be constructed using methods described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 948 981 which is assigned to the assignee of the present patent application and incorporated herein by reference. Optionally DETF resonator may be constructed using any of the designs known to those of skill in the art. For example classical formulae for designing DETFs are described in U.S. Pat. No. 4 372 173 and finite element analysis techniques for designing DETFs are described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 668 329 both incorporated herein by reference.

DETF resonator is optionally formed of such conventional resonator materials as silicon quartz and zirconia with surface electrodes formed of metal. The electrode metal may be gold which is a highly stable and electrically conductive noble metal. However the electrode metal is optionally selected from a group of materials that exhibit desired conductivity and adhesion properties. For example the electrode metal is one selected from the group consisting of aluminum chrome molybdenum and other equivalent materials that exhibit the desired properties. Frame reaction mass and hinges are integrally formed of a material matching DETF resonator which avoids errors due to thermal mismatch.

According to another alternative frame reaction mass and hinges are optionally integrally formed of monolithic silicon with DETF resonator formed in an epitaxial layer formed on either surface shown or of substrate and separated therefrom by a thin insulation layer such as silicon dioxide or silicon nitrate.

While the preferred embodiment of the invention has been illustrated and described it will be appreciated that various changes can be made therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

