---

title: Method and apparatus for providing quality of service level in broadband communications systems
abstract: An access terminal having user applications identified by product keys used to determine a QoS level to be granted to invoked user applications for the establishment of connections by an access network. The access terminal invokes the user applications, identifies the product key of the invoked user applications and determines a quality of service (QoS) level to which the invoked user applications are to be granted. The user applications may be formed into preferred and non-preferred categories with preferred user applications generally having a higher QoS than the non-preferred user applications. Access network connections using a high QoS are established from the preferred user applications to preferred servers of the access network. Connections from the non-preferred user applications are extended, using a lower QoS, by the access network to servers of a public data network.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07652990&OS=07652990&RS=07652990
owner: Alcatel-Lucent USA Inc.
number: 07652990
owner_city: Murray Hill
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051129
---
This invention relates to a method and apparatus for determining the quality of service QoS to be granted to user applications for the establishment of connections by a packet based access network of a communication system. The invention further relates to the provision of an access terminal that determines the QoS level to be granted to a user application for the establishment of an access network connection. The access terminal then generates signals requesting the establishment of an access network connection using the determined level of QoS.

It is known to equip communications system networks including packet based access networks with QoS functionality. An access network is a private network that provides services to customers of the access network. The access network may also act as a gateway to a public network such as the Internet. QoS enables an access network to offer priority service for one or more traffic flows while not causing traffic flows of a lower priority to fail. QoS enables an access network provider to prioritize network traffic by offering high priority service to some users while offering a lesser level of service to other users. A high QoS level may be granted to the traffic of a particular user based on the user s willingness to pay an increased amount for the high QoS level. A lower QoS level may be granted to the traffic of a different user whose communication needs are less demanding and who is willing to accept a lower QoS level in return for a corresponding reduction in costs for traffic deemed by the user to be less urgent.

QoS is advantageous for an access network provider since it permits better control over network resources it enables the access network provider to offer tailored services to users and it permits the harmonious coexistence of critical traffic and non critical traffic. A common expedient used in controlling access network traffic is to drop packets when necessary of traffic having a low QoS level. It is also known for an access network provider to control the QoS level of network traffic by managing the bandwidth jitter latency and loss characteristics of the access network.

It is known in the prior art to use an access network in a determination of the QoS level to be granted to user applications. The use of the access network for this function is a problem since it requires the access network and an access terminal and to exchange signals to determine the appropriate QoS level. This increases the complexity of the access network.

It is common practice for user applications of an access terminal to be subdivided into functional groups that are based upon characteristics common to the user applications defining a category. An example of such characteristics may be a functional group of user applications that provide VoIP service. The user applications of other functional groups may provide other types of service on a per category basis such as video data voice etc.

It is a problem that prior art QoS systems require that the user applications within a functional group be granted the same QoS level. This is disadvantageous to both the owner of the access terminal and the network provider since it limits flexibility in granting different QoS levels to each user application in the same category. The requirement that the same QoS level be granted to all user applications of a functional group is a problem since it ignores meaningful functional characteristics and requirements that can distinguish the user applications within a functional group. For example although all user applications of a functional group may be dedicated to providing VoIP service the operational requirements of the user applications of such a functional group may vary depending upon significant differences in the type of traffic local domestic foreign etc. served by each user application. This is a problem since it requires the same QoS level for all user applications of the same functional group. This requirement is undesirable since it is often advantageous for the user applications of a functional group to have the flexibility of being given different levels of QoS.

In view of the above it can be seen that it would be desirable to provide access terminal users and access network providers with flexibility in determining the appropriate QoS levels to be granted to user applications of the same functional group. This flexibility is not available in prior art QoS systems.

The above and other problems are solved by the present invention in accordance with which an access terminal may grant different QoS levels to user applications in the same functional group. The QoS levels may be granted on a per user application basis rather than on a per group basis wherein all user applications of a functional group are granted the same QoS level. The grant authority of QoS levels is provided by the access terminal. The removal of the QoS level determination per use flow from the access network reduces its cost and complexity. Instead the access terminal is granted authority to determine the QoS levels by the access network upon initialization and subsequently controls the user applications on a per flow basis. The ability to grant different levels of QoS to the different user applications of the same functional group is advantageous to the network provider. This permits the network provider to steer network traffic from the different user applications of a group to different servers based on the operational needs of the user of the access terminal. For example with this increased flexibility in granting QoS levels the access network provider can steer network traffic from the same user application group to different servers that provide the same service such as VoIP Video Push To Talk but by different service providers. It is possible that the access network provider may prefer one such service VOIP Video and Push to Talk over another based upon a perceived difference in quality. In this case the access network provider may assign different levels of QoS to the user applications of the same group. The user application requesting a connection to the preferred service source could be assigned to a higher level of QoS by the network provider. The user application requesting a connection to the less preferred service source could be assigned a lower level of QoS. Both service sources could be associated with servers of the public data network. Alternatively it is possible that the preferred service source could be associated with a preferred server of the access network while the nonpreferred service source is associated with a server of the public data network.

Further in accordance with the invention the access terminal is adapted to store both a product key and a secret key that identify and authorizes the access terminal to the network provider. Product keys are assigned to the user applications for identifying and authenticating the user applications to the access terminal. The secret key of the access terminal together with the product keys of the user applications are used in determining the QoS level to be granted to the user applications.

The access terminal invokes a user application requiring the establishment of an access network connection. A logic element within the access terminal compares the product key of the invoked user application with the secret key of the access terminal to determine whether the invoked application is authorized for service by the access terminal.

In accordance with a first embodiment of the invention the access terminal determines the QoS level granted to an invoked user application by applying a product key of an invoked user application to control logic within the access terminal. The control logic uses the identified product key to determine the QoS level to be granted to the invoked user application. The access terminal then applies signals specifying the granted QoS level to the access network for the establishment of the required network connection.

In accordance with a second possible embodiment of the invention the secret key of the access terminal and the product key of an invoked user application are applied to key matching algorithms in the control logic of the access terminal. The key matching algorithms process the received secret key and product key to determine the QoS level to be granted to the invoked user application. Key matching algorithms are well known to those skilled in the art. In accordance with the present invention keys may be simple indicia digital signatures serial numbers or any indicia that identifies a user application.

In a manner similar to that of the first embodiment the access terminal is authorized by the access network through the access terminal s product key. The access terminal then applies signals specifying the granted QoS level to the access network for the establishment of the required network connection.

Further in accordance with the invention the user applications of the access terminal are divided into functional groups with the user applications of a group being adapted to be granted different levels of QoS. This differs from prior art QoS systems that require all user applications within a group be granted the same QoS level. The present invention advantageously permits QoS levels to be granted to user applications based upon the functional and operational characteristics of each user application regardless of whether it is within a group of user applications.

The access terminal of the present invention is adapted to serve user applications granted different levels of QoS such as high medium and low as well as intermediate gradations of QoS. Following the authorization and authentication of an invoked user application as well as a determination of the QoS level to be granted the access terminal transmits signals to the access network specifying the granted level of QoS as well as a server to which an access network connection is to be established. This connection may be established by the access network or may be extended by the access network to a server of a public data network such as the Internet.

Further in accordance with the present invention user applications may be of different categories such as preferred or non preferred. User applications may be granted different levels of QoS as determined by their product keys. Generally user applications in a preferred category have product keys specifying higher levels of QoS than do the product keys of user applications in a non preferred category. Prior to the time of installation user applications may be granted a QoS level by the access network provider or may be granted QoS levels determined during negotiations between the access network provider and the user of the access terminal. Some user applications in the non preferred category may not have a product key. At the discretion of the access network provider user applications that do not have a product key may receive a default level of service or may receive no service.

The access terminal of the present invention is adapted to be coupled to an access network having preferred servers. The access terminal is further adapted to be connected via the access network to a public data network having non preferred servers. The access terminal controls the operation of its preferred and non preferred user applications in the establishment of connections to the preferred servers of the access network and to the non preferred servers of the public data network. Advantageously the preferred user applications request connections to the preferred servers of the access network. Similarly the non preferred user applications request connections to the non preferred servers of the public data network.

Further in accordance with the invention the access network serves a database which stores information regarding connections established by the access network. The network service provider uses the database to manage the access network and the access terminal. The database also stores data which enables the network provider to control the authentication and authorization functions required to assure the network provider that the access terminal is authorized for service by the access network and to assure the access network provider that the user applications are authorized for service at a QoS level authorized by the network provider.

The access terminal may be any general purpose computer including for example an enhanced cell phone adapted to download specialized user applications. User applications may be loaded into the access terminal by the access network provider at the time of manufacturer or sale of the access terminal. Alternatively a user can load user applications into the access terminal at any time. A user may obtain user applications from the access network provider or from a third party. The user applications received from the access network provider will normally be of the preferred category and will be adapted to access preferred servers of the access network. These preferred servers are adapted to provide specialized enhanced services to users of the access terminals. The enhanced services may include specialized ring tones games internet service streaming video VoIP etc. Access network connections from invoked user applications to preferred servers of the access network would generally be established using high levels of QoS.

Further in accordance with the invention a plurality of access terminals may be connected to the access network for the granting of QoS levels to user applications substantially as above described for an access terminal. Some of the plurality of access terminals may be assigned different types of traffic so that some access terminals may specialize in a first type of traffic while other access terminals may serve other types of traffic.

Access terminal contains secret key control logic and user applications and . The user applications include preferred user applications PAPP PAPP and PAPP and non preferred user applications NPAPP through NPAPPN . The user applications and may comprise software programs or other applications that may be invoked by the user of access terminal to request the establishment of connections by access network and public data network to preferred servers and nonpreferred servers respectively. Access network and public data network may be packet based networks of the landline or wireless type that establish virtual connections in a manner well known to those skilled in the art. Public data network may be the Internet.

Access network contains appearances of preferred servers PS PS PS and PSn . Public data network contains appearances of non preferred servers NPS NPS . . . NPSn . Access network is operable to establish network connections from preferred user applications of access terminal to preferred servers . Access network can also establish connections from non preferred user applications and of access terminal to public data network via paths and to non preferred servers . Access network is shown on between vertical lines and . Public data network is positioned to the right of vertical line on . Access network has a database . The network provider may use database to determine the level of QoS that user applications and of access terminal may be granted for the establishment of network connections.

The establishment of network connections between user applications and and the preferred servers of access network and the non preferred servers of public data network permits the user applications and and servers to communicate. Servers can perform enhanced functions required by the user applications and . Such enhanced functions require different levels of QoS in packet networks and may include specialized ring tones screens savers games Internet service streaming audio streaming video VoIP etc.

Access terminal may be a cell phone or any general purpose computer having a plurality of user applications that may be invoked to request the establishment of network connections. In general the preferred user applications are granted a high level of QoS for the establishment of connections to preferred servers of access network . Non preferred user applications and are normally granted a lower level of QoS for the establishment of connections to the non preferred servers of public data network . Further details regarding the distinctions between the preferred user applications and the non preferred applications are subsequently described.

Access terminal may contain control logic product key and secret key . Preferred user applications and non preferred user application contain a product key. Non preferred user application does not contain a product key. The function of a product key is to assist control logic in determining the QoS level to be granted to an invoked user application for the establishment of an access network connection. A further function of control logic is to identify a user application requesting service as well as to determine whether the requesting user application is authorized for service in access terminal .

Element stores a secret key that identifies access terminal to the network provider and authorizes access terminal to control QoS signals to the access network . Control logic may contain memory and logic not shown that enable access terminal to control the operation of the user applications as well as to determine the QoS level granted to an invoked user application. Secret key has a number of functions. First secret key assists the network provider in managing access network and access terminals . Access terminal is owned by the user of the access terminal but is installed in communications system with the guidance and cooperation of the network provider.

Access terminal does not initially contain a secret key. After access terminal is ready for initialization access terminal transmits a product key identifying access terminal to database for use by the network provider. The product key of access terminal requests the assignment of a secret key by database to access terminal . The network provider accesses database to transmit a secret key to access terminal . Access terminal stores secret key . The identity of secret key is known only to the network provider and is not known to the user of access terminal . The storage of secret key signifies that access terminal is authorized for service in communications system .

Another function of secret key is to assist access terminal in determining the QoS level to which each invoked user application may be granted. Secret key also authenticates each invoked user application requiring service. In order to maintain security for the secret key of an access terminal the network provider may periodically transmit a new secret key over path to access terminal .

User applications and are generally loaded into the access terminal by the owner of access terminal . This may be done at any time by the owner of access terminal independently of the network provider. However the network provider is involved in a determination of the QoS level that may be granted to each user application. Different user applications and may be granted different levels of QoS with the preferred user applications generally receiving a higher level of QoS than the non preferred user applications and .

Preferred user applications have high level of QoS and receive a high level of service within an access network . Non preferred user applications may be granted a lower level of QoS and will therefore generally receive a lower level of service in the establishment of access network connections. User application does not have a product key. With the concurrence of the network provider user application may be served on a low level of QoS by access network . Alternatively it may be denied service by the network provider.

Database stores information required by the network provider to administer access network and access terminal . Database may also provide an accounting function that records the duration of established network connections as well as the QoS level provided for each connection. This accounting function is useful to the network provider since it identifies network connections that are established at a lower QoS level than that required to an invoked user application by access terminal . This is useful when network traffic is high so that a requested network connection can be established but only at a lower QgS level than that granted to the invoked user application.

Access terminal grants an appropriate QoS level to an invoked user application requiring the establishment of a network connection. This process begins when the invoked user application transmits information over conductor to the application program interface and via path to control logic . The transmitted information includes the product key of the invoked user application.

In accordance with a first embodiment of the invention control logic uses the received product key to determine the QoS level to be granted to an invoked user application. The granted QoS level is transmitted by control logic over paths and to access network . Access network transmits the received QoS level to database which uses the received QoS level to manage the establishment of the connection requested by the invoked in user application. Database maintains records of each connection established by access network as well as the QoS level provided by the network in serving the connection. The network path over which the connection is established includes path shown on . The preferred servers are not shown on to minimize drawing complexity. Similarly public data network and non preferred servers of are not shown on to minimize drawing complexity.

In accordance with a second embodiment of the invention access terminal uses both secret key as well as the product key identifying the invoked user application in determining the QoS level to be granted. Access terminal determines the QoS level to be granted by using the product key of the invoked user application and the secret key . The product key is applied over path and extended through application program interface and over path to control logic . Control logic applies the secret key and the received product key to key matching algorithms within control logic . The key matching algorithms process the received information and derive the QoS level that is to be granted to the invoked user application. As in the first embodiment the granted QoS level is transmitted over path to access network . Access network also receives indicia specifying the preferred server or the non preferred server to which the network connection is to be established.

Secret key is used as described in the second embodiment for determining the QoS level to be granted to an invoked user application. Secret key is also used in both embodiments to determine whether an invoked user application and is authorized for service within access terminal . Control logic uses the product key as well as the secret key to determine whether the invoked user application is authorized for service. If the requested user application is not authorized it may either be denied service or may be served on a when available basis at the option of the network provider. Non preferred user application does not have a product key. In accordance with agreements between the network provider and the user of access terminal non preferred user application may be either be denied service by the network provider or may be provided service on a when available basis.

As mentioned secret key is transmitted by the network provider from database to access terminal over path . The secret key is not known or accessible to the end user or the user applications of the access terminal and is stored securely in secret key element . Prior to the initialization of access terminal and the installation of the user applications the network provider and the user of access terminal negotiate and jointly determine the QoS level that may be subsequently granted to invoked one of user applications and . The legitimate use of the QoS levels is of significance to the network provider who desires that access network be used to provide high level QoS only for user applications that are charged tariffs appropriate to the higher QoS levels. In order to maintain security for the secret key of an access terminal the network provider may periodically transmit a new secret key over path to access terminal .

The product key of access terminal is authenticated by element which is a part of database . In response to the authentication element transmits a secret key over message to access network . Access network extends the secret key over message to access terminal for storage by secret key element . The storage of the secret key completes the initialization of access terminal and signifies that access terminal is authorized to serve requests from invoked ones of user applications and . The functions performed by access terminal in serving user applications and include the authentication of the user applications and and the granting of the appropriate QoS level to each invoked user application and requiring a connection by access network .

An invoked one of user application and requiring the establishment of a connection by access network requests authentication and the granting of a QoS level by the transmitting a signal over path to access terminal . Access terminal receives the product key of the invoked one of user application and . Element of access terminal determines that the invoked user application is authorized for service and grants an appropriate QoS level to the invoked user application. Element transmits over path the granted QoS level as well as indicia identifying the preferred server or non preferred server to which a network connection is to be established. Access network receives the transmitted information from path . Element of access network then establishes the requested connection to the specified server.

The process of begins in step when the product key of access terminal is transmitted to database during system initialization. In step database authenticates the received product key of access terminal . Database transmits a secret key to access terminal in step . In step access terminal stores the secret key for subsequent use in authenticating the product keys of invoked user application and as well as for determining the QoS levels to be granted to invoked user applications requiring the establishment of a network connection.

Step may subsequently transmit a replacement secret key from database to access terminal . The replacement secret key is transmitted by the network provider in the event that the identity of the original secret key has been compromised. Step stores the replacement secret key in access terminal and discards the earlier secret key. Steps and may be iteratively performed

The requested connection may involve the establishment of a connection to a preferred server of access network . This path is designated on as element . Alternatively the connection may require the establishment of a connection over path in access network and further over path to a nonpreferred server in public data network . Following the establishment of a connection to a requested server the invoked user application may communicate with the server.

Preferred servers and non preferred servers may be of different types and may provide different services to user applications and . For example some servers may be self contained in that they generate the signals that are transmitted to user applications and . Such a server may generate ringing tones or store games. Both ringing tones and games may be generated by the servers for transmission to user applications and . Servers and may also be the end points for signals transmitted by user applications and . Other servers may not be the originator of the destination of signals exchanged with the user applications. VoIP is one such example. Some servers may be relatively simple such as those that generate ringing tones. Other servers may be more complex and perform functions such as the provision of VoIP or streaming video or audio received by the server from an external source.

As priorly mentioned the present invention is not limited to the use of a single access terminal . A single access terminal is shown on to minimize drawing complexity. If desired a plurality of access terminals may be used. In accordance with the present invention a plurality of access terminals could be coupled to access network for the control of user applications as above described. The plurality of access terminals could be adapted to serve different types of traffic.

