---

title: Mixtures of polypeptides, compositions containing and processes for preparing same, for treating neurodegenerative diseases
abstract: The invention provides a composition comprising a mixture of polypeptides, wherein each polypeptide (a) is a copolymer of the amino acids L-glutamic acid, L-alanine, L-tyrosine, and L-lysine, and (b) may be in the form of a pharmaceutically acceptable salt; and wherein in the mixture (i) the polypeptides have an average molecular weight in the range 13,500 to 18,500 daltons, (ii) 13% to 38% of the polypeptides have a diethylamide group instead of a carboxyl group present at one end thereof, and (iii) 68% of the polypeptides have a molecular weight between 7,000 and 41,000 daltons. In an embodiment, the average molecular weight is 16,000 daltons. The invention also provides a method of treating a human subject afflicted with a neurodegenerative disease comprising administering to the human subject a therapeutically effective amount of any of the disclosed compositions so as to thereby treat the human subject.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07560100&OS=07560100&RS=07560100
owner: Yeda Research and Development Co., Ltd.
number: 07560100
owner_city: Rehovot
owner_country: IL
publication_date: 20050909
---
This application claims benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 608 844 filed Sep. 9 2004 the contents of which are hereby incorporated herein by reference.

Throughout this application various patent and nonpatent publications are referenced full citations of which are provided. The disclosures of these publications in their entireties are hereby incorporated by reference into this application in order to more fully describe the state of the art to which this invention pertains.

Copolymers of L glutamic acid L alanine L tyrosine and L lysine and mixtures thereof have long been known. U.S. Pat. No. 3 849 550 issued Nov. 19 1974 Teitelbaum et al. 

Over the last two decades such copolymer mixtures have been extensively studied and numerous modifications as well as potential uses have been identified. As a result of these efforts a commercial product COPAXONE was developed which is now marketed.

Specifically COPAXONE is the brand name for a pharmaceutical composition which contains glatiramer acetate GA as the active ingredient. COPAXONE contains the acetate salts of synthetic polypeptides containing four naturally occurring amino acids L glutamic acid L alanine L tyrosine and L lysine with an average molar fraction of 0.141 0.427 0.095 and 0.338 respectively. The average molecular weight of glatiramer acetate is 4 700 11 000 daltons. Chemically glatiramer acetate is designated L glutamic acid polymer with L alanine L lysine and L tyrosine acetate salt . Its structural formula is Glu Ala Lys Tyr . CHCOOH CHNO.CHNO.CHNO.CHNO . CHO CAS 147245 92 9 Copaxone 2000 Medical Economics Co. Inc. Montvale N.J. 3115. 

Glatiramer acetate is approved for use in the reduction of the frequency of relapses in patients with relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis. Multiple sclerosis has been classified as an autoimmune disease. Glatiramer acetate has also been disclosed for use in the treatment of other autoimmune diseases Publication No. US 2002 0055466 A1 for R. Aharoni et al. inflammatory non autoimmune diseases Publication No. US 2005 0014694 A1 for V. Wee Yong et al. and U.S. Patent Application No. 2002 0077278 A1 published Jun. 20 2002 Young et al. and to promote nerve regeneration and or to prevent or inhibit secondary degeneration which may follow primary nervous system injury Publication No. US 2003 0004099 A1 for M. Eisenbach Schwartz et al. and U.S. Patent Application No. 2002 0037848 A1 published Mar. 28 2002 Eisenbach Schwartz . Furthermore glatiramer acetate has been disclosed as a treatment for immune mediated diseases e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 6 514 938 B1 issued Feb. 4 2003 Gad et al. PCT International Publication No. WO 01 60392 published Aug. 23 2001 Gilbert et al. and PCT International Publication No. WO 00 27417 published May 19 2000 Aharoni et al. as well as diseases associated with demyelination PCT International Publication No. WO 01 97846 published Dec. 27 2001 Moses et al. .

As a result of further study and improvement a new mixture of such copolymers has been developed which has potential as a well tolerated non steroidal medication for the treatment of multiple sclerosis and other diseases as described more fully herein.

The invention provides a composition comprising a mixture of polypeptides wherein each polypeptide a is a copolymer of the amino acids L glutamic acid L alanine L tyrosine and L lysine and b may be in the form of a pharmaceutically acceptable salt and wherein in the mixture i the polypeptides have an average molecular weight in the range 13 500 to 18 500 daltons ii 13 to 38 of the polypeptides have a diethylamide group instead of a carboxyl group present at one end thereof and iii 68 of the polypeptides have a molecular weight between 7 000 and 41 000 daltons. In an embodiment the average molecular weight is 16 000 daltons.

This invention also provides a process for making a composition comprising a mixture of polypeptides comprising 

The currently available data suggests that the development of the polypeptide mixture of the invention may address patient and physician needs by providing convenience less frequent injections increased and sustained efficacy and improved neuroprotective potential.

The invention provides a composition comprising a mixture of polypeptides wherein each polypeptide a is a copolymer of the amino acids L glutamic acid L alanine L tyrosine and L lysine and b may be in the form of a pharmaceutically acceptable salt and wherein in the mixture i the polypeptides have an average molecular weight in the range 13 500 to 18 500 daltons ii 13 to 38 of the polypeptides have a diethylamide group instead of a carboxyl group present at one end thereof and iii 68 of the polypeptides have a molecular weight between 7 000 and 41 000 daltons. In an embodiment the average molecular weight is 16 000 daltons.

In any of the disclosed embodiments the amino acids are present in the mixture in an amount such that the average molar fraction of the amino acids is L glutamic acid 0.129 0.153 L alanine 0.392 0.462 L tyrosine 0.086 0.100 and L lysine 0.300 0.374. In an embodiment the amino acids are present in the mixture in an amount such that the average molar fraction of the amino acids is L glutamic acid 0.141 L alanine 0.427 L tyrosine 0.095 and L lysine 0.338.

In any of the disclosed embodiments 19 to 28 of the polypeptides in the mixture can have diethylamide at one end thereof the remainder of polypeptides in the mixture may have a carboxyl group at the C terminus.

In another embodiment 35 45 of the polypeptides in the mixture have a L alanine at the N terminus preferably 37 41 or 38 39 or 39 .

In yet another embodiment less than 5 preferably less than 3 of the polypeptides in the mixture have a molecular weight below 4 700 daltons.

In any of the disclosed embodiments the mixture of polypeptides may have a circular dichroism value of 0.91.

In any of the disclosed embodiments the polypeptides are in the form of a pharmaceutically acceptable salt which may be an organic salt an acid addition salt. In a further embodiment the salt is an acetate salt or chloride salt.

In any of the disclosed embodiments the composition disclosed may be further characterized by having at least 90 suppressive activity in an EAE blocking test when administered at a dose of 100 g mouse of the polypeptide mixture.

The invention also provides a pharmaceutical composition comprising a therapeutically effective amount of the composition of any of the disclosed embodiments and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. In an embodiment the pharmaceutically acceptable carrier comprises mannitol.

The pharmaceutical composition may further be a liposome comprises an adjuvant. In a still further embodiment the adjuvant such as alum a phospholipid a DNA adjuvant complete Feund s adjuvant or incomplete Freund s adjuvant.

In any of the disclosed embodiments the polypeptide mixture may be in or attached to a nanoparticle for example electrostatically.

In any of the disclosed embodiments the effective amount may be 0.1 mg to 70 mg. In an embodiment the effective amount may be 0.5 mg to 60 mg 1 mg to 50 mg 5 mg to 35 mg 10 mg to 30 mg 45 mg to 70 mg 50 mg to 70 mg 15 mg to 25 mg 18 mg to 22 mg 0.1 mg to 2 mg 0.5 mg to 1.5 mg 2 mg to 7 mg 4 mg to 6 mg 12 mg to 18 mg 14 mg to 16 mg 17 mg to 23 mg 19 mg to 21 mg 27 mg to 33 mg 29 mg to 31 mg 47 mg to 53 mg or 49 mg to 51 mg. In another embodiment the effective amount may be 1 mg 5 mg 15 mg 20 mg 30 mg or 50 mg.

In any of the disclosed embodiments the composition may have a pH between 5.5 and 9.0 between 5.5 and 8.5 between 5.5 and 7.5 between 5.5 and 7.0 between 5.5 and 6 may be 5.7 or may be 5.5.

The invention also provides a pharmaceutical composition of any of any of the disclosed embodiments further comprising at least one of riluzole glatiramer acetate baclofen phenytoin quinine amitriptyline phenothiazine chlorpromazine butyrophenone neuroleptics geldanamycin RNA interference trehalose cystamine rapamycin glucocorticoid nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drug minocycline folic acid creatine dichloroacetate nicotinamide riboflavin carnitine tauroursodeoxycholic acid ginko biloba coenzyme Q10 vitamin A vitamin C vitamin E selenium lipoic acid arginine mithramycin remacemide filuzole lamotrigine memantine gabamentin HDAC inhibitors retinoic acid reserpine anticholinergics diphenoxylate loperamide deodorized opium tincture codeine metronidazole sulfasalazine corticosteroid azathioprine 6 mercaptopurine cyclosporine T lymphocyte aphaeresis 4 amino quinolines methotrexate loperamide 5 aminosalicylic acid 5 ASA balsalazide olsalazine ACTH 75 ACTH 120 antibiotic pilocarpine isoptocarpine timolol hemihydrate timolol maleate betaxolol levobunolol carteolol metipranolol epinephrine dipivefrin carbachol apraclonidine brimonidine dorzolamide latanoprost travaprost brimatoprost brinzolamide cholinesterase inhibitor demecarium isoblurophate carbonic anhydrase inhibitor mannitol oral glycerin and mydriatics memantine atropine meclizine dienhydrinate prochlorperazine scopolamine diphenhydramine clonazepam gabapentin primidone botulinum toxin actazolamide and cabidopa levodopa isoniazid diazepam clonazepam dantrolene sodium tizanidine clonidine sildenafil alprostadil papaverine bisacodyl magnesium hydroxide glycerin psyllium hydrophilic mucilloid sodium phosphate anti tumor necrosis factor TNF docusate oxybutynin desmopressin vasopressin tolterodine carbamazepine imipramine bethane phenoxybenzamine terazosin propantheline oxybutonin hyoscyamine methenamine nitrofurantoin phenazopyridine ciprofloxacin amantadine pemoline vitamin D derivative modafinil fluoxetine sertraline venlafaxine citalopram parocetine trazodone nortriptyline imipramine dothiepin lofepramine doxepin protriptyline tranylcypromine moclobemide bupropion nefazodone mirtazapine zolpidem alprazolam temazepam buspirone gabatentin topiramate zonisamide desipramine imipramine doxepin protriptyline pentozifylline hydroxyzine natalizumab steroids muscle relaxants prednisolone dexamethasone corticotrophin immunosuppressants acyclovir azathioprine cyclophosphamide mitoxantrone cyclosporine methotrexate cladribine interferons laquinimod alemtuzumab 4 aminopyridine 3 4 diaminopyridine eliprodil IV immunoglobin pregabalin or ziconotide.

This invention also provides a process for making a composition comprising a mixture of polypeptides comprising 

In an embodiment the removal of the benzyl protecting group in step b may be performed at a temperature in the range of 17 21 C. In a further embodiment the removal of the benzyl protecting group in step b may be conducted at a temperature in the range of 19 20 C.

In any embodiment of the process the removal of the benzyl protecting group in step b may be conducted over a period of 7 to 15 hours for example approximately 15 hours.

In any embodiment of the process the organic base in step c may be a primary amine a secondary amine a tertiary amine methanolic ammonia piperidine.

In any embodiment of the process the hydrogen bromide and acetic acid solution is from 10 to 36 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid. In another embodiment the hydrobromic acid in acetic acid is from 16 to 33 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid 18 to 33 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid 20 to 37 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid 20 to 33 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid 22 to 33 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid 24 to 33 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid 25 to 35 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid 26 to 33 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid 28 to 33 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid 30 to 34 hydrobromic acid is acetic acid 30 to 33 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid or 32 to 33 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid. In a further embodiment the solution is 33 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid. In another embodiment the solution is 16 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid.

The hydrogen bromide and acetic acid solution may be pretreated with a bromine scavenger such as phenol in order to remove free bromine.

In an embodiment the process of any of disclosed embodiments may further comprise a step of lyophilizing the composition.

This invention also provides a process for preparing a pharmaceutical composition comprising combining a therapeutically effective amount of the composition of any of the disclosed embodiments with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier disclosed herein.

This inevention further provides a method of treating a human subject afflicted with an autoimmune disease comprising administering to the subject a therapeutically effective amount of any of the disclosed compositions so as to treat the human subject.

The invention also provides a method of treating a human subject afflicted with an inflammatory non autoimmune disease an immune mediated disease or a disease associated with demyelination comprising administering to the subject a therapeutically effective amount of any of the disclosed compositions so as to treat the human subject.

The invention further provides a method of alleviating a symptom of an autoimmune disease in a subject afflicted with such a disease comprising administering to the human subject a therapeutically effective amount of any of the disclosed compositions in an amount effective to alleviate the symptom.

The invention also provides a method of alleviating a symptom of an inflammatory non autoimmune disease an immune mediated disease or a disease associated with demyelination in a subject afflicted with such a disease comprising administering to the human subject a therapeutically effective amount of any of the disclosed compositions in an amount effective to alleviate the symptoms.

The invention also provides a method of promoting nerve regeneration or preventing or inhibiting secondary degeneration which may otherwise follow primary nervous system injury in a human subject comprising administering to the human subject a therapeutically effective amount of any of the disclosed compositions.

The invention also provides a method of treating a human subject afflicted with a neurodegenerative disease comprising administering to the human subject a therapeutically effective amount of any of the disclosed compositions so as to thereby treat the human subject.

The invention further provides a method of alleviating a symptom of a deurodegenerative disease comprising administering to the human subject the composition of any of the embodiments or of the pharmaceutical compostion of any of any of the embodiments in an amount effective to alleviate the symptom.

The neurodegenerative disease may be Huntington s disease in which case the method may further comprise administering to the subject phenothiazine butyrophenone neuroleptics haloperidol reserpine or a combination thereof.

The neurodegenerative disease may be glaucoma in which case the method preserves the structural integrity of the optic nerve of the human subject afflicted with glaucoma preserves the retinal cells in the human subject afflicted with glaucoma and or reduces the rate of visual field loss in the human subject afflicted with glaucoma.

When the neurodegenerative disease is glaucoma the method can further comprise administering to the subject a second agent wherein the second agent is glatiramer acetate pilocarpine timolol maleate betaxolol levobunolol metipranolol epinephrine dipivefrin carbachol potent cholinesterase inhibitors carbonic anhydrase inhibitors atropine mydriatics or a combination thereof. Preferably the amount of the composition and the dose of the second agent taken together are effective to treat the subject each of the amount of the composition taken alone and the dose of the second agent taken alone is effective to treat the subject or either the amount of the composition taken alone or the dose of the second agent taken alone is not effective to treat the human subject.

In an embodiment the human subject may have received both the polypeptide mixture of the invention and the second agent but subsequently the second agent is discontinued.

When the neurodegenerative disease is glaucoma the treatment may further comprise laser trabeculoplasty filtering surgery peripheral iridectomy or laser iridectomy.

When the neurodegenerative disease is glaucoma the composition may be administered once every 1 to 12 weeks once every 3 to 12 weeks once every 3 to 8 weeks once every 2 to 6 weeks once every 1 to 2 weeks once every 3 to 5 weeks once every 4 to 10 weeks once every 4 weeks once every 2 months.

When the neurodegenerative disease is glaucoma the amount of the composition may be 0.1 mg to 70 mg of the composition 0.5 mg to 60 mg of the composition 1 mg to 50 mg of the composition 5 mg to 35 mg of the composition 10 mg to 30 mg of the composition 45 mg to 70 mg of the composition 50 mg to 70 mg of the composition 15 mg to 25 mg of the composition 18 mg to 22 mg of the composition 0.1 mg to 2 mg of the composition 0.5 mg to 1.5 mg of the composition 2 mg to 7 mg of the composition 4 mg to 6 mg of the composition 12 mg to 18 mg of the composition 14 mg to 16 mg of the composition 17 mg to 23 mg of the composition 19 mg to 21 mg of the composition 27 mg to 33 mg of the composition 29 mg to 31 mg of the composition 47 mg to 53 mg of the composition 49 mg to 51 mg of the composition 5 mg of the composition 15 mg of the composition 30 mg of the composition and 50 mg of the composition.

When the neurodegenerative disease is glaucoma the administration may be through an intravenous intraperitoneal intramuscular subcutaneous oral intranasal buccal vaginal rectal intraocular intrathecal topical or intradermal route. In an embodiment the composition may be administered intranasally and the dose may be less than 1 mg or the composition may be administered orally and the dose may be 70 mg. Preferably the composition is administered by injection.

The invention also provides a method of treating a human subject afflicted with an inflammatory bowel disease comprising administering to the human subject a therapeutically effective amount of any disclosed composition so as to treat the inflammatory bowel disease.

The subject invention further provides a method of alleviating a symptom of an inflammatory bowel disease comprising administering to the human subject any disclosed composition in an amount effective to alleviate the symptom.

When the disease is inflammatory bowel disease the method may further comprise administering to the subject a second agent wherein the second agent is an anticholinergic diphenoxylate loperamide deodorized opium tincture codeine antibiotics metronidazole sulfasalazine corticosteroids prednisone hydrocortisone antimetabolites azathioprine 6 mercaptopurine cyclosporine methotrexate 4 amino quinolines loperamide 5 aminosalicylic acid 5 ASA sulfasalazine olsalazine prednisone ACTH 75 ACTH 120 antibiotics or a combination thereof. In an embodiment the effective amount of the composition and the dose of the second agent taken together may be effective to treat the patient afflicted with inflammatory bowel disease each of the effective amount of the composition taken alone and the dose of the second agent taken alone may be effective to treat the patient afflicted with inflammatory bowel disease or either the effective amount of the composition taken alone or the dose of the second agent taken alone may be not effective to treat the patient afflicted with inflammatory bowel disease.

In an embodiment the human subject never previously received the second agent as a treatment for inflammatory bowel disease.

In another embodiment the human subject received both the polypeptide mixture of the invention and the second agent but subsequently the second agent is discontinued.

In a further embodiment the method may further comprise ingestion of an elemental diet hyperalimentation surgery proctoclectomy with abdominoperineal resection emergency colectomy subtotal colectomy with ileostomy or rectosigmoid mucous fistula.

In an embodiment of the method the amount of the composition may be from 0.1 mg to 70 mg of the composition 0.5 mg to 60 mg mg of the composition 1 mg to 50 mg of the composition 5 mg to 35 mg of the composition 10 mg to 30 mg of the composition 45 mg to 70 mg of the composition 50 mg to 70 mg of the composition 15 mg to 25 mg of the composition 18 mg to 22 mg of the composition 0.1 mg to 2 mg of the composition 0.5 mg to 1.5 mg of the composition 2 mg to 7 mg of the composition 4 mg to 6 mg of the composition 12 mg to 18 mg of the composition 14 mg to 16 mg of the composition 17 mg to 23 mg of the composition 19 mg to 21 mg of the composition 27 mg to 33 mg of the composition 29 mg to 31 mg of the composition 47 mg to 53 mg of the composition 49 mg to 51 mg of the composition 5 mg of the composition 15 mg of the composition 30 mg of the composition and 50 mg of the composition.

In an embodiment of the method the composition may be administered every 1 to 60 days every 1 to 30 days every 5 to 60 days every 7 to 60 days every 5 to 30 days every 20 to 40 days every 50 to 60 days every 5 to 9 days every 6 to 8 days every 7 days every 14 days 30 days 60 days or every 2 months.

In the method the administration of the composition may be through an intravenous intraperitoneal intramuscular subcutaneous oral intranasal buccal vaginal rectal intraocular intrathecal topical or intradermal route.

Preferably the composition is administered by injection. More preferably the composition is administered orally.

The invention also provides a method of treating a human subject afflicted with multiple sclerosis comprising administering to the human subject a therapeutically effective amount of any disclosed composition so as to thereby treat the human subject afflicted with multiple sclerosis.

The invention further provides a method of alleviating a symptom of multiple sclerosis in a human subject afflicted with multiple sclerosis comprising administering to the human subject an amount of any disclosed composition in an amount effective to alleviate the symptom of multiple sclerosis.

The invention still further provides a method of reducing the frequency of relapses in a human subject afflicted with relapse remitting multiple sclerosis comprising administering to the human subject a therapeutically effective amount of any disclosed composition so as to thereby reduce the frequency of relapses in the human subject.

The invention also provides a method of reducing the disability based on the EDSS scale of a human subject afflicted with multiple sclerosis comprising administering to the human subject a therapeutically effective amount of any disclosed composition so as to thereby reduce the disability based on EDSS scale in the human subject.

The invention further provides a method of reducing lesions detected by magnetic resonance imagining MRI in a human subject afflicted with multiple sclerosis comprising administering to the human subject a therapeutically effective amount of any disclosed composition so as to thereby reduce the lesions detected by MRI in the human afflicted with multiple sclerosis.

When the disease is multiple sclerosis the method may further comprise administration of a second agent wherein the second agent is glatiramer acetate a pain reliever a steroid a muscle relaxant prednisone dexamethasone an immunosuppressant azathioprine cyclophosphamide an interferon natalizumab riluzole alphacalcidol calcitriol rasagiline minocycline mitoxantrone simvastatin or a combination thereof. Preferably the second agent is glatiramer acetate. In an embodiment the amount of the composition and the dose of the second agent taken together are effective to treat the subject each of the amount of the composition taken alone and the dose of the second agent taken alone is effective to treat the subject or either the effective amount of the composition taken alone the dose of the second agent taken alone is not effective to treat the subject. In a further embodiment the subject never previously received the second agent for therapy. In another embodiment the subject has received the second agent for therapy but is no longer receiving the second agent for therapy.

In any embodiment of the method the composition may be administered every 1 to 60 days 1 to 30 days every 5 to 60 days every 7 to 60 days every 5 to 30 days every 20 to 40 days every 50 to 60 days every 5 to 9 days every 6 to 8 days every 7 days every 14 days 30 days 60 days or every 2 months.

In the method the amount of the composition may be 0.1 mg to 100 mg of the composition 1 mg to 80 mg of the composition 1 mg to 50 mg of the composition 5 mg to 25 mg of the composition 25 mg to 75 mg of the composition 2 mg to 8 mg of the composition 4 mg to 6 mg of the composition 12 mg to 18 mg of the composition 14 mg to 16 mg of the composition 27 mg to 33 mg of the composition 29 mg to 31 mg of the composition 47 mg to 53 mg of the composition 49 mg to 51 mg of the composition 5 mg of the composition 15 mg of the composition 30 mg of the composition or 50 mg of the composition.

In any embodiment of the method the administration may be through an intravenous intraperitoneal intramuscular subcutaneous oral intranasal buccal vaginal rectal intraocular intrathecal topical or intradermal route. Preferably the administering of the composition is by injection or orally.

The invention further provides a product containing the composition of any of the disclosed compositions and a second pharmaceutical agent as a combined preparation for simultaneous separate or sequential use as a medicament.

The invention still further provides a use of any disclosed composition for the manufacture of a medicament for the treatment of a disease in a human subject.

The invention also provides a use of any disclosed composition and of a second agent for the manufacture of a medicament for the treatment of a disease in a human subject.

The invention further provides a process for determining whether polypeptides in a mixture have an average molecular weight between 13 500 daltons and 18 500 daltons each of which polypeptides a is a copolymer of the amino acids L alanine L glutamic acid L tyrosine and L lysine and b may be present in the form of a pharmaceutically acceptable salt and wherein 13 to 38 of the polypeptides in the mixture have a diethylamide group instead of a carboxyl group present at one end thereof comprising subjecting the polypeptide mixture to gel permeation chromatography to determine whether the polypeptides in the mixture have the average molecular weight wherein the gel permeation chromatography is carried out on a column calibrated by subjecting a plurality of molecular weight markers to chromatography on the column to establish a relationship between retention time on the column and molecular weight each such marker being a copolymer of L alanine L glutamic acid L tyrosine L lysine having a defined sequence and having a defined molecular weight between 12 000 and 30 000 Daltons.

The invention still further provides a process for determining the average molecular weight of a mixture of polypeptides each of which polypeptides a is a copolymer of the amino acids L alanine L glutamic acid L tyrosine and L lysine and b may be present in the form of a pharmaceutically acceptable salt and wherein in the mixture 13 to 38 of the polypeptides have a diethylamide group instead of a carboxyl group present at one end thereof which process comprises subjecting the polypeptide mixture to gel permeation chromatography so as to determine the average molecular weight of the polypeptides in the mixture wherein the gel permeation chromatography is carried out on a column calibrated by subjecting a plurality of molecular weight markers to chromatography on the column to establish a relationship between retention time on the column and molecular weight each such marker being a copolymer of L alanine L glutamic acid L tyrosine and L lysine having a defined sequence and having a defined molecular weight of 12 000 to 30 000 daltons.

In an embodiment of the disclosed process the average molecular weight of the polypeptides in the mixture may be 16 000 daltons.

In another embodiment the gel permeation chromatography column may comprise a cross linked agarose for example a cross linked agarose with an exclusion limit of 2 10Daltons an optimal separation range of 1000 to 3 10Daltons and a bead diameter of 20 40 m.

In a further embodiment each of the plurality of molecular weight markers may have a molecular weight between 16 000 and 27 000 daltons.

In any of the disclosed embodiments of the process in each marker the amino acids may be present in an amount such that the molar fraction of L glutamic acid is 0.129 0.153 of L alanine is 0.392 0.462 of L tyrosine is 0.086 0.100 and of L lysine is 0.300 0.374.

In any of the disclosed embodiments of the process the plurality of molecular weight markers may comprise five polypeptides having the following sequences 

Any disclosed embodiment of the process may further comprise combining the composition with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier for example mannitol.

The invention also provides a polypeptide consisting of consecutive amino acids having a sequence selected from the following 

The invention further provide a process for making the polypeptide of any of the disclosed DNA of the disclosed polypeptide sequences comprising expressing under suitable conditions the polypeptide from DNA encoding the polypeptide in a suitable cell and isolating the polypeptide so expressed. In an embodiment the DNA consists of consecutive nucleotides having a sequence selected from the following 

Based on the data gathered the mixture of polypeptides of the invention is contemplated for use in treating at least the same conditions as glatiramer acetate has been disclosed to treat. Specific diseases and classes of diseases are discussed below.

An autoimmune disease or disorder is one where the immune system produces autoantibodies to an endogenous antigen with consequent injury to tissues Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy 1999 Merck Research Laboratories Whitehouse Station N.J. 1061 . These diseases may be either cell mediated disease e.g. T cell or antibody mediated e.g. B cell disorders U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 20020055466 A1 published May 9 2002 Aharoni et al. . Autoimmune diseases are contemplated for treatment with the composition comprising the mixture of polypeptides of the invention.

Specific autoimmune diseases contemplated for treatment with the composition comprising the mixture of polypeptides of the invention are polyarthritis juvenile arthritis Felty s syndrome autoimmune hemolytic anemia autoimmune oophoritis autoimmune thyroiditis autoimmune uveoretinitis Crohn s disease ulcerative colitis such as in inflammatory bowel disease chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura contact sensitivity disease diabetes mellitus Graves disease Guillain Barre s syndrome Hashimoto s disease thyroiditis idiopathic myxedema myasthenia gravis psoriasis pemphigus vulgaris rheumatoid arthritis uveitis lupus nephritis CNS lupus or systemic lupus erythematosus. GA has been disclosed for use in the treatment of these diseases in e.g. U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 20020055466 A1 published May 9 2002 Aharoni et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 514 938 B1 issued Feb. 4 2003 to Gad et al. PCT International Publication No. WO 01 60392 published Aug. 23 2001 Gilbert et al. U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 2004 0006022 published Jan. 8 2004 Strominger et al. .

Inflammatory non autoimmune diseases are diseases which impact the central nervous system but do not include an autoimmune component and are associated with an inflammatory response in the subject afflicted with the disease. Inflammatory non autoimmune diseases are contemplated for treatment with the composition comprising the mixture of polypeptides of the invention. Specific inflammatory non autoimmune diseases contemplated for treatment with the polypeptide mixtures of the invention are Alzheimer s disease Parkinson s disease HIV encephalopathy brain tumor glaucoma neuropathy dementia central nervous system infection central nervous system bacterial infection meningitis stroke and head trauma. GA has been disclosed for use in the treatment of these diseases in e.g. U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 20020077278 A1 published Jun. 20 2002 Young et al. .

The composition of the invention is also contemplated to be useful to promote nerve regeneration or to prevent or inhibit secondary degeneration which may otherwise follow primary nervous system NS injury e.g. closed head injuries and blunt trauma such as those caused by participation in dangerous sports penetrating trauma such as gunshot wounds hemorrhagic stroke ischemic stroke glaucoma cerebral ischemia or damages caused by surgery such as tumor excision.

In addition the composition of the mixture may be used to ameliorate the effects of disease that result in a degenerative process e.g. degeneration occurring in either gray or white matter or both as a result of various diseases or disorders such as neurodegenerative diseases including without limitation diabetic neuropathy senile dementias Alzheimer s disease Parkinson s Disease Huntington s disease uveitis facial nerve Bell s palsy glaucoma Huntington s chorea amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ALS status epilepticus non arteritic optic neuropathy intervertebral disc herniation vitamin deficiency prion diseases such as Creutzfeldt Jakob disease carpal tunnel syndrome peripheral neuropathies associated with various diseases including but not limited to uremia porphyria hypoglycemia Sjorgren Larsson syndrome acute sensory neuropathy obstructive lung disease chronic ataxic neuropathy ophthalmic neuropathy primary amyloidosis obstructive lung diseases acromegaly malabsorption syndromes polycythemia vera IgA and IgG gammapathies complications of various drugs e.g. metronidazole and toxins e.g. alcohol or organophosphates Charcot Marie Tooth disease ataxia telangectasia Friedreich s ataxia amyloid polyneuropathies adrenomyeloneuropathy Giant axonal neuropathy Refsum s disease Fabry s disease lipoproteinemia epilepsy hyperalgesia psychosis seizures abnormally elevated intraocular pressure oxidative stress opiate tolerance and dependence. Multiple sclerosis is not considered a neurodegenerative disease in this disclosure but rather a demyelinating disease. In addition mixtures of this invention are contemplated to be useful for their glutamate protective aspect i.e. for injury or disease caused or exacerbated by glutamate toxicity for example post operative treatments generally and surgical tumor removal from the central nervous system CNS . GA has been disclosed for use in the treatment of these diseases in e.g. U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 20020037848 A1 published Mar. 28 2002 Eisenbach Schwartz and U.S. Patent Application Publication No. 20030004099 A1 published Jan. 2 2003 Eisenbach Schwartz .

Certain immune mediated diseases contemplated for treatment with a composition comprising the polypeptide mixture of the invention are characterized by undesirable immune hypersensitivity to one or more antigens and include host versus graft disease HVGD and graft versus host disease GVHD which are exemplified respectively by graft rejection by the host immune system and by attack on the host by donor T cells. These diseases are a significant barrier to transplantation systems such as organ transplantations and bone marrow reconstitutions. Other immune mediated diseases that are contemplated for treatment by the polypeptide mixture of the invention include delayed type hypersensitivity DTH which is associated with contact antigens such as poison ivy and poison oak and various chemicals as well as tuberculosis leprosy leishmaniasis deep fungal infections etc. GA has been disclosed for use in the treatment of these diseases in e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 6 514 938 B1 issued Feb. 4 2003 to Gad et al. and PCT International Publication No. WO 01 60392 published Aug. 23 2001 Gilbert et al. PCT International Publication No. WO 00 27417 published May 19 2000 Aharoni et al. .

Polypeptide mixtures of the invention are also contemplated as a treatment for diseases associated with demyelination of central nervous system axons such as multiple sclerosis acute disseminated encephalomyelitis transverse myelitis demyelinating genetic diseases spinal cord injury virus induced demyelination Progressive Multifocal Leucoencephalopathy Human Lymphotrophic T cell Virus I HTLVI associated myelopathy and nutritional metabolic disorders such as vitamin B12 deficiency and central pontinemyelinolysis. GA has been disclosed for use in the treatment of these diseases in e.g. PCT International Publication No. WO 01 97846 published Dec. 27 2001 Moses et al. .

Methods of administration include all standard methods e.g. by parenteral intravenous intraperitoneal intramuscular subcutaneous mucosal oral intranasal buccal vaginal rectal intraocular intrathecal topical transdermal and intradermal routes. Administration can be systemic or local.

For oral administration excipients such as lactose or milk sugars as well as high molecular weight polyethylene glycols and the like may be used.

Liquid dosage forms for oral administration of the polypeptide mixture include pharmaceutically acceptable emulsions microemulsions solutions suspensions syrups and elixirs. In addition to the active ingredient s the liquid dosage forms may contain inert diluents commonly used in the art such as for example water or other solvents solubilizing agents and emulsifiers such as ethyl alcohol isopropyl alcohol ethyl carbonate ethyl acetate benzyl alcohol benzyl benzoate propylene glycol 1 3 butylene glycol oils in particular cottonseed groundnut corn germ olive castor and sesame oils glycerol tetrahydrofuryl alcohol polyethylene glycols and fatty acid esters of sorbitan and mixtures thereof.

For intraocular administration the polypeptide mixture may be formulated into pharmaceutical compositions with pharmaceutically acceptable carriers such as water or saline and may be formulated into eye drops.

For oral administration the pharmaceutical preparation may be in liquid form for example solutions syrups or suspensions or may be presented as a drug product for reconstitution with water or other suitable vehicle before use. Such liquid preparations may be prepared by conventional means with pharmaceutically acceptable additives such as suspending agents e.g. sorbitol syrup cellulose derivatives or hydrogenated edible fats emulsifying agents e.g. lecithin or acacia non aqueous vehicles e.g. almond oil oily esters or fractionated vegetable oils and preservatives e.g. methyl or propyl p hydroxybenzoates or sorbic acid . The pharmaceutical compositions may take the form of for example tablets or capsules prepared by conventional means with pharmaceutically acceptable excipients such as binding agents e.g. pregelatinized maize starch polyvinyl pyrrolidone or hydroxypropyl methylcellulose fillers e.g. lactose microcrystalline cellulose or calcium hydrogen phosphate lubricants e.g. magnesium stearate talc or silica disintegrants e.g. potato starch or sodium starch glycolate or wetting agents e.g. sodium lauryl sulphate . The tablets may be coated by methods well known in the art.

Preparations for oral administration may be suitably formulated to give controlled release of the polypeptide mixture. For buccal administration the compositions may take the form of tablets or lozenges formulated in conventional manner. The compositions may be formulated for parenteral administration by injection e.g. by bolus injection or continuous infusion. Formulations for injection may be presented in unit dosage form e.g. in ampoules or in multidose containers with an added preservative. The compositions may take such forms as suspensions solutions or emulsions in oily or aqueous vehicles and may contain formulatory agents such as suspending stabilizing and or dispersing agents. Alternatively the active ingredient may be in powder form for constitution with a suitable vehicle e.g. sterile pyrogen free water before use.

The polypeptide mixture may also be formulated in rectal compositions such as suppositories or retention enemas e.g. containing conventional suppository bases such as cocoa butter or other glycerides.

For administration by inhalation the polypeptide mixture according to the present invention is conveniently delivered in the form of an aerosol spray presentation from pressurized packs or a nebulizer with the use of a suitable propellant e.g. dichlorodifluoromethane trichlorofluoromethane dichlorotetrafluoroethane carbon dioxide or other suitable gas. In the case of a pressurized aerosol the dosage unit may be determined by providing a valve to deliver a metered amount. Capsules and cartridges of e.g. gelatin for use in an inhaler or insufflator may be formulated containing a powder mix of the compound and a suitable powder base such as lactose or starch.

Pharmaceutical compositions comprising the mixture of polypeptides of the invention may optionally be administered with an adjuvant in the usual manner for immunization. Non limiting examples of such adjuvants include alum and incomplete Freund s adjuvant. Other manners of improving the immunogenicity of the administered peptide or polypeptide include administration in the form of an aggregation or a complex with albumin or with other carriers all as are well known to those of ordinary skill in the vaccine art. Metabolizable lipid emulsions such as Intralipid or Lipofundin may also be used as vehicles for the Cop 1 therapy in the manner disclosed in PCT International Publication No. WO 97 02016 published Jan. 23 1997 Cohen et al the entire contents of which being hereby incorporated herein by reference.

When the mixture of polypeptides of the invention is administered orally it may be mixed with other food forms and consumed in solid semi solid suspension or emulsion form and it may be mixed with pharmaceutically acceptable carriers including water suspending agents emulsifying agents flavor enhancers and the like. In one embodiment the oral composition is enterically coated. Use of enteric coatings is well known in the art. For example Lehman teaches enteric coatings such as Eudragit S and Eudragit L. Lehman K. Acrylic Coatings in Controlled Realse Tablet Manufacturer Manufacturing Chemist and Aerosol News p. 39 1973 The Handbook of Pharmaceutical Excipients 2.sup.nd Ed. also teaches Eudragit S and Eudragit L applications. One Eudragit which may be used in the present invention is L30D55.

The mixture of polypeptides of the invention may also be administered nasally in certain of the above mentioned forms by inhalation or nose drops. Furthermore oral inhalation may be employed to deliver the mixture of polypeptides of the invention to the mucosal linings of the trachea and bronchial passages.

The mixture of polypeptides can also be administered in the form of liposome delivery systems such as small unilamellar vesicles large unilamallar vesicles and multilamellar vesicles. Liposomes can be formed from a variety of phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholines or lipids such as cholesterol and stearylamine. The compounds may be administered as components of tissue targeted emulsions.

Examples of liposomes which can be used in this invention include the following 1 CellFectin 1 1.5 M M liposome formulation of the cationic lipid N NI NII NIII tetramethyl N NI NII NIII tetrapalmity spermine and dioleoyl phosphatidylethanolamine DOPE GIBCO BRL 2 Cytofectin GSV 2 1 M M liposome formulation of a cationic lipid and DOPE Glen Research 3 DOTAP N 1 2 3 dioleoyloxy N N N trimethyl ammoniummethylsulfate Boehringer Manheim and 4 Lipofectamine 3 1 M M liposome formulation of the polycationic lipid DOSPA and the neutral lipid DOPE GIBCO BRL .

The invention also provides a pharmaceutical pack or kit comprising one or more containers filled with one or more of the ingredients of the pharmaceutical compositions of the invention.

The mixture of polypeptides disclosed in this application having a net positive charge can be attached electrostatically to charged nanoparticles or nanoparticle by mixing an aqueous solution of the polypeptide mixture of the invention with a suspension of the nanoparticles or microparticles. The suspension thus formed of the polypeptide mixture attached to the nanoparticles or nanoparticle can be lyophilized to a powder for long term storage. The lyophilized powder can be reconstituted in buffer to re obtain the suspension of drug. Suspensions of attached drug thus obtained are particularly suited for oral delivery. If made with particles having an average diameter below 200 nm the suspension is suitable for sublingual delivery since nanoparticles can transverse the sublingual membrane. For oral delivery to the gastrointestinal tract larger nanoparticles can be used since they are the size most readily recognized by the Peyer s patches and M cells. For such oral delivery a nano suspension as a lyophilized powder or as a reconstituted suspension may be delivered to the small intestine by using an enteric coated capsule. The enhanced stability of the peptide or protein when attached in a nano suspension formulation allows for more time for the peptide drug to be absorbed in the intestine before it is degraded by enzymes in the gastrointestinal tract. Production of nanoparticles can be achieved by methods well known in the art. An example of a nanoparticle involving glatiramer acetate is described in PCT International Publication No. WO 2005 041933.

In various embodiments the claimed methods can encompass the administration of a therapeutically effective amount of the polypeptide mixture of the invention alone or in combination with another therapeutic or prophylactic agent. By administration in combination it is meant that the polypeptide mixture of the invention can be administered either substantially simultaneously with the second agent or that the second agent can be administered in a stepwise fashion with the polypeptide mixture of the invention. Thus in various embodiments depending on the particular treatment regime chosen by the physician one may administer the polypeptide mixture of the invention at the same time as the second agent or in other embodiments the polypeptide mixture of the invention and the second agent can be administered hours days or possibly even weeks apart. Alternatively the polypeptide mixture of the invention and the second agent are administered together for a period of time after which administration of the second agent is discontinued while administration of the polypeptide mixture of the invention is continued. The desired treatment regime can be determined by one skilled in the art depending upon the particulars of the patient being treated and the desired outcome.

Furthermore in various embodiments depending on the particular treatment regime chosen by the physician one may administer the polypeptide mixture of the invention and the second agent when administered in a combination as described above in lower dosages as determined by one skilled in the art. Any therapeutic or prophylactic agent useful in the treatment of the diseases for which the polypeptide mixture of the invention may be used can be the second agent according to this invention.

The polypeptide mixture of the invention can be used together with the second agent from the inception of the treatment of the patient or the mixture can be added to a treatment regimen after the patient has already been receiving the second agent for some time. Likewise the second agent can be added to the treatment regimen after the patient received the mixture for some time. Alternatively the mixture can be used to replace an agent when for example the patient s response to the agent deteriorates or when the patient experiences side effects using the other agent.

For the treatment of multiple sclerosis or its symptoms the second agent may be glatiramer acetate COPAXONE natalizumab TYSABRI steroids muscle relaxants oral prednisone DELTASONE methylprednisolone DEPO MEDROL SOLU MEDROL prednisolone DELTA CORTEF dexamethasone DECADRON TOBRADEX AK TROL DEXPAK MEDROL adreno corticotrophic hormone ACTH ACTHAR corticotrophin immunosuppressants acyclovir azathioprine IMURAN cyclophosphamide CYTOXAN NEOSAR mitoxantrone NOVANTRONE cyclosporine SANDIMMUNE methotrexate cladribine LEUSTATINE interferons AVONEX BETASERON BETAFERON REBIF laquinimod ginko biloba natalizumab ANTEGREN alemtuzumab CAMPATH 1H 4 aminopyridine FAMPRIDINE 3 4 diaminopyridine eliprodil IV immunoglobin GAMMAGARD GAMMAR IV GAMIMUNE N IVEEGAM PANGLOBULIN SANDOGLOBULIN VENOGLOBULIN ANERGIX MS pregabalin or ziconotide.

For the treatment of pain and or altered sensation dysaesthesia related to multiple sclerosis the second agent may be carbamazepine TEGRETOL EPITOL ATRETOL CARBATROL gabatentin NEURONTIN topiramate TOPAMAX zonisamide ZONEGRAN phenyloin DILANTIN desipramine NORPRAMIN amitriptyline ELAVIL imipramine TOFRANIL IMAVATE JANIMINE doxepin SINEQUAN ADAPIN TRIADAPIN ZONALON protriptyline VIVACTIL pentozifylline TRENTAL ibuprophen ADVIL MOTRIN asprin acetaminophen or hydroxyzine ATARAX .

For the treatment of depression anxiety and or insomnia related to multiple sclerosis the second agent may be fluoxetine PROZAC sertraline ZOLOFT LUSTRAL venlafaxine EFFEXOR XR citalopram CELEXA parocetine PAXIL SEROXAT trazodone DESYREL TRIALODINE amitriptyline ELAVIL nortriptyline PAMELOR AVENTYL imipramine TOFRANIL IMAVATE JANIMINE dothiepin PROTHIADEN lofepramine GAMANIL doxepin SINEQUAN ADAPIN DRIADAPIN ZONALON protriptyline VIVACTIL tranylcypromine PARNATE moclobemide MANERIX AURORIX bupropion WELLBUTRIN SR AMFEBUTAMONE nefazodone SERZONE mirtazapine REMERON zolpidem AMBIEN alprazolam XANAX temazepam RESTORIL diazepam VALIUM or buspirone BUSPAR .

For the treatment of fatigue related to multiple sclerosis the second agent may be amantadine SYMMETREL pemoline CYLERT vitamin D derivatives such as alphacalcidol and calcitrol or modafinil PROVIGIL .

For the treatment of urinary problems related to multiple sclerosis the second agent may be oxybutynin DIPTROPAN XL desmopressin DDAVP vasopressin tolterodine DETROL carbamazepine TEGRETOL EPITOL ATRETOL CARBATROL imipramine TOFRANIL bethane URECHOLINE phenoxybenzamine DIBENZYLINE terazosin HYTRIN propantheline PRO BANTHINE oxybutonin DITROPAN hyoscyamine URISPAS CYSTOPAS baclofen LIORESAL diazepam VALIUM methenamine HIPREX MANDELAMINE nitrofurantoin MACRODANTIN phenazopyridine PYRIDIUM or ciprofloxacin CIPRO .

For the treatment of bowel problems related to multiple sclerosis the second agent may be bisacodyl DULCOLAX BISACOLAX magnesium hydroxide milk of magnesia glycerin SANI SUPP psyllium hydrophilic mucilloid METAMUCIL sodium phosphate FLEET ENEMA anti tumor necrosis factor TNF INFLIXIMAB REMICADE or docusate COLACE THEREVAC PLUS .

For the treatment of sexual dysfunction related to multiple sclerosis the second agent may be sildenafil VIAGRA alprostadil PROSTIN VR MUSE or papaverine.

For the treatment of spasticity clonus and or muscle tics related to multiple sclerosis the second agent may be diazepam VALIUM clonazepam KLONOPIN RIVOTRIL baclofen LIORESAL dantrolene sodium DANTRIUM Tizanidine ZANAFLEX SIRDALUD clonidine CATAPRES or botulinum toxin BOTOX NERUOBLOC .

For the treatment of tremors related to multiple sclerosis the second agent may be clonazepam KLONOPIN RIVOTRIL gabapentin NEUROTIN primidone MYSOLINE botulinum toxin BOTOX NEUROBLOC actazolamide DIAMOX and cabidopa levodopa SINEMET or isoniazid LANIAZID NYDRAZID .

For the treatment of vertigo nausea and or dizziness related to multiple sclerosis the second agent may be meclizine ANTIVERT BONAMINE dienhydrinate DRAMAMINE prochlorperazine COMPAZINE scopolamine TRANSDERM or diphenhydramine BENADRYL .

For the treatment of multiple sclerosis the polypeptide mixture of the invention can be administered with or after therapy such as plasmaphoresis reflexology or total lymphoid radiation.

For the treatment of glaucoma or its symptoms the second agent may be glatiramer acetate COPAXONE pilocarpine PILOCAR ISOPTO CARPINE PILOPINE HS isoptocarpine timolol hemihydrate BETIMOL timolol maleate BLOCADREN COSOPT TIMOLIDE TIMOPTIC TIMOPTIC XE betaxolol BETOPTIC levobunolol BETAGAN carteolol OCUPRESS metipranolol OPTIPRANOLOL epinephrine EPIPEN EPIFRIN EPPY N dipivefrin PROPINE carbachol ISOPTO CARBACHOL apraclonidine IOPIDINE brimonidine ALPHAGAN dorzolamide TRUSOPT COSOPT latanoprost ZALATAN travaprost TRAVATAN brimatoprost LUMIGAN brinzolamide AZOPT potent cholinesterase inhibiters e.g. echothiophate iodide PHOSPHOLINE IODIDE demecarium isoblurophate carbonic anhydrase inhibitors e.g. dichlorphenamide DARANIDE or acetazolamide mannitol oral glycerin and mydriatics e.g. homatropine cyclopentolate phenylephrine memantine or atropine.

For the treatment of glaucoma the polypeptide mixture of the invention can be administerd with or after therapy such as laser trabeculoplasty filtering surgery surgery peripheral iridectomy laser iridotomy argon laser trabeculoplasty ALT selective laser trabeculoplasty SLT or neodymium YAG laser cyclophotocoagulation .

For the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease IBD or its symptoms the second agent may be glatiramer acetate COPAXONE anticholinergics diphenoxylate loperamide deodorized opium tincture codeine antibiotics metronidazole METROCREAM METROGEL METROGEL VAGINAL METROLOTION METRO I.V. FLAGYL I.V. RTU FLAGYL INJECTION FLAGYL ORAL METRIC 21 PROTOSTAT NORITATE and HELIDAC sulfasalazine AZULFIDINE EN TABS and ASULFIDINE corticosteroid therapy betamethasone CELESTONE SOLUSPAN budesonide ENTOCORT EC prednisone DELTASONE methylprednisolone MEDROL MEPROLONE UNIPAK DEPO MEDROL DEOJECT DEPOPRED DURALONE M PREDNISOL MEDRALONE SOLU MEDROL DEMEDALONE hydrocortisone ANUSOL HC CIPRO HC OTIC HYDROCORTONE COLOCORT CORTANE B CORTEF CORTIC ND LACTICARE HC PROTOCORT PROCTOCREAM HC VYTONE ZOTO HC ANUCORT HC ANUMED HC CORT DOME HIGH POTENCY HEMORRHOIDAL HC HEMRIL HC . UNISERTS PROCTOCORT antimetabolites immunosuppressive therapies e.g. azathioprine IMURAN 6 mercaptopurine PURINETHOL cyclosporine GENGRAF NEORAL SANDIMMUNE T lymphocyte aphaeresis 4 amino quinolines methotrexate RHEUMATREX TREXALL loperamide 5 aminosalicylic acid 5 ASA mesalamine ASACOL PENTASA CLAVERSAL CANASA SUPPOSITORY ROWASA balsalazide COLAZAL sulfasalazine AZULFIDINE EN TABS olsalazine DIPENTUM azathioprine AZASAN IMURAN ACTH 75 ACTH 120 anti tumor necrosis factor TNF INFLIXIMAB REMICADE or antibiotics e.g. ampicillin PRINCIPEN cefazolin .

For the treatment of IBD the polypeptide mixture of the invention can be administered with or after therapy such as elemental diet hyperalimentation surgery emergency colectomy subtotal colectomy with ileostomy and rectosigmoid mucous fistula or proctoclectomy with abdominoperineal resection.

For the treatment of Huntington s disease or its symptoms the second agent may be glatiramer acetate COPAXONE phenothiazine chlorpromazine THORAZINE 100 to 900 mg day butyrophenone neuroleptics haloperidol geldanamycin RNA interference trehalose cystamine rapamycin glucocorticoids nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drugs asprin acetaminophen ibuprohen ADVIL MIDOL omega 3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid EPA LAX 101 docosahexanoic DHA minocycline folic acid creatine dichloroacetate nicotinamide riboflavin BEVITAMEL TABLETS MEGA B MASCOBAL GEL FOLGARD NIFREX 150 FORTE CAPSULES TRINSICON CAPSULES carnitine tauroursodeoxycholic acid ginko biloba coenzyme Q10 vitamin A MEGADOSE TABLETS PALMITATE A VI DAYLIN ADC vitamin C PROFLAVANOL 90 TABLETS ACES ANTIOXIDANT SOFT GELS PERIDIN C TABLETS TRINSICON TABLETS VI DAYLIN ADC vitamin E MEGADOSE TABLETS UNIQUE E ACES ANTIOXIDENT SOFT GELS E GEMS SOFT GELS LACTINOL E CREME selenium ACES ANTIOXIDENT SOFT GELS lipoic acid arginine mithramycin remacemide filuzole lamotrigine LAMICTAL memantine gabamentin HDAC inhibitors retinoic acid or reserpine.

For the treatment of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis ALS or its symptoms the second agent may be riluzole RILUTEK glatiramer acetate COPAXONE baclofen phenyloin DILANTIN quinine or amitriptyline.

For the treatment of ALS the polypeptide mixture of the invention can be administered with or after therapy such as gastrostomy and noninvasive ventilation e.g. BiPAP bilevel positive airway pressure or a tracheostomy and a ventilator .

The invention includes salts of the polypeptide mixture of the invention. As used herein the term salts refers to both salts of carboxyl groups and to acid addition salts of amino groups of the peptide molecule. Salts of a carboxyl group may be formed by means well known in the art and include inorganic salts for example sodium calcium ammonium ferric or zinc salts and the like and salts with organic bases such as those formed for example with amines such as triethanolamine arginine or lysine piperidine procaine and the like. Acid addition salts include for example salts with mineral acids such as for example hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid and salts with organic acids such as for example acetic acid citric acid or trifluoroacetic acid. Such salts are preferably used to modify the pharmaceutical properties of the peptide insofar as stability solubility etc. are concerned.

The term mixture as used in this application in the phrase mixture of polypeptides of the invention means a mixture of copolymers of the amino acids comprising L glutamic acid L alanine L tyrosine and L lysine wherein some of the polypeptides of the mixture have C terminal carboxyl groups and others have a diethylamide group instead. The polypeptide in the mixture may include residual impurities as a result of the manufacturing process. Because no reaction goes 100 to completion and not all impurities can be totally eliminated small amounts may remain and be present in the mixture. In general said impurities are of the following three types 

The term average molecular weight as used in this application means the molecular weight of the species of polypeptides present in the mixture in the highest relative proportion i.e. the peak maximum when the mixture is subjected to separation by molecular weight on an HPLC gel permeation column. This value can be obtained in several ways e.g. from the retention time on a calibrated column or from a correlation between the location of the peak and the location of the cochromatographed copolymer markers of defined sequence and molecular weight. Other methods of determining an average molecular weight such as by light scattering may be employed and will correspond substantially to the value obtained from the peak maximum.

The term carrier refers to any binder disintegrant glidant sweetening agent flavoring or any other vehicle with which the mixture is administered. Suitable carriers in the pharmaceutical composition may comprise a binder such as microcrystalline cellulose polyvinylpyrrolidone polyvidone or povidone gum tragacanth gelatin starch lactose or lactose monochydrate a disintegrating agent such as alginic acid maize starch and the like a lubricant or surfactant such as magnesium stearate or sodium lauryl sulphate a glidant such as colloidal silicon dioxide a sweetening agent such as sucrose or saccharin and or a flavoring agent such as peppermint methyl salicylate or orange flavoring.

The term substantially as used in this document means considerable in quantity or significantly great or being largely but not wholly that which is specified.

The term substantially free as used in this document means largely but not wholly chemically uncombined or not united with attached to combined with or mixed with something specified.

The term nanoparticle as used in this document refers to a particle having an average diameter of 1 5000 nanometers nm .

The term glatiramer acetate markers as used in this document refers to the glatiramer acetate markers disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 800 287 B2 issued Oct. 5 2004 Gad et al. .

The superscripts represent the molar percent range of amino acid and diethylamide residues comprising the various species in the polypeptide mixture of the invention where the sequence of the amino acid residues varies among these individual components.

n represents the number of moles of acetate per one mole of the polypeptide mixture of the invention max. 26 .

The calculations for formulae 2 5 are based on a DEA range from 700 ppm to 1500 ppm and 10 AcOH average observed content .

The superscript values are ratios of each amino acid moles and the sum of all moles amino acid and DEA found after total hydrolysis of the sample. Poly L Glu L Ala L Tyr L Lys N CH n CHCOH 

n is the number of acetate counterions for 10 ACOH n is 26 or 26 acetate residues per one polypeptide molecule of the polypeptide mixture of the invention.

The subscripts are presented as ratios between the moles of each component found and the number of moles of the polypeptide mixture of the invention subjected to analysis. Poly L Glu L Ala L Tyr L Lys N CH n CHCOH where x 0.13 0.38 i.e. 13 38 of the molecules have a C terminal diethylamide.

The superscripts reflect the molar percent range of the amino acid residues X represents the percentage of molecules with C terminal diethylamides 13 38 n is the number of acetate counter ions per molecule 15 29 . Average molecular weight 16 000 Daltons 13 500 18 500 .

The average molecular weight of the polypeptide mixture of the invention for all formulae can be 16 000 daltons and in the range of 13 500 18 500 daltons.

Polypeptides with molecular weights below 5000 daltons and in an embodiment those below 4 700 daltons can be substantially removed from a precursor of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention by ultrafiltration.

While the polypeptide mixture of the invention and GA the active ingredient of Copaxon are characterized by the same molar fraction range for each amino acid residue other characteristics differ. Physician s Desk Reference PDR 56ed. Med. Econ. Co. Montvale USA 2002 pp. 3306 3310. The average MW of GA is 4 700 to 11 000 daltons whereas the average MW of the polypeptide mixture of the invention is 16 000 2 500 daltons. There are also differences in chemical properties biological activity and immunogenicity of the polypeptide mixture of the invention as compared to GA.

The preferred polypeptide mixture of the invention is the acetate salt of synthetic polypeptides prepared by chemically reacting four activated amino acid derivatives L Glutamic acid L Glu L alanine L Ala L tyrosine L Tyr and L lysine L Lys two of them protected i.e. 5 BZ Glutamate derivative and 6N TFA Lysine derivative in a specified ratio in the presence of a catalytic amount of diethylamine initiator.

The polypeptide mixture of the invention is preferably obtained and stored as a white to slightly yellowish lyophilized material at standard conditions.

The following analyses are typically carried out on the polypeptide mixture Identification Assay on a water free basis Acetate Content pH Amino Acid Content DEA content and molecular weight distribution.

Although the polypeptides of the polypeptide mixture of the invention consist of the same four amino acid residues as glatiramer acetate GA the physico chemical and in particular the biological characteristics of the two drug substances differ.

In the mixture of polypeptides of the invention 13 38 of the polypeptides have a diethylamide group at one end instead of a carboxy group in certain embodiments from 18 28 whereas in GA only about 6 are diethylamides. The increased proportion of C terminal amides is achieved by a controlled modification introduced in the manufacturing process. Thus polypeptides in the mixture of the invention may have C terminal carboxylic acids or C terminal diethylamides. This may be measured by assaying formation of a diethylamine residue after totally degrading the polypeptide mixture. The amount of diethylamine residues upon degradation in the poypeptide mixture of the invention may be from 700 ppm to 1500 ppm on a water and acetate free basis.

In addition Circular Dichroism CD measurements showed a distinct difference in the alpha helical conformation of GA as compared with the polypeptide mixture of the invention.

GA and the polypeptide composition comprising the mixture of the invention share immunological cross reactivities and so the mechanism of action of the polypeptide mixture of the invention is expected to be similar to that of GA although unexpectedly the mixture has a higher immunologic activity. Comparative immunological and biological studies conducted with the polypeptide mixture of the invention and GA demonstrated that the polypeptide mixture of the invention induces a stronger immune response and biological activity in a mouse models for MS EAE and in mouse model for neurodegeneration of retinal ganglion cells.

Additionally the mixture of polypeptides of the invention in embodiments may contain less than 1000 ppm preferably less than 500 ppm more preferably less than 100 ppm or most preferably less than 10 ppm of metal ion impurities. In embodiments the mixture may contain no more than 60 ppm preferably no more than 30 ppm preferably no more than 20 ppm and most preferably no more than 10 ppm or even be substantially free of heavy metals impurities. In some embodiments the mixture contains no more than 0.10 fluorides 0.10 polypeptides with residual trifluoroacetyl on the polypeptides and no more than 0.10 benzyl bromide i.e. no more than 0.10 of benzylated glutamyl residues . In additional embodiments the mixture contain no more than 0.5 0.2 0.1 or 0.05 bromotyrosine no more than 1000 ppm dioxane and or no more than 0.2 piperidine.

For investigational use the drug product is supplied in a single use pre filled syringe containing 1.0 ml of a clear solution of mannitol and the polypeptide mixture of the invention in different dose strengths.

During production copolymerization of the four amino acids L Alanine L Glutamic acid L Tyrosine and L Lysine N carboxyanhydrides is initiated by the addition of diethylamine. During this process the diethylamine binds covalently at which point it is referred to as diethylamide and remains bound to the end of the polypeptide chains of the protected polypeptides as a result of formation of an amide bond where a carboxyl group would otherwise be present.

As a result of the acidolytic cleavage of the protected polypeptides two types of polypeptide components are present in the mixture 

Consequently in the polypeptide mixture of the invention diethylamide derivatives are present in the drug substance and are represented in the molecular structural formula of the polypeptide mixture of the invention given above.

The optical activity of the polypeptide mixture of the invention originates from the asymmetric centers of the four L amino acid residues composing the polypeptide species.

The proton NMR spectrum exhibits an absorption pattern characteristic of the amino acid residues composing the polypeptides of the polypeptide mixture of the invention.

A C 13 spectrum was run on a Bruker DPX 300 instrument 300.1 for protons and 75.5 MHz for Carbons in DO. The chemical shifts of the carbon atoms are presented in. The C 13 shifts are characteristics of the amino acid residues present in the polypeptide mixture of the invention.

The relatively high molar absorptivity at 220 nm coupled with the relatively low molar fraction of tyrosine 0.086 0.100 in the polypeptide mixture of the invention suggests that the absorption at 220 nm is not due solely to its n transition. Such absorption is also characteristic of alpha helix regions in polypeptide molecules. The presence of alpha helix in the polypeptide mixture of the invention has been further verified by circular dichroism measurements. See .

The intensity of the amide I absorption 1655.0 cm correlates with the degree of the helical conformation in the polypeptide mixture of the invention which is verified by circular dichroism measurement. See .

The amino acid content was determined by a method which included quantitative hydrolysis of the sample derivatization of the free amino acids obtained after the hydrolysis with orthophtaldialdehyde OPA and 2 mercaptoethanol and analysis by RP HPLC with UV detection at 330 nm.

Edman degradation is a method for step wise sequential analysis of the amino acids composing a polypeptide starting from the molecular N terminus. The results of the Edman degradation indicate the specific relative occurrence expressed in molar fraction of the four amino acid residues comprising the polypeptides of the polypeptide mixture of the invention.

Because the mixture of polypeptides of the invention contains polypeptides of different sizes and compositions only limited information on the amino acid residues sequence is available by a standard method of sequencing such as Edman degradation. The average molar fraction of the amino acids between batches as measured is 0.427 alanine 0.337 lysine 0.141 glutamate and 0.093 tyrosine. However the test results indicate that L tyrosine is more prevalent at or near the N terminus and L lysine is more prevalent at or near the C terminus of the polypeptides of the mixture of the invention. Furthermore although the average molar content of alanine in GA and in the polypeptide mixture of the invention is the same in the polypeptide mixture of the invention the first cycle of Edman degradation show that there are fewer polypeptide molecules with alanine at the N terminus 0.393 molecules than in GA. Specifically realative to the average molear content of alanine in the mixture there are a greater percentage of polypeptide molecules with alanine at the N terminus in GA but a lower percentage of polypeptide molecules with alanine at the N terminus in the polypeptide mixture of the invention.

A graphical comparison between the molecular sizes of GA and the polypeptide mixture of the invention appears in . The difference in molecular size between a polypeptide mixture of the invention RS and glatiramer acetate RS is illustrated by their two overlaid GP HPLC Superose 6 chromatograms.

The polymerization process is initiated by the reaction between diethylamine DEA and N carboxamide amino acid precursors in the reaction mixture. Following the acidolytic cleavage reaction some of the polypeptide chains retain their C terminal diethylamides although most of the polypeptides of the invention are cleavage products with C terminal carboxylates. Furthermore the ultrafiltration process removes short peptides which may have either C terminal carboxylates or diethylamides while the larger fragments remain in the polypeptide mixture.

In the polypeptide mixture of the invention 13 38 of the polypeptides chains have diethylamides at the end thereof where a carboxyl is usually present preferably 18 28 . Thus the measured free diethylamine content calculated on a water and AcOH free basis may vary from 700 ppm to 1500 ppm 70 150 milligrams of diethylamine per 100 grams of polypeptide mixture .

Since neither GA nor the mixture of polypeptides of the invention contain free diethylamine the percentage of diethylamide substituted derivatives in the polypeptide mixture is actually determined by complete hydrolysis of a sample of polypeptide mixture under strongly alkaline conditions followed by quantitation of liberated diethylamine by headspace chromatography and correction to the water and AcOH free basis.

The percentage of polypeptide chains with C terminal diethylamides DTP may be calculated as follows for convenience the calculation is shown for 100 grams of polypeptide mixture DTP DEA PP 100

For example the average molecular weight of a representative batch of a mixture of polypeptides was determined to be 16 192 Da. A 100 gram sample was found to contain 112.4 mg of diethylamine after hydrolysis calculated on the dry basis thus the DTP is 24.9.

The polypeptide mixture of the invention was dissolved in phosphate buffer pH 6.8 containing potassium chloride. The initial spectra was determined in this buffer line with triangles . Minima at about 208 and 220 nm which is characteristic of the presence of alpha helical conformation.

Trifluoroethanol TFE an inducer of alpha helical conformation was added and the spectra were recorded. The addition of TFE caused no significant effect on the polypeptide mixture of the invention.

The minimal signal ratio is from 0.91 solution in buffer to 0.93 solution in buffer TFE . These results represent the polypeptide mixture of the invention with 97.0 of initial helical conformation.

On the basis of these test results it can be concluded that the degree of alpha helical conformation in the polypeptide mixture of the invention is apparently almost at its maximum and is not affected by the addition of TFE. Contrary to the polypeptide mixture of the invention glatiramer acetate molecules which have a smaller degree of alpha helical conformation are induced to increase this characteristic by the addition of TFE.

The average molecular weight of the polypeptides in the mixture of the invention was initially determined to be approximately 15 000 2 000 daltons by multi angle laser scattering MALLS . The molecular weight is now being determined by SEC chromatography. As determined by SEC chromatography the same mixture of polypeptides was shown to have an average molecular weight of 16 000 2 500 daltons.

Determination of molecular weights MW distribution in the polypeptide mixture of the invention by SEC chromatography requires a suitable set of MW markers. As the polypeptide mixture of the invention differs from native protein no commercial protein MW markers could be used for this purpose and markers related to the mixture of polypeptides of the invention polypeptide markers had to be produced. In order to obtain marker set for MW calibration curve five markers were designed with MW range from about 16 000 Da to 27 000 Da table 6 . The polypeptide markers were produced by recombinant methods. The markers cDNA were sub cloned into pET 21a vector Merck cat 69740 and cloned into HMS174 DE3 strain Merck cat 69453 . After expression two precipitations and two chromatography steps gave the markers in at least 80 purity.

Molecular weight determination of the markers was made using a Q TOF Ultima Global Micromass mass spectrometer. Data were deconvoluted using MaxEnt 1 software. The results of molecular mass determination are summarized in Table 6.

The MS analysis demonstrate that the markers for the main mass are comparable to the planned mass and all markers are without Met residue on the N termini.

SDS PAGE analysis was performed to estimate the markers characteristics. About 45 g of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention and LMW SDS marker kit Amersham cat 17 0446 01 and 1 g of each polypeptide markers were loaded on 14 gel. As shown in the markers align correctly according to their comparative mass. However calculating the markers molecular weight based on commercially available SDS PAGE protein markers results in a measured mass about 30 higher then their expected mass . Similar results have been experienced previously thus accentuating the need for specific markers.

Core chromatographic conditions at which linear correlation between the markers was obtained was a flow rate of 0.4 ml min at a guanidine HCl GuaHCl concentration of 4.5 M. The linearity was maintained after the markers were lyophilized and reconstituted with water. The conditions presented nice symmetrical shape peaks with minimum tailing Rvalue of 0.999 and elution time gap between polypeptide markers 1 and 5 of 3.5 min. .

Synthetic DNA encoding each of the polypeptide markers of the invention was subcloned into the NdeI and SalT sites of the Pet21 a vector and transformed into strain HMS174 DE3 .

A 10 30 liter culture was grown and expression of the polypeptides was induced with IPTG. After 25 50 hours of fermentation the cells were harvested and centrifuged. The pellet was resuspended with 50 mM phosphate buffer pH 2.5 and 6M urea and lysed in a Microfluidics homogenizer with cooling coil inline. The homogenate was then centrifuged and the pellet was resuspended with 50 mM phosphate buffer pH 12. The resulting suspension was centrifuged and the supernatant pH was adjusted to 8.0 with HCl. 1 mM MgCl and DNAse were added and the suspension was incubated for 2 hours at room temperature.

Chromatographic Step 1 The ammonium sulfate concentration of the suspention was adjusted to 50 and the markers were loaded on a phenyl sepharose column Amersham . The markers were eluted from the column using a gradient of 50 mM phosphate buffer pH 8 and the peak fractions were collected.

Chromatographic Step 2 The main peak from the phenyl sepharose column was diluted with 50 mM buffer phosphate pH 8.5 and loaded on a SP 650C column Tosoh . The markers were eluted from the column using a gradient of 50 mM phosphate buffer pH 8.5 2M NaCl and then collected desalted and lyophilized.

To compare the chromatographic characters of different MW markers we tested four sets of markers the polypeptide markers 1 5 as disclosed Glatiramer acetate markers disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 800 287 and commercially available protein markers from two vendors sigma cat MW GF 70 and Amersham cat 17 0442 01 . All markers were prepared in the same fashion according to the method that was developed during this study including sample preparation with 4.5M guanidine hydrochloride.

The experiments show that these polypeptide markers are almost in line with GA markers disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 800 287 B2 and apparently have identical running characters. The two largest GA markers 9200 Da and 11700 Da form together with the polypeptide markers 1 5 an excellent linear correlation R 0.996 . The smaller GA markers seem to deviate slightly from the straight line however the differences are most likely due to column range that wasn t designed to include samples with MW as small as the polypeptide markers. Unexpectedly the two set of protein markers present two unrelated trend lines. The two calibration curves formed by the protein markers set are not comparable with each other and undoubtedly not with the GA markers disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 800 287 B2 and polypeptide markers 1 5.

The test shows that calibrations with commercial MW markers are not comparable with the polypeptide markers 1 5. Even though the commercial markers trend lines show slope values close to that of the other two sets their RRT values are significantly larger compared to their MW as if they maintained some level of globular form they appear smaller then their labeled MW compared to the polypeptide markers 1 5 . In addition under the conditions developed for running the mixture of polypeptides of the invention one commercial marker was aggregated during preparation Ovalbumin Amersham 43000 Da marker and the others show poor linear correlation.

After establishing core chromatographic conditions at which linear correlation between the molecular weight markers was obtained a preliminary experiment to determine the MW of the polypeptide mixture of the invention was performed. The experiment was carried out with the conditions using phosphate buffer pH 3 with 4.5M GuaHCl as mobile phase and 0.4 ml min flow rate. The MW distribution results of a batch of a mixture of polypeptides of the invention were determined by Millennium MW calculation program based on theoretical MW values for the markers.

As shown in the overlay chromatogram of the polypeptide mixture of the invention and the polypeptide markers the markers covered the higher molecular weight region of the polypeptide mixture of the invention. The RT of polypeptide marker 1 the lower MW marker and the polypeptide mixture of the invention at its max were about the same. Extension of the MW range covered by markers toward the lower MW region of the polypeptide mixture of the invention can be achieved with 11700 Da and 9200 Da markers respectively described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 800 287 B2 for Alexander Gad et al.

Finally the markers themselves having the four amino acid constituents of the polypeptide of the invention are contemplated as being useful for the same uses and methods as the polypeptide mixture of the invention.

The copolymerization of N carboxyanhydride derivatives of the four amino acids L Ala L Glu L Tyr and L Lys in 1 4 dioxane stirred at 25 C. 2 C. in the presence of an initiator diethylamine 24 hours hours to yield a mixture of protected polypeptides. The four derivatives of the amino acids used are L Tyrosine N carboxyanhydride L Alanine N carboxyanhydride 5 benzyl L glutamate N carboxyanhydride and 6N Trifluoroacetyl L Lysine N carboxyanhydride.

Following copolymerization process water is added and the protected polypeptides are subjected to precipitation chopping and dispersion for 1.25 hours. The protected polypeptides are then subjected to filtration and washing. The filter cake is dried in a vacuum at 60 C. 5 C. at a pressure of less than 20 mmHg for 12 hours and then subjected to milling. This yields a mixture of protected polypetides wherein the side chain functional groups of two amino acids glutamic acid and lysine are protected to avoid cross linking.

The mixture of protected polypeptides is the first intermediate in the production of the mixtures of polypeptides of the invention.

Treatment of the mixtures of protected polypeptides with a solution of 33 hydrogen bromide in glacial acetic acid at 20 C. for a time determined by a test reaction involves two chemical reactions cleavage of the benzyl protecting group from the 5 carboxylate side chain of the glutamate residues deprotection and acidolytic peptide bond cleavage reducing the average molecular size of the peptide mixture. The process water is then added follwed by washing with stirring decantation filtration and drying at 40 C. 2 C. at less than 40 mmHg thus forming the second intermediate mixtures of trifluoroacetyl polypeptides of reduced average molecular size and weight.

The necessary reaction time is determined by a test reaction prior to the actual execution of production stage 2 directing the reaction to a target value of an average molecular weight of 16 000 daltons. The reaction time is normally 7 to 18 hours at 17 21 C. Thus the reaction time is 7 15 hours at 18 20 C. and is 15 hours at 20 C.

Treatment of mixtures of trifluoroacetyl polypeptides with aqueous piperidine at 20 C. 26 C. removes the trifluoroacetyl protecting groups from the lysine residues forming a mixture of polypeptides of the invention base . The resulting product is then subjected to filtration less than 1.2 m 0.2 m at a temperature less than 15 C. During the ultrafiltration dilution steps of which there may be two low weight polypeptides formed during the first two production stages salts and piperidine are removed by alternating the ultrafiltration dilution cycles. After acidification with glacial acetic acid pH 4.0 4.5 the ultrafiltration dilution cycles are resumed reaching pH greater than 5.5 e.g. 5.5 6 and reducing the impurity concentration to the required level. This produces the third intermediate mixture an acidified mixture of the polypeptides of the invention in solution.

The third imtermediate mixture is subjected to further filtration 0.2 m and then lypopilized. After inicital freezing 50 C. the freeze drying process on the filtered solution of acidified mixture of polypeptides of the invention contained in individual trays in the lyophilizer is continued step wise maintaining a controlled pressure of 

Following the lyophilization a white to slightly yellowish material is obtained characterized by its formula as the acetate salt of the polypeptide mixture of the invention having an average molecular weight range at HPLC peak maximum 16 000 2 500 daltons as characterized by GC HPLC calibrated by the polypeptide markers.

In the manufacturing process for the mixtures of polypeptides of the invention 10 36 hydrobromic acid in acetic acid can be used to deprotect the protected polypeptides. During the development of the production process it was found that some of the tyrosine residues in trifluoroacetyl polypeptides were brominated. This impurity was isolated and identified. The tyrosine residue was found to react with bromine to form a mono bromotyrosine moiety comprising either 2 bromotyrosine or 3 bromotyrosine.

After much investigation the inventors discovered that the brominated tyrosine impurity was introduced into the polypeptides through free bromine in HBr acetic acid. The free bromine was present in 33 HBr acetic acid bought from a supplier and used in the production process. Thus the hydrogen bromide and acetic acid solution is contemplated to have less than 500 ppm in an embodiment less than 100 ppm or less than 10 ppm of metal ion impurities. In an embodiment the hydrogen bromide and acetic acid solution is free of metal ion impurities. Furthermore in the hydrogen bromide and acetic acid solution should have less than 0.5 0.1 0.05 0.01 or 0.001 of or to be free of free bromine and as noted should have less than 1000 ppm of metal ion impurities.

Thus measures were taken in order to decrease the level of free bromine in the solution. For example pre treatment of 33 HBr acetic acid with a bromine scavenger was effective in removing some of the free bromine from the HBr acetic acid solution. Furthermore the hydrogen bromide and acetic acid solution was handled in a non metallic reactor such as a glass lined or Teflon lined reactor.

One of the bromine scavengers used in the HBr purification process was phenol. In addition to phenol other reducing agents such as sodium bisulfite may be used. Phenol was chosen as a bromine scavenger because it and its reaction product with bromine bromophenols are both substantially non reactive with protected polypeptides the mixture of polypeptides of the invention and the mixture of TFA polypeptides of the invention and they are easy to remove from the solution during the purification process. Similarly any bromine scavenging agent may be used provided that it and its reaction product with bromine are not reactive with protected polypeptides the mixture of polypeptides of the invention and the mixture of TFA polypeptides of the invention and it is easily removable during the final purification process.

A number of different strengths of the polypeptide mixture of the invention have been developed. Immunorecognition tests in vitro by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay ELISA using anti GA glatiramer acetate specific monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies which show high cross reactivity with the polypeptide mixture of the invention serve the specific identification of the polypeptide mixture of the invention. The biological activity of the material is demonstrated by the ex vivo Potency Test and the in vivo EAE Blocking Test both carried out on mice.

One out of three regular production batches of the polypeptide mixture of the invention displaying acceptable effect in the glutamate toxicity intra occular pressure and TNBS models described herein was chosen to serve as the Reference. Material.

The material was not subjected to an additional purification process for its use as Reference Standard.

The biological properties of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention were evaluated by immunorecognition tests using antibodies specific to GA. The immunorecognition of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention by monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies specific to GA was examined by ELISA. Several lab scale preparations of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention were screened and the binding of antibodies to relevant epitopes was calculated relative to GA RS 100 . Immunorecognition above 100 binding was found up to 122 and up to 113 bidnign for poly and mono clonal antibodies respectively.

The test batches of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention were identified by GA specific antibodies indicating that GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention share similar B cell epitopes and that there is cross reaction between GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention. However these identification ELISA tests were not quantitative and incapable of evaluating the relative amount of epitopes hence batches of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention do not show significantly higher binding as compared to GA RS. Consequently a more sensitive sandwich ELISA method has been developed enabling a more quantitative evaluation. Results of batches of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention tested by sandwich ELISA are presented in .

The results showed that the amount of antibodies binding to the mixture of polypeptides of the invention were higher than that to GA indicating higher immunorecognition corresponding to its higher immunogenicity as shown in the EAE models and the ex vivo potency tests.

A microtiter plate is coated with mouse anti Glatiramer acetate anti GA monoclonal antibody MAb 4B5 44 or 10F6 32 . After washing the excess unbound MAbs and blocking the exposed well surface the polypeptide mixture of the invention reference standard RS or the tested polypeptide mixture of the invention drug substance DS batches are allowed to bind the bound anti GA MAbs. Since the polypeptide mixture of the invention contains the same amino acid residues as GA similar antigenic determinants are presented in both polypeptides. Therefore the peptides of the polypeptide mixture of the invention are recognized by anti GA antibodies in a specific manner. The binding of the polypeptide mixture of the invention to the antibodies is subsequently detected by biotin conjugated goat anti GA polyclonal antibodies PAbs and streptavidin conjugated horseradish peroxidase HRP . The results are expressed as the average of binding deviation of the tested the polypeptide mixture of the invention DS and GA DS batches to the antibodies relative to the binding of the polypeptide mixture of the invention RS batch. The extent of binding correlates with the amount of bio recognizable material in the tested batch relative to the RS batch.

The polypeptide mixture of the invention is identified by the immunorecognition test and as shown in Table 7 this method showed high selectivity to distinguish between the polypeptide mixture of the invention and GA batches. Out of two tested polypeptide mixture of the invention batches both batches passed gave test results of 2 9 binding deviation while all three GA batches failed gave test results of 35 47 binding deviation .

The results are expressed as the average of binding deviation of the tested polypeptide mixture of the invention or GA DS batches to the antibodies relative to the binding of the polypeptide mixture of the invention RS batch which is considered as 100 binding . A polypeptide mixture of the invention DS batch is considered acceptable if its average absolute binding deviation is not more than 25 .

The relative potency of a batch of the polypeptide mixture of the invention is determined ex vivo using the polypeptide mixture of the invention RS specific T cells. Mice are immunized with 250 g of the polypeptide mixture of the invention RS in Complete Freund s Adjuvant CFA . Nine to 11 days after immunization the animals are sacrificed and a primary culture of lymph node LN cells is prepared. The cells are incubated with various concentrations of the polypeptide mixture of the invention RS and with samples of the polypeptide mixture of the invention. Following 19 21 hours of incubation at 37 C. in a humidified CO2 incubator the culture media are collected and the levels of IL 2 are measured by ELISA. The T cell response to each polypeptide mixture of the invention batch is tested at five concentrations within the linear range and for each batch the potency relative to that of the polypeptide mixture of the invention RS batch is calculated.

As shown in Table 8 the ex vivo potency test showed high selectivity to distinguish between the polypeptide mixture of the invention and GA batches. Three polypeptide mixture of the invention batches passed test results of 95.3 and 97.4 while the GA batch failed test result of 61.6 .

Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis EAE is an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system induced in animals by immunization with central nervous system material. The encephalotogenic antigen used for EAE induction is the Mouse Spinal Cord Homogenate MSCH . Blocking of EAE is defined as the reduction of the incidence reduction in number of sick mice as well as reduction in the severity of clinical signs typical of the experimental disease Mean Maximal Score .

The maximal score of each mouse in the group was summed. The mean maximal score of a group is the average maximal score of the animals in the group. The mean maximal score of the group was calculated maximal score of each mouse number of mice in the group.

The MMS ratio is the ratio of the MMS of either the RS control group or the MMS of the group in which the batch is tested to the MMS of the EAE control group. The MMS ratio was calculated as follows MMS ratio MMS of group MMS of EAE control group

The tested batch of the polypeptide mixture of the invention is emulsified together with the MSCH in CFA and injected into mice known to be sensitive to EAE i.e. F1 hybrid mice of the SJL J BALB C strain. Each experiment includes a negative control group EAE induction only and a positive control group injected with the polypeptide mixture of the invention RS in MSCH emulsion. The incidence and the clinical signs in all groups are observed and scored daily for 20 days from the 10day post EAE induction.

The biological activity of different batches of the polypeptide mixture of the invention is determined by their ability to block the induction of EAE in mice that is by reducing the number of sick animals and lowering the severity of disease clinical score .

Furthermore comparative immunological and biological studies conducted recently with the polypeptide mixture of the invention and GA demonstrated that the polypeptide mixture of the invention induces a stronger immune response and biological activity in mouse EAE which is an experimental model for MS see dose response comparison between GA and the polypeptide mixture of the invention .

Comparison between the polypeptide mixture of the invention and GA with regard to dose response in the EAE blocking test

Dose response studies were conducted with four polypeptide mixture of the invention batches which were compared with the dose response of GA RS .

The release specification for the EAE blocking test defines a blocking activity of not less than 80 .

A comparison between GA and the polypeptide mixture of the invention displays the following approximate and rounded up values 

The data indicate that the polypeptide mixture of the invention reaches the minimum blocking activity of 80 already at a dose of approximately 70 g mouse while a dose of at least 150 g mouse of GA is needed to reach this level of activity See .

The following table summarizes the physico chemical and biological attributes of the polypeptide mixture of the invention.

In this example the polypeptide mixture of the invention is a sterile solution packaged in Hypak pre filled syringes intended for subcutaneous injection. The composition of the drug product is outlined in the following table 

The above listed four different dose sizes of the polypeptide mixture of the invention drug product have been prepared to be applicable in different clinical studies e.g. for the treatment of inflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases.

The goal was to develop an iso osmotic formulation of the polypeptide mixture of the invention at concentrations of 15 and 30 mg ml in Mannitol solution with pH in the range of 5.5 to 8.5 which is suitable for a parenteral application.

The following table summarizes data of experimental batches of the polypeptide mixture of the invention Drug Product.

Due to the chemical similarity between the polypeptide mixture of the invention and glatiramer acetate mannitol was chosen as the suitable excipient as it is in use for the production of the Copaxone drug products.

Three sets of the 15 mg and 30 mg doses of the drug product i.e. a total of six batches were manufactured from three different lots of active drug substance for the initial development in order to study the stability of the formulation kept under long term and accelerated storage conditions.

The following table lists the polypeptide mixture of the invention Injection development lots manufactured filled and fuse sealed in 1 mL USP Type I colorless glass ampoules under full aseptic conditions in the ampoule filling suite of the sterile manufacturing facility Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. Kfar Sava Israel. The procedures used for the compounding and sterilizing filtration were similar to those in use for Copaxone . These lots of the polypeptide mixture of the invention solution were stored in fuse sealed 1 mL USP Type I colorless glass ampoules to eliminate a possible effect of the syringe and its rubber stopper on the stability of the solution. The ampoules were tested for time zero and placed on hold under long term conditions 2 C. 8 C. for up to 24 months. These samples will serve as controls whenever needed.

The stability was evaluated by physical color clarity and particulate matter physico chemical pH assay and impurities degradation products microbiological sterility bacterial endotoxins biological EAE abnormal toxicity test safety and functional tests.

All physico chemical biological and microbiological parameters of the drug product studied for the proposed packaging systems remained within specifications for each storage condition during the listed test period.

Several laboratory scale preparations 7 gr. each of increasing average molecular weight 12 000 Daltons 20 000 Daltons were produced and their biological activity was tested in EAE models acute and chronic and the ex vivo potency test. In this test only the average molecular weight is indicated by MALLS.

In EAE models the clinical score was expressed using daily mean score or mean maximal score parameters. These parameters showed the severity of clinical signs typical of the experimental disease. The incidence and the clinical signs in all groups were observed and scored daily for 20 days from the 10th day post EAE induction values ranging from 0 for normal behavior to 5 for death. Daily mean score was the mean of scores of all mice in a test group on a given day. Mean maximal score was the sum of maximal scores of all mice in a test group divided by number of mice in the group.

The biological activity of the different preparations was determined by their ability to block the induction of EAE in mice by reducing the number of sick animals and lowering the severity of disease clinical score .

The preparations of increasing MW were tested in the EAE blocking model acute . Mice were treated with 25 g mouse of either GA or the preparations. The animals were observed over the following 20 days and their daily clinical score was recorded. The experiment compared the EAE blocking activity of the five experimental preparations differing by their molecular weight and GA RS .

The results demonstrated the effect of increase in MW on biological activity. At the dose of 25 g mouse GA blocking activity was suboptimal while preparations with MW ranging between 15 and 20 KDa as determined by MALLS were more effective in inhibiting acute EAE. See .

In this model the encephalitogenic antigen used for EAE induction was Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein MOG . The encephalitogenic emulsion MOG CFA enriched with 5 mg mL MT was injected s.c in the right flank of C57BL 6J mice. Concomitantly pertussis toxin was injected intraperitoneally at a volume dose of 0.1 mL mouse. Pertussis toxin injection was repeated after 48 hours. A boost of the encephalitogenic emulsion MOG CFA enriched with 5 mg mL MT was injected sc in the left flank one week later. The mixture of polypeptides of the invention was administered daily beginning on the first day of clinical sign appearance until day 30 post immunization.

The effect of the preparations on chronic MOG induced EAE a chronic EAE model where EAE was induced using myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein was compared to that of GA. The results presented in show that at the dose of 50 g mouse GA 7.5 daltons is not effective while the mixture of polypeptides of the invention 16.0 k daltons had a significant inhibitory effect.

Dose response studies with GA RS and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention 16 000 Daltons were conducted in the EAE blocking test in mice. The results are presented in .

The results show that at a dose as low as 75 g mouse the mixture of polypeptides of the invention showed 89 activity and at a dose of 150 g mouse the EAE suppressive activity of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention was equal to that induced by GA RS at 250 g mouse 100 in agreement with the higher immunologic activity of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention. In dose response experiments with GA RS GA batches exerted 100 blocking activity in the 150 g mouse dose range. 

Using the model of induced cytotoxicity in mouse optic nerve studies were conducted to test the potential neuroprotective properties of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention. An insult was induced in mice by intravitreal injection of glutamate at a concentration previously shown to lead to RGC death that is measurable after one week. On the day of glutamate injection Day 0 male C57BL 6J mice aged 1.5 2 months were anesthetized and each animal s right eye was punctured with a 27 gauge needle in the upper portion of the sclera. Next a Hamilton syringe with a 30 gauge needle was inserted as far as the vitreal body and a total volume of 1 l 200 nmol of L glutamate dissolved in saline was injected. Four days after the glutamate injection the mice were anesthetized and a retrograde neurotracer dye FluoroGold was injected stereotactically into the superior colliculus of each hemisphere. From the superior colliculus the dye is retrogradely transported into RGCs. Three days later the animals were sacrificed their eyes enucleated and the retinas detached fixed in paraformaldehyde and whole mounted on filters. Labelled cells from four selected fields of identical size were counted. The selected fields were located at approximately the same distance from the optic disk to overcome the variation in RGC density as a function of distance from the optic disc. RGCs were counted under a fluorescent microscope and the average number of RGCs per field in each retina was calculated. The RGC count in a number of uninjured contralateral retinas was used as healthy control for the purpose of calculating Toxicity. For each mouse the degree of neuronal toxicity induced by the glutamate insult was calculated as follows 

The following calculation was used to determine mean percentage of neuronal protection observed in each immunized treatment group of mice 

A set of mouse studies was conducted in order to investigate whether a single injection treatment immunization with GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention would protect RGCs from glutamate induced toxicity. The following is a list of the pre insult treatment groups to which the mice were assigned across the set of investigations. The combined number of animals included in each group across the set of investigations is indicated in parentheses 

The mixture of polypeptides of the invention and GA were dissolved in Phosphate Buffered Saline PBS and injected subcutaneously in the flank

The results displayed in show that both GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention protected RGCs from the toxic effects of an intravitreal glutamate insult in mice. Treatment with GA provided 23 protection while treatment with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention provided 26 and 22 protection in the low 25 g mouse and high 75 g mouse dose groups respectively. These effects were statistically significant p

An investigation was conducted to assess the immunological response to treatment with GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention in mice following a single injection. The study was conducted over a period of 7 days. Male C57BL 6J mice aged 1.5 2 months received a single injection of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention 75 g mouse or GA 75 g mouse . During the study period following the injection subsets of animals in each treatment group were sacrificed on days 1 3 and 7 post injection. Spleens were removed and a primary culture of spleen cells was prepared. Cells were activated in vitro with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention or GA and cytokine secretion was measured using commercial ELISA kits. The concentrations of IL 2 IL 10 and IFN determined in the spleen cultures at each time point are plotted in three graphs in . IL 4 was not detected. Taken together the results show that a single injection of both GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention evoked an immunological response where the peak effect was observed on Day 3 post injection. The mixture of polypeptides of the invention was found to be more immunogenic than GA.

The presence of an enhanced immunological response following the mixture of polypeptides of the invention administration shows that the mixture of polypeptides of the invention evokes a beneficial T cell response that e.g. mediates neuronal protection against loss of RGCs. Moreover the T cell response elicited by the mixture of polypeptides of the invention is superior to the T cell response elicited by GA.

Polypeptide mixture of the invention immunization was proved to attenuate neuronal cell death induced by exposure to elevated levels of the excitotoxic neurotransmitter glutamate. The neuroprotective effect is dependent upon activation and proliferation of the polypeptide mixture of the invention specific T cells. Using the model of induced cytotoxicity in mouse optic nerve the inventors have conducted studies to test the potential neuroprotective properties of the polypeptide mixture of the invention.

The mice were immunized by SC injections of 75 g mouse the polypeptide mixture of the invention or 75 g mouse GA or phosphate buffer saline PBS control administered once a week nine consecutive injections from Day 63 to Day 7 prior to the induction of glutamate toxicity.

Repeated weekly injections of 75 g of the polypeptide mixture of the invention showed a high and significant neuroprotective effect p

These data demonstrate that on top of the polypeptide mixture of the invention being effective when administered once weekly in this administration schedule the polypeptide mixture of the invention is more effective than GA therefore supporting a weekly administration schedule for the polypeptide mixture of the invention.

Effect of Single Injection on the Immune Response to GA and the Mixture of Polypeptides of the Invention

An investigation was conducted to assess the immunological response to treatment with GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention in mice following a single injection. The study was conducted over a period of 7 days. Male C57BL 6J mice aged 1.5 2 months received a single injection of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention 75 g mouse or GA 75 g mouse . During the study period following the injection subsets of animals in each treatment group were sacrificed on days 1 3 and 7 post injection. Spleens were removed and a primary culture of spleen cells was prepared. Cells were activated in vitro with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention or GA and cytokine secretion was measured using commercial ELISA kits. The concentrations of IL 2 IL 10 and IFN determined in the spleen cultures at each time point are plotted in three graphs in . IL 4 was not detected.

Taken together the results showed that a single injection of both GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention evoked an immunological response where the peak effect was observed on Day 3 post injection. In most cases the mixture of polypeptides of the invention was found to be more immunogenic than GA.

Based on the fact that the mixture of polypeptides of the invention was found to be more immunogenic than GA in vivo the effect of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention in administration schedule less frequent than that for GA was evaluated. An investigation was conducted to assess the immunological profile of a weekly administration of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention in mice vs. a daily administration of GA. The study was conducted over a period of 21 days Day 0 Day 21 . Mice were injected once a week total of 3 injections with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention 75 g mouse or daily with GA 75 g mouse . During the study period which followed each of the injections subsets of animals in each treatment group were sacrificed on days 4 and 7 of each week spleens were excised and primary cell cultures were prepared. The effect of the treatment was tested by in vitro activation of splenocytes and specific T cell response was monitored by detection of cytokines secreted from activated cells. The results of IL 2 measurements are shown in .

Daily injections of GA or once weekly injections of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention provided a similar immune response of GA specific T cells as evident by IL 2 secretion. Once weekly injections of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention induced a strong IL 2 secretion after the first injection. This secretion decreased tolerance with repeated injections in parallel with 7 10 daily injections of GA. No significant difference was observed between GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention administered once daily or once weekly respectively. The levels of additional cytokines i.e. IFN IL 10 and IL 4 were examined throughout the tested three weeks. All cytokines determined in the spleen cultures showed similar pattern of initial peak and a subsequent decline to steady low levels. An additional experiment testing the effect of nine consecutive weekly injections of the polypeptide mixture of the invention showed similar immunological response a decrease in secretion of all cytokines after the third injection.

Having shown the immunological response to weekly administration of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention the effect of weekly repeated injections of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention on protection of RGCs from glutamate toxicity was tested. The mice were immunized by a sc injection of 75 g mouse of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention or 75 g mouse GA or PBS control administered once a week nine consecutive injections from day 63 to day 7 prior to the induction of glutamate toxicity. shows that 9 repeated injections administered once a week of 75 g mouse of either GA RS or the reference standard of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention provide a significant neuroprotective effect on RGC survival in the glutamate toxicity model. Repeated weekly injections of 75 g of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention 16 000 Daltons showed a high and significant neuroprotective effect p

These data demonstrate that not only is the mixture of polypeptides of the invention effective when administered once weekly in this administration schedule the mixture of polypeptides of the invention was more effective than GA therefore supporting a weekly administration schedule for the mixture of polypeptides of the invention.

GA fractionation studies showed that peptides characterized by increased molecular size and hydrophobicity exhibit progressively higher effect in both in vivo and ex vivo tests i.e. the higher the average molecular weight the higher is the biological activity and immunogenicity. These studies established the basic rationale for the development of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention as an improved product for MS.

Indeed the mixture of polypeptides of the invention showed increased relative potency ex vivo antibodies specific to GA recognize the mixture of polypeptides of the invention and the interaction of the antibodies with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention yields a stronger signal in ELISA compared to that of GA in correlation with an increase in MW of its peptides the higher the average molecular weight the higher the immunogenicity and potency.

These results were in agreement with the effect of an increase in average molecular weight on activity in vivo in both acute and chronic EAE models. All batches of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention exhibited higher activity in the EAE blocking test as compared to GA. At a dose as low as 100 g mouse batches of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention reduced the incidence of sick mice increased activity and reduced the severity of the disease to a level similar to that conferred by GA RS at 250 g mouse.

The mixture of polypeptides of the invention showed increased immunogenicity in vivo. A single injection of both GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention evoked immunological response where the mixture of polypeptides of the invention was found to be more immunogenic than GA. The presence of an enhanced immunological response following administration of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention lent support to the hypothesis that the mixture of polypeptides of the invention evokes a beneficial T cell response that mediates neuronal protection.

In agreement with enhanced immunogenicity in vivo of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention in immunological studies in mice no significant difference was observed between GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention administered once daily or once weekly respectively. Daily injections of GA or once weekly injections of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention provided a similar immune response of GA specific T cells.

The studies of the neuroprotective effect of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention showed that active immunization with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention provides effective neuroprotection from glutamate toxicity suggesting that the mixture of polypeptides of the invention is a neuroprotective agent that would have clinical benefits in the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders in which glutamate is a prominent participant such as MS ALS Huntington s Disease and glaucoma.

Taken together these findings suggested that the mixture of polypeptides of the invention was efficacious when administered once weekly was more efficacious than GA and therefore can potentially confer a therapeutic effect in MS when administered at a lower frequency than GA supporting weekly administration schedule for the mixture of polypeptides of the invention and weekly monthly or bimonthly administration in other neurological disorders.

In order to investigate whether a monthly treatment regimen immunization with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention would protect RGCs from glutamate induced toxicity mice were assigned to the following pre insult treatment groups 

The mixture of polypeptides of the invention was dissolved in PBS and injected subcutaneously in the flank.

The results of the study are displayed in which shows the protective effects of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention on RGC survival in the immunized treatment groups. The results displayed in show that treatment with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention protected RGCs. The observed effect was higher in the group treated with monthly repeated administrations of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention at a dose of 75 g mouse 35 protection p

An investigation was conducted to assess the immunological profile of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention in mice during the monthly treatment regimen used in the above study. The experiment duplicated the monthly administration schedule that was used to test the neuroprotective properties of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention following an intravitreal glutamate insult.

The study was conducted over a period of 70 days Day 0 Day 70 . Using the same monthly treatment regimen described above mice were injected once a month total of 3 injections with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention 75 g mouse on three occasions Days 0 28 and 56. During the study period which followed each of these injections subsets of animals in each treatment group were sacrificed on days 3 7 14 28 post injection. For the third treatment the procedure was only conducted 3 7 14 days post injection. Cytokine secretion from primary spleen cultures was determined as described above.

The concentrations of IL 2 IFN IL 10 and IL 4 determined in the spleen cultures at each time point are plotted in . Taken together the graphs show that each of the three administrations of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention evoked an immunological response.

Mice were treated monthly with 75 g mouse of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention or GA or bi monthly with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention. Splenocytes were cultured and cytokine levels measured at several timepoints.

Glutamate Toxicity results are shown in . The protection of the positive control group GA at day 7 is relatively low the expected result rendering an experiment valid for batch release is above 20 25 which may be attributed to the old age of the mice. All the data collected in this model up to date is in 8 12 week old mice. However relative to the positive control group of the experiment all the treatment groups showed similar or higher protection. Furthermore the effect of bi monthly administration of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention showed close to statistical significance p 0.058 .

It is important to note that both monthly total of 6 injections and bi monthly total of 3 injections schedules of administration provide equal or greater protection than single injection at day 7 i.e. repeated injections in these frequencies are neuroprotective.

Immunology results are shown in and . IL 2 levels were measured following each injection. The results in show a rapid rise and decline in the first cycle as seen in previous experiments followed by lower peaks in each of the five successive cycles. The current results confirm ability of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention to elicit a stronger T cell response than GA. The results also confirm the ability of monthly treatment to boost the immune response albeit at a level about half of the initial response. This response seems to be sufficient to maintain a neuroprotective effect. Bi monthly injections of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention show the ability to boost the immune response following each injection though at progressively lower levels . shows the TH1 TH 2 shift after several injections showing a decrease in IFN response and a stable if not rising IL 10 response.

The results also show that the immune response is maintained after each new injection as indicated by the presence of a peak after each boost.

The effect of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention on RGC survival was tested in a rat model of chronically elevated IOP a major risk factor in glaucoma.

A unilateral increase in IOP was induced in anesthetized male Lewis rats aged 8 weeks by laser photocoagulation of the limbal and episcleral veins. Rats received two laser cauterization treatments one week apart. IOP was measured one week following the second laser treatment. The second laser treatment was followed two weeks later by application of a fluorescent retrograde neurotracer distally to the optic nerve head. One day after dye application 3 weeks after the initial laser treatment the rats were sacrificed their retinas excised fixed in paraformaldehyde and whole mounted on filters. Survival of RGCs was determined by counting the labeled cells using a fluorescent microscope similar to the procedure described above .

To examine the effect of immunization with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention on the survival of RGCs rats received a single subcutaneous injection of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention 0 100 250 500 or 1000 g rat prior to the second laser treatment. The number of animals tested in the 100 250 500 1000 g rat groups and in the vehicle control PBS injected group was n 11 n 13 n 12 n 7 and n 16 respectively. See A further group of na ve animals received no laser treatments n 3 . The Protection of treatment with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention in relation to control PBS treatment and the statistical significance of the effect were calculated in the manner described Example 2.

By one week after the last laser cauterization IOP in treated rats had increased to an average of about 39 mm Hg compared to an IOP of about 17 mm Hg in normal Lewis rats and it remained at approximately that level thereafter. Furthermore the number of surviving RGCs in the PBS treated rats was reduced by about 50 in relation to RGC count obtained from the na ve non cauterized animals. These data indicate that ocular hypertension induced in these animals by laser cauterization resulted in a significant loss of RGCs as predicted by the model.

Based on the dose response study previously described the dose of 500 g rat of the polypeptide mixture of the invention was chosen for testing repeated injections treatment regimen. To examine the effect of the polypeptide mixture of the invention weekly and monthly treatment on the survival of RGCs rats received repeated subcutaneous injection of 500 g rat of the polypeptide mixture of the invention for 12 weeks weekly treatment 11 injections monthly treatment 3 injections starting on the day of the second laser treatment. A control group received weekly PBS additional positive control PC group received a single injection of 500 g rat of the polypeptide mixture of the invention on the day of the second laser treatment Day 7 . The number of animals tested in all groups was n 11.

To examine the effect of the polypeptide mixture of the invention weekly and monthly treatment on the survival of RGCs rats received repeated subcutaneous injection of 500 g rat of polypeptide mixture of the invention for 12 weeks weekly treatment 11 injections monthly treatment 3 injections starting 63 days prior to the second laser treatment last injection for all groups on the day of the second laser treatment. A control group received weekly PBS additional positive control PC group received a single injection of 500 g rat of polypeptide mixture of the invention on the day of the second laser treatment Day 7 . The number of animals tested in weekly monthly PBS and positive control groups was n 10 n 10 n 12 and n 7 respectively.

The inflammatory bowel diseases are Crohn s Disease and ulcerative colitis. Both are characterized by chronic inflammation of various sites in the gastrointestinal GI tract. Crohn s disease is a nonspecific chronic transmural inflammatory disease that most commonly affects the distal ileum and colon but may occur in any part of the GI tract Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy 1999 Merck Research Laboratories Whitehouse Station N.J. 302 312 . Ulcerative colitis is a chronic inflammatory and ulcerative disease arising in the colonic mucosa Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy 1999 Merck Research Laboratories Whitehouse Station N.J. 302 312 .

CSJL mice were treated with either two administrations of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention at days 10 and 4 or two administrations of GA days 10 and 4 or daily administrations of GA. Budenoside was administered intrarectally at days 1 0 and 1. Disease was induced by TNBS skin sensitization at day 7 and TNBS rectal sensitization at day 0. Animals were sacrificed at day 2. Read out paramerters were weight loss diarrhea colonic shortening and histological analysis. Results are displayed in .

On day 7 a solution of 3.75 mg TNBS in 150 l 48 ethanol was applied onto the shaved skin of CSJL mice. On day 0 the animals were anesthetized with isoflurane after which 1.0 mg TNBS in 100 l 40 ethanol was administered rectally.

Mice were sacrificed on day 2 colons were dissected from the animals and after removal of the feces the weight and length of the colons was determined.

The colon was fixed in 4 buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Tissue sections 5 m of the formalin fixed colon tissue were stained with hematoxylin eosin saffron and evaluated with regard to the extent of inflammation and tissue damage. Histological grading was done in a blinded fashion. The score of each magnification field ranged from 0 to 4 the higher the score the more severe the disease See .

Mice rectally treated with budesonide developed significantly less severe colitis than vehicle treated mice evident from significantly less weight loss a lower clinical score less redness of the colon and a lower histological score.

This study showed that the mixture of polypeptides of the invention inhibits the development of TNBS induced colitis. The mixture of polypeptides of the invention had a significant and beneficial effect on the body weight the clinical score redness of the colon and the histological score. See .

Regardless of dosage the mixture of polypeptides of the invention inhibited the extent and severity of inflammation and tissue damage present both in the rectal half and in the proximal half of the colon.

The mixture of polypeptides of the invention was most effective at a dosage of 75 g 500 g and 2 mg per mouse.

The dose response for the mixture of polypeptides of the invention was bell shaped which is characteristic of the activity of immunomodulators.

Balb c mice were subjected to experimental colitis induction by providing 3.5 DSS in the drinking HO continuously supplied ad libitum for a duration of 7 days followed subsequently by 3 days of regular drinking HO until study termination on study day 10. Disease activity was measured with the following parameters Mortality Body Weight Clinical Score and Colon Length.

DSS induced colitis was evident in the control PBS group as seen by mortality 30 weight loss clinical severity and shortening of the colon. Treatment with both GA and the mixture of polypeptides of the invention improved clinical severity. The treatment regimen of 100 mg kg 2 mg mouse the mixture of polypeptides of the invention administered on days 0 4 and 8 proved to be more effective than daily treatment. There was a dose dependent improvement in clinical outcome using the mixture of polypeptides administered on 3 occasions days 0 4 and 8 .

Glaucoma is a group of ocular diseases characterized by progressive damage to the eye at least partly due to elevated intraocular pressure IOP Glaucoma Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy 1999 Merck Research Laboratories Whitehouse Station N.J. 733 738 . Additionally glaucoma is characterized by retinal ganglion cell RGC death axon loss and an excavated appearance of the optic nerve head Alward Medical Management of Glaucoma N Eng J Med 1998 339 1298 1307 . Glaucoma can be diagnosed before vision loss occurs by visual field testing and by ophthalmoscopic examination of the optic nerve to detect cupping. The management of glaucoma is based on lowering the IOP to prevent further optic nerve damage. The mean IOP in normal adults is 15 to 16 mm Hg the normal range is 10 to 21 mm Hg. The first step in the management of glaucoma is based on lowering the IOP using topically applied medications Coleman Glaucoma Lancet 1999 354 1803 1810 . Currently there are five major classes of medications that are used to lower the IOP adrenergic antagonists adrenergic agonists parasympathomimetics prostaglandin like analogues and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors Medeiros et al. Medical Backgrounders Glaucoma Drugs of Today 2002 38 563 570 . Although most medications are applied topically to the eye they can cause severe systemic side effects and adversely affect the quality of the patient s life. If additional lowering of IOP is indicated or if medication fails to sufficiently lower the IOP laser trabeculoplasty is usually the next step. If IOP is still not adequately controlled incisional glaucoma surgery is indicated Id . The lowering of IOP although significantly reducing the extent of neuronal loss does not ensure cessation of the disease process because the loss of Retinal Ganglion Cells RGCs may continue. Recent studies of the association between IOP regulation and visual field loss after medical or surgical intervention showed that ongoing neuronal loss reflected in visual field tests can be diminished if the IOP is low. However neuronal loss may continue to occur after reduction of IOP Bakalash et al. Resistance of Retinal Ganglion Cells to an Increase in Intraocular Pressure is Immune dependent Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002 43 2648 2653 .

Glaucomatous optic neuropathy appears to result from specific pathophysiological changes and subsequent death of RGCs and their axons. The process of RGC death is thought to be biphasic a primary injury responsible for initiation of damage followed by a slower secondary degeneration attributable to the hostile environment surrounding the degenerating cells Kipnis et al. T Cell Immunity To Copolymer 1 Confers Neuroprotection On The Damaged Optic Nerve Possible Therapy For Optic Neuropathies Proc Natl Acad Sci 2000 97 7446 7451 .

RGC death mechanisms in experimental animal models of glaucoma and human glaucoma have been shown to involve apoptosis. Although the molecular mechanism triggering the apoptosis has not been identified deprivation of neurotrophic factors ischemia chronic elevation of glutamate and disorganized nitric oxide metabolism are suspected to be possible mechanisms Farkas et al. Apoptosis Neuroprotection and Retinal Ganglion Cell Death An Overview Int Ophthalmol Clin 2001 41 111 130 . In addition it would not be surprising if the mechanisms leading to RGC death shared common features with other types of neuronal injury such as signaling by reactive oxygen species depolarization of mitochondria or induction of transcriptionally regulated cell death Weinreb et al. Is Neuroprotection a Viable Therapy for Glaucoma Arch Ophthalmol 1999 117 1540 1544 .

It has been hypothesized that an excessive release of the excitatory amino acid glutamate in the retina may contribute to cell death. Glutamate is an important neurotransmitter in the retina but when released in excess it can be toxic to RGCs. It is therefore essential that glutamate levels be tightly regulated within the retina. Glutamate toxicity seems to be mediated at least in part through N methyl D aspartate NMDA receptors that can allow entry of excessive amounts of calcium. The increase in intracellular calcium appears to activate the enzyme nitric oxide synthase which generates reactive oxygen species. These free radicals ultimately destroy the cell. Neuronal ischemia has been proposed as the mechanism underlying the glutamate elevation observed in glaucoma Sucher et al. Molecular Basis of Glutamate Toxicity in Retinal Ganglion Cells Vision Res 1997 37 3483 3493 Osborne et al. Neuroprotection in Relation to Retinal Ischemia and Relevance to Glaucoma Survey of Ophthalmology 1999 43 Supp 1 S102 S128 .

In the brain glutamate abnormalities have been implicated in a number of neurologic diseases including Alzheimer s disease Huntington s disease Parkinson s disease and epilepsy Sucher et al. Molecular Basis of Glutamate Toxicity in Retinal Ganglion Cells Vision Res 1997 37 3483 3493 . Elevated glutamate concentrations have been found in the vitreous of patients with glaucoma and also in monkeys with experimental glaucoma Dreyer et al. Elevated Glutamate Levels in the Vitreous of Humans and Monkeys with Glaucoma Arch Ophthalmol 1996 114 299 305 . However whether abnormalities of glutamate metabolism play a causative role in either primary glaucomatous RGC death or in secondary RGC degeneration remains uncertain.

In recent years there has been increasing interest in preventing progression of glaucomatous optic neuropathy using approaches based on the premise that glaucoma is a neurodegenerative disease Fisher et al. Vaccination for Neuroprotection in the Mouse Optic Nerve Implications for Optic Neuropathies J Neurosci 2001 21 136 142 . Neuroprotection of the glaucomatous optic nerve would therefore be an adjunctive therapeutic paradigm for use with conventional IOP lowering treatments Schwartz et al. Potential Treatment Modalities for Glaucomatous Neuropathy Neuroprotection and Neurodegeneration J. Glaucoma 1996 5 427 432 . Research led to the development of the concept of protective autoimmunity i.e. a physiological response in which auto reactive T cells confer protection against neurodegeneration Schwartz et al. Protective Autoimmunity Against the Enemy Within Fighting Glutamate Toxicity Trends in Neurosciences 2003 26 297 302 Moalem et al. Autoimmune T Cells Protect Neurons form Secondary Degeneration after Central Nervous System Axotomy Nat Med 1999 5 49 55 .

Neuroprotection is a novel therapeutic paradigm for slowing or preventing degeneration and death of neurons to maintain their physiological function. An important advantage of the neuroprotective strategy is that it allows treatment of disease for which the specific etiology is either unknown or differs among patients. This is particularly relevant to the treatment of glaucoma where neuroprotection should be effective independently of whether a particular patient s glaucoma is due to primary or secondary disease mechanisms Weinreb et al. Is Neuroprotection a Viable Therapy for Glaucoma Arch Ophthalmol 1999 117 1540 1544 . Though significantly decreasing neuronal loss the current IOP lowering medications do not halt the progressive nature of glaucoma and the loss of RGCs may continue even after the IOP has been reduced. Thus the greatest unmet medical need in glaucoma is a therapeutic agent capable of protecting ocular tissue from continued degeneration.

Several approaches to neuroprotection in glaucoma have been proposed. A neuroprotective approach has been suggested which relies on delivering neurotrophins to the retina to compensate for the deprivation of target derived neurotrophins resulting from blockade of retrograde axoplasmic transport Weinreb et al. Is Neuroprotection a Viable Therapy for Glaucoma Arch Ophthalmol 1999 117 1540 1544 . Memantine an N methyl D aspartate NMDA antagonist reduced ganglion cell loss in a rat model of IOP induced retinal ischemia Lagreze et al. Memantine is Neuroprotective in a Rat Model of Pressure induced Retinal Ischemia Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1998 39 1063 1066 and is presently being tested in clinical trails with glaucoma patients Vision Newsletter Fall 2002 ucsfeye.net visionsfal02p2.shtml . In a rat model of high IOP vaccination with Cop 1 significantly reduces the pressure induced death of RGCs Schwartz Neurodegeneration and Neuroprotection in Glaucoma Development of a Therapeutic Neuroprotective Vaccine the Friedenwald Lecture Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003 44 1407 1411 Bakalash et al. Antigenic Specificity of Immunoprotective Therapeutic Vaccination for Glaucoma. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003 44 3374 3381 Schwartz M. Neuroprotection as a Treatment for Glaucoma Pharmacological and Immunological Approaches Eur J Ophthalmol 2003 13 S27 31 .

Recent investigations showed that neuroprotection of crush injured rat optic nerves can be obtained by active immunization with GA on the day of injury and by adoptive transfer of GA reactive T cells Kipnis et al. T Cell Immunity To Copolymer 1 Confers Neuroprotection on the Damaged Optic Nerve Possible Therapy For Optic Neuropathies Proc Natl Acad Sci 2000 97 7446 7451 . GA demonstrated neuroprotective properties in a glutamate induced toxicity model in mice and in a rat model of elevated intraocular pressure IOP by protecting the animals from RGC loss inflicted by intravitreal injection of glutamate Schori et al. Vaccination for Protection of Retinal Ganglion Cells Against Death From Glutamate Cytotoxicity and Ocular Hypertension Implications for. Glaucoma Proc Natl Acad Sci 2001 98 3398 3403 . Furthermore in the rat ocular hypertension model which simulates glaucoma immunization with GA significantly reduced the RGC loss from 27.8 to 4.3 without affecting the IOP Id . Vaccination with GA resulted in significant neuroprotection in rat models of optic nerve crush and chronic glaucoma Schwartz Vaccination for Glaucoma Dream or Reality Brain Res Bull. 2004 62 6 481 4 .

GA specific activated T cells are used to promote nerve regeneration or to prevent or inhibit the secondary degenerative effects which may follow primary nervous system injury or the effects of neurodegenerative processes caused by a disease or condition including glaucoma U.S. Patent Application Publication 2002 0037848 A1 published Mar. 28 2002 Eisenbach Schwartz et al. U.S. Patent Application Publication 2003 0004099 A1 published Jan. 2 2003 Eisenbach Schwartz et al. .

Multiple Sclerosis MS is a debilitating autoimmune disease characterized by destruction of myelin demyelination in the central nervous system. Relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis RR MS is the most common form of the disease at time of initial diagnosis Noseworthy et al. Multiple Sclerosis N Engl J Med 2000 343 938 952 . Although RR MS patients typically have mild manifestations between relapses initially nearly 60 experience a secondary progressive course 15 years after diagnosis. This proportion increases to 90 at 25 years after disease onset which leaves the majority of patients disabled at a relatively young age Bjartmar et al. Pathological Mechanisms and Disease Progression of Multiple Sclerosis Therapeutic Implications Drugs of Today 2002 38 17 29 .

The prevalence of MS varies considerably around the world. National Multiple Sclerosis Society available at nationalmssociety.org The prevalence is highest in northern Europe southern Australia and the middle part of North America. Worldwide MS may affect 2.5 million individuals. The reasons for the variation in the prevalence and incidence of MS worldwide are not understood. Environmental and genetic explanations have been offered and both factors probably have a role. Typically patients are diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 50. MS is found in two to three times as many women as men. The basis for this difference is unknown National Multiple Sclerosis Society nationalmssociety.org .

The management of MS has been substantially advanced by the availability of four injectable disease modifying agents interferon beta 1b Betaseron interferon beta 1a intramuscular Avonex and interferon beta 1a subcutaneous Rebif and glatiramer acetate Copaxone . After several years of experience with these immunomodulatory drugs it is the consensus that these agents reduce future disability and improve the quality of life for many individuals with R R MS. It is thus recommended that immunomodulatory therapy should begin shortly after R R MS diagnosis and continue for many years. Freedman M S Blumhardt L D Brochet B Comi G Noseworthy J H Sandberg Wollheim M Soelberg S rensen P and the Paris Workshop Group. International consensus statement on the use of disease modifying agents in multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis 2002 8 19 23. 

The choice of the specific agent remains highly dependent on the physician s opinion of its relative potency and the patient s anticipated tolerance to treatment related side effects. Copaxone is generally well tolerated and may be most effective for mildly disabled patients with a recent diagnosis of MS who wish to start treatment early in the course of the illness Noseworthy et al. Multiple Sclerosis N Engl J Med 2000 343 938 952 .

Recent experimental evidence implicates glutamate the major neurotransmitter in the mammalian brain as an important contributing factor in MS pathogenesis. Glutamate levels had been found to be elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of MS patients and its concentration is associated with the severity and course of the disease. This excitotoxicity secondary to autoimmunity could indeed underlie a substantial part of the lesions observed in MS Matute et al. The Link Between Excitotoxic oligodendroglial Death and Demyelinating Diseases Trends Neurosci. 2001 24 224 30 Gilgun Sherki et al. Riluzole Suppresses Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis Implications for the Treatment of Multiple Sclerosis Brain Res. 2003 989 196 204 .

A multi center randomized double blind placebo controlled multiple dose three arm study to assess the tolerability safety and the efficacy of subcutaneous injections of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention in patients with glaucomatous optic neuropathy at high risk to progress. The study is designed to evaluate the tolerability safety and the efficacy of multiple subcutaneous injections of the investigational medicinal product in this patient population. The secondary objective of the study is to evaluate the immunological response in patients following multiple subcutaneous injections of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention. The study lasts one year or more and includes male and female subjects suffering from open angle glaucoma who meet criteria for high risk to progress. The subject receives placebo or the mixture of polypeptides of the invention 5 15 30 or 50 mg in either weekly or monthly subcutaneous injections. Subjects attend the study sites periodically for safety immunological and efficacy functional and structural evaluations throughout the entire study period.

Patients treated with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention exhibit an increase in immunological response to the mixture of polypeptides of the invention as compared to the group receiving the placebo. Additionally the group receiving the mixture of polypeptides of the invention demonstrates increased protection against loss of RGCs and consequent reduced severity of glaucoma symptoms e.g. reduced atrophy of the optic nerve as compared to the group receiving the placebo. The patients receiving the mixture of polypeptides of the invention also demonstrate reduced visual field loss and increased preservation of the retina and of the structural integrity of the optic nerve.

The clinical trials of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention for MS are open label pilot studies designed to evaluate the efficacy tolerability and safety of once weekly subcutaneous injections of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention 15 mg or 30 mg in relapsing remitting MS patients n 25 patients per study . Magnetic resonance imaging MRI studies provide the strongest evidence for a neuroprotective effect in MS patients. The effect of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention is evaluated by the change from baseline in the total number of Tgadolinium enhancing lesions. The immunological response to the mixture of polypeptides of the invention is evaluated.

A number of different strengths of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention have been developed. The complete composition of a single prefilled syringe of 15 mg or 30 mg of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention are presented in Table 13.

The storage conditions for the prefilled syringes of the mixture of polypeptides of the invention were refrigeration 2 to 8 C. 36 to 46 F. . However excursions from recommended storage conditions to room temperature conditions 15 to 30 C. 59 to 86 F. for up to one week were shown to have no adverse impact on the product.

Two Phase II open label pilot studies in RR MS patients are presently ongoing. These studies are designed to evaluate the efficacy tolerability safety and immunogenicity of once weekly sc injections of the polypeptide mixture of the invention 15 mg or 30 mg in MS patients. Specifically the studies evaluateonce weekly injections of the polypeptide mixture of the invention on MRI disease activity as reflected by the total number of T1 gadolinium Gd enhancing lesions and new T2 lesions and to evaluate the tolerability and safety of the polypeptide mixture of the invention in subjects with R RMS.

Thirty eight 38 subjects 29 76.3 females were enrolled in this study. The mean age is 33.8 years range 20 48 all besides one subject are Caucasians. Mean body mass index BMI is 23 range 17 24 mean MS duration is 4.7 years range 0.2 20.6 . According to the CRF database 37 subjects are still ongoing one subject prematurely discontinued due to adverse event. The mean treatment duration since the first study drug injection is 71.7 days range 29 108 .

Twenty seven 27 subjects 18 66.7 females were enrolled in this study. The mean age is 33.6 years range 18 51 all besides one subject are Caucasians. Mean BMI is 23.3 range 17 34 mean MS duration is 2.4 years range 0.2 13.6 . According to the CRF database 25 subjects are still ongoing two subjects prematurely discontinued due to adverse event. The mean treatment duration since the first study drug injection is 52.1 days range 1 90 .

Patients treated with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention exhibit a change in immunological response to glatiramer acetate or high molecular weight glatiramer acetate as compared to the group receiving the placebo. Patients treated with the mixture of polypeptides of the invention have reduced the proportion of re enhancing lesions and new MS lesions evolving into black holes as compared to the group receiving the placebo suggesting a global central mechanism of action and a potential neuroprotective effect. Thus the mixture of polypeptides of the invention has a beneficial clinical effect in the long term since axonal degeneration is believed to cause irreversible chronic damage in MS.

