---

title: Messaging system based building control
abstract: An arrangement using an Instant Messaging (“IM”) chat-type interface for monitoring and controlling devices in an automated home is provided. The automated home is arranged to be accessible as an IM contact (often called a “buddy”) to a user of an IM service that is located remotely from the automated home. After initiating an IM chat session, the user queries the status of systems and devices in the automated home, and operates devices in the automated home. In various illustrative examples, natural language commands are utilized to enable the user to ask simple questions regarding the status of devices in the home, take a virtual “walk through” the home, and turn devices on and off, among other options. As IM interfaces are being increasingly used on a variety of devices including mobile phones and personal digital assistants, users can conveniently access and control their automated home while traveling.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07403838&OS=07403838&RS=07403838
owner: General Instrument Corporation
number: 07403838
owner_city: Horsham
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051214
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 636 496 filed Dec. 16 2004 entitled Messaging System Based Building Control which is incorporated by reference herein in its entirety.

Home automation systems play an increasingly important role in providing consumers with an ability to monitor and control a wide range of devices in the home including heating units and air conditioners lighting sound and entertainment doors and security cameras as well as any other system appliance or apparatus that can be connected to home network. It is presently possible to control the devices in the home through a centralized interface such as touchpad or computer and to add additional devices to the system and enable them to be controlled through the centralized interface.

While home automation systems work well in many settings the centralized control interface is not always sufficient particularly for those users wanting to control devices from remote locations. Unfortunately existing remote access schemes provide neither a simple and easy to use control interface nor enable remote access to the home from mobile communication devices.

An arrangement using an Instant Messaging IM chat type interface for monitoring and controlling devices in an automated home is provided. The automated home is arranged to be accessible as an IM contact often called a buddy to a user of an IM service that is located remotely from the automated home. After initiating an IM chat session the user queries the status of systems and devices in the automated home and operates devices in the automated home.

In various illustrative examples natural language commands are utilized to enable the user to ask simple questions regarding the status of devices in the home take a virtual walk through the home and turn devices on and off among other options. As IM interfaces are being increasingly used on a variety of devices including mobile phones and personal digital assistants users can conveniently access and control their automated home while traveling.

The present arrangement advantageously enables monitoring and control of devices in the home from remote locations through a user friendly interface. The automated home is able to monitor the presence and state of devices in the home and report on the presence or absence and state of those devices in an entirely automated fashion using IM and without requiring user action.

A few examples of services enabled by home automation technology include a home entertainment system playing a person s favorite music and responding to their voice commands lighting and heating ventilation air conditioning HVAC automatically adjusting depending on time of day and whether anyone is currently at home kitchen appliances such as the oven and coffee maker activating in advance of a person waking up in the morning or returning home and a home personal computer PC automatically sending email to the office or the telephone system calling a mobile phone number should a home emergency such as a water leak or power failure occur.

In this illustrative arrangement the home automation network is arranged as a wireless Ethernet network using the known TCP IP protocol suite Transmission Control Protocol Internet Protocol . In such an arrangement each device on the network has a unique address commonly called an IP address. An IP address consists of four numbers separated by a dot . where each number is in the range 0 255. For example an IP address for a device on home automation network could be 192.36.253.80.

In addition to wireless Ethernet any of the other commonly available networks used in a typical home or office are also useable with the present arrangement depending on the requirements of a specific application. Illustrative examples of such networks are listed at the end of this description.

The devices connected to the home automation network include PC touch pad thermostat television and garage camera . It is emphasized that these particular devices are merely illustrative and others are also useable with the present arrangement several of which are listed as examples at the end of this description.

PC typically functions as the centralized home automation controller and accordingly is arranged to monitor operational states of and provide operating commands to the devices coupled to it through the home automation network . Touchpad is also commonly used to manage automated home functions from a central location. In alternative arrangements sufficient intelligence is often embodied into the various devices coupled to the network so that centralized control is not necessary to implement some desired features and functions. For example in one application of messaging based building control a user may wish to query the status of a device using an IM message that is sent directly to a particular device e.g. television without using PC as an intermediary.

PC is representative of any of a variety of devices that enables external network access to a home or office. PC thus provides the home automation network with the capability to communicate outside the home using IM. PC accordingly may be selected for example from one of personal computer network server gateway router laptop computer and set top box.

PC is typically arranged in most applications as a gateway to an external communications network where one such external network is shown in below and described in the accompanying text . PC performs a number of common networking tasks in such arrangement including functioning as a firewall and as router having two IP addresses one having relevance to the home automation network and one for its use with the external communications network.

PC may also provide a DNS server domain name server function to the home automation network . A DNS server is a name server that is used to associate and remember given names to corresponding IP addresses. For example the garage camera used to monitor a garage door is more easily remembered and accessed by the word garage cam than it is by its IP address e.g. 192.36.253.80.

Thermostat television and garage camera are coupled indirectly to home automation network in this illustrative arrangement. Disposed between the devices and the network are devices servers A B and C respectively indicated by reference numerals and in . Such device servers are optionally used to store and serve software objects that are used to represent devices on the home automation network in an abstract manner to PC . That is PC retrieves data associated with a device but in a format that is not device specific.

Advantageously such device servers and enable a particular device to be replaced in the automated home with a similar but still different device. When for example television is updated with a newer model of a different brand device server B presents non device specific abstracted device data to PC over home automation network . The automated home can thereby continue to operate without interruption and without requiring any software to be upgraded on the PC as might otherwise be necessary if server B were not utilized.

The software objects used to provide the abstracted representation of a device to the home automation network are also optionally arranged in a dynamic manner. In this arrangement the software object types and structure are able to change while home automation network including device servers and is running. As a result the operational state of the device for example whether it is turned on or off can change and the state change is represented in the software object held in the corresponding device server. When PC or other devices or systems queries the device server for device status the software object will reflect the latest state of the device.

Although shows an illustrative home setting it is emphasized that the present arrangement is applicable a wide variety of setting and environments. Networks that include elements or devices for which remote control is desired or necessary are routinely found in office commercial professional academic and industrial settings and can take advantage of the features provided by messaging based control arrangements shown and described herein.

Communications network facilitates communicative relationships between the automated home and remote entities including a cellular network base station and terminal . Communications network is selected from one of a variety of conventional networks including the Internet a private network public network or combination thereof. Communications network is used in this illustrative example to access IM services and communicate instant messages between the automated home and the remote device. A variety of public IM service providers exist today that may be used to provide the required IM service which are often provided free of charge. Most major IM services are accessible through the Internet.

In most applications in addition to setting up an account with an IM service provider an IM client application is required at each network endpoint to facilitate communication using IM. IM client applications are typically specific to each class of device i.e. mobile phones versus personal computer but a wide variety of devices are now supporting IM.

IM is different from regular E mail because communications in IM occur very quickly if not quite instantly to enable conversation in written form commonly called chat in real time. Most IM users use and treat IM chat sessions more like telephone communication than E mail because of this real time feature.

An additional difference from E mail is that virtually all public IM service providers enable a presence information feature that indicates whether any in a user s list of contacts stored by the IM client are online and available to chat using IM. The term Buddy List is used in AOL Instant Messenger and Yahoo Messenger whereas the term Contact List is used in MSN Messenger and ICQ.

The more precise term for a contact is presentity which is defined as an entity whose presence i.e. availability is tracked by the IM service provider. Accordingly IM service is often referred to as presence based communications. To engage in an IM chat session a presentity must typically sign on to the service by registering its status location and other attributes with the IM service provider s registrar i.e. presence server.

In cellular network base station is arranged to facilitate access by a mobile phone to communications network to enable mobile phone to engage in an IM chat session with automated home . It is emphasize that mobile phone is merely illustrative and other electronic devices which support IM are also useable in the present arrangement. Such devices include personal digital assistants pocket PCs pagers and the like.

Terminal is arranged to participate in an IM chat session with the automated home . Terminal is selected from a variety of devices that support IM including personal computers laptop computers terminal devices tablet PCs and other electronic devices that are capable of hosting an IM client.

As shown in the GUI window user is online meaning that user is a presentity that is signed on and recognized by the IM service. User is thus able to select and then send instant messages to contacts that are also online. User has three contacts Automated Home Friend and Relative A that are currently online and three contacts Co worker Relative B and Friend that are currently offline.

GUI window is typically refreshed periodically for example to reflect when contacts in the contact list go online and offline over time. While the names of the contacts used in are made up for this illustrative example it should be noted that names which comprise a contact or buddy list are often provided as screen names or as email addresses that may not correspond to the real name of the actual person represented by the contact.

The Automated Home contact is utilized by user to communicate with automated home via home automation network using IM. Accordingly automated home functions as a presentity on an IM service. To enable such function one or more IM clients are disposed in home automation network . Such IM clients run on PC or in alternative arrangements on one or more of the devices connected to home automation .

Typically PC hosts an IM client and is arranged with a software agent often called an intelligent agent that interacts with the IM client to send and receive instant messages through the IM service. Many IM clients are regularly integrated into existing software applications such as web browsers and email clients. Accordingly these IM clients are provided with an application programming interfaces that enable such integration. Other IM clients are available in open source form which support multiple IM service protocols.

Using its agent PC collects data status and state information from devices on the home automation network which is used for notifications in instant messages or in an IM chat session responsively to instant messages received from a remote user. In some applications of messaging based building control the IM client and agent are integrated in a single software application.

The process described above used to represent the automated home as an IM contact is shown in . The process starts at block . At block communication is established with one or more of the devices on home automation network . At block the software agent signs the automated home in with the IM service using the IM client. More than one presentity can be used in this step. For example one presentity is used to represent the entire home automation network and devices coupled thereto or alternatively each device on the network may be represented as a separate presentity. Once recognized as a presentity the automated home is capable of exchanging instant messages with other presentities using the IM service including the user that is located remotely from the automated home as indicated in block . The process ends at block .

GUI window is arranged to show multiple lines of chat between the user and the contact selected from the GUI window shown in . In this illustrative example the selected contact is automated home contact which has an associated E mail address as shown.

The user e.g. using terminal or mobile phone converses with the automated home contact using instant messages to navigate from room to room in the automated home . A running transcript of the chat session is displayed on GUI in a conversation window with each new instant message being displayed after earlier messages at the bottom of the lines of chat.

GUI window is arranged with a message entry window where the user types an instant message and sends to the automated home by pressing the send button . As shown in user is intending to send the instant message which includes the command goto garage. 

The interaction with automated home is preferably implemented using natural language type commands e.g. goto turn on that allow the user to navigate through the home and make changes to it as desired. Such natural language commands set are well known and were developed in part for computer command line text based role playing games that were introduced in the early 1980s. In the present arrangement the use of natural language command sets provides an effective way to remotely accomplish tasks in the automated home without needing to learn a new and complex interface.

Areas of the automated home e.g. FirstFloor SecondFloor are listed as objects as well as particular devices such as the thermostat and garage camera in the messaging window . User is thus able to go to particular locations in the automated home to both monitor objects as well as operate or adjust them for example turning on a dishwasher adjusting the temperature on a thermostat checking that a door is closed etc. .

The automated home responds to queries and commands from the user using instant messages containing natural language. Such responses can preferably include indications when certain commands from the user cannot be recognized or are not applicable to a particular device. For example an instant message seeking to make an adjustment to a device that only has binary states i.e. on and off would be met with a responsive instant message stating that such adjustment cannot be made. Similarly a response might state that a light is already turned on in response to an instant message from user requesting that the light be turned on.

As indicated by the instant message text the user is able to issue a natural language command to have automated home stop sending occupancy notifications. This reduces instant messages from the automated home that the user might find as being redundant or unnecessary. This could occur for example because the user has concluded that an authorized person has entered the automated home .

Various networking protocols may be used to implement the home automation network shown in depending on the specific requirements of an application of automated home control. These networking arrangements include Ethernet wireless Ethernet IEEE 802.11 Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers HomePlug Wi Fi Bluetooth Zigbee Wireless USB powerline phoneline X10 HomePNA Z wave and UPB universal powerline bus protocols.

Various devices may be used with the home automation network shown in depending on the specific requirements of an application of automated home control. These devices include television media player such as a compact disc digital versatile disc sound system such as stereo systems home theater thermostat climate control system HVAC door sensor window sensor automobile telephone telephone answering machine appliance furnace hot water heater fireplace set top box digital video recorder smoke detector heat detector motion detector carbon monoxide detector personal computer lights radio security camera garage door opener intercom and security system.

Each of the processes shown in may be implemented in a general multi purpose or single purpose processor. Such a processor will execute instructions either at the assembly compiled or machine level to perform that process. Those instructions can be written by one of ordinary skill in the art following the description of and stored or transmitted on a computer readable medium. The instructions may also be created using source code or any other known computer aided design tool. A computer readable medium may be any medium capable of carrying those instructions and include a CD ROM DVD magnetic or other optical disc tape silicon memory e.g. removable non removable volatile or non volatile packetized or non packetized wireline or wireless transmission signals.

