---

title: Sensor system for measuring an electric potential signal of an object
abstract: The invention generally pertains to reducing artifact noise signals present when non-invasive capacitive-type signal measurements are taken of static electric fields produced by an object of interest. According to a first preferred embodiment of the invention, a given static artifact signal is reduced by minimizing the potential difference between a ground point of sensor circuitry and the potential of the object. According to a second preferred embodiment of the invention, the change in signal due to motion of the sensor in the field produced by the object is minimized by reducing the impact of changes in coupling to the signal source.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07466148&OS=07466148&RS=07466148
owner: QUANTUM Applied Science & Research, Inc.
number: 07466148
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050701
---
The present application represents a National Stage application of PCT US2005 023606 filed Jul. 1 2005 entitled A Sensor System for Measuring an Electric Potential Signal of an Object and claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 584 146 filed Jul. 1 2004 entitled Method to Reduce the Effect of Static Potentials in Capacitive Measurements.

The United States Government retains a royalty fee fully paid up non exclusive license to make use have made or have the invention used for governmental purposes.

The present invention pertains to measuring an electric potential signal generated by an object and more particularly to reducing the effect of artifact signals or signals caused by a change in static potential on measurement of an electric potential signal of interest.

Capacitive electrodes that sense the electrical potential produced in the space surrounding a voltage source enable many important new measurement modalities. For example a particularly important new capability is the measurement of bioelectric signals such as those measured during an electrocardiogram ECG or an electroencephalogram EEG without touching a subject s skin. In such cases signals of interest such as those produced by a heart or brain are measured. An arrangement for making such measurements is set forth in U.S. Pat. No. 6 686 800 which is hereby incorporated by reference. While the system set forth in the 800 patent is effective almost all capacitive measurements that occur in real world environments are degraded by artifact signals and noise caused by the presence of static electric fields.

Static electric fields are everywhere. An important limiting factor in capacitive measurements is the behavior of static electric potential in the region where sensors must be located to measure a signal of interest. If ambient static potentials where truly static and never changed they could not be measured by sensors using a capacitive electrode arrangement. However the static potential on a measured object changes for various reasons. For example the static potential level may rise dramatically due to triboelectric charging and reach levels on the order of 10 000V. Further the static potential can vary significantly due to discharging and the influence of other conducting bodies. In addition motion of a capacitive sensor relative to the static electric field produces a change in the potential that is sensed. Such changes in the sensed potential can saturate the capacitive electrode causing large changes in the output signal produced by the sensor. Even at low levels changes in the static electric field will appear as measured unwanted artifact signals. Such artifact signals can often be very similar in frequency to the signal of interest and thus are typically very difficult to filter.

In the case of a sensed bioelectric signal certain artifact signals such as common mode signals can be particularly troublesome. Often common mode signals are of low frequency and can be read as a heartbeat. Such a state of affairs can lead to the measuring equipment reading a normal heartbeat when in fact the heartbeat is not normal. The opposite is also true and can lead to measuring equipment reading an irregular heartbeat or fibrillation when the heartbeat is actually normal. One solution to this problem is suggest by Leyde et al. in U.S. Pat. No. 5 650 750 which is hereby incorporated by reference. Leyde et al. simply propose a way to measure faults. To this end in the Leyde et al. arrangement common mode voltage signal is measured and identified. However no simple way of eliminating such signals is proposed.

In the case where an electric potential is measured through a more common resistive type coupling in which a low impedance electrical contact is made with the object of interest the static potential on the object is relatively easy to control. Typically it is controlled with a simple additional electrical connection to the object. For example an electrocardiogram ECG taken in a hospital involves electrodes that attach to a patient s skin via a gel or adhesive that make electrically conducting connections with the patient s body. With such an arrangement it is relatively simple to discharge static electricity by using an additional resistive contact ground strap or even to use the electrodes themselves. However the main idea behind using capacitive electrodes is to measure signals in a noninvasive manner. Since by its very nature a non invasive capacitive measurement system cannot make a resistive coupled electric contact with an object in such a system a static potential cannot be reduced in this manner.

One proposed method to facilitate capacitive measurement is to allow an entire measurement system to float at the potential of the object. Such an approach is designed to minimize the absolute potential presented to the sensor relative to the remainder of the sensing system. However this approach is limited by how similar the potential of the sensing system is to the static potential of the object. For a measuring system that is only connected to an object of interest by a capacitive coupling the measuring system s potential is always different from that of the object thereby producing a potential difference across the sensing region that could still be rather large compared to the signal of interest.

Yet another proposed solution to reducing signal artifacts when using capacitive measuring to sense a voltage signal of interest is to use two or more capacitive electrodes and subtract their outputs. Taking the difference of the two sensor measurements is standard practice in many applications. For example the lead configurations used to diagnose heart ailments in an ECG have such a configuration. So long as the static potential does not exceed the measurement range of the sensors the effect of such static potential can be removed for a large extent by taking the difference between two or more sensor inputs. Such an approach works relatively well for conventional skin contact resistive electrodes but does not work so well for capacitive electrodes particularly ones that are not firmly attached to the body.

A capacitive based system requires measuring a relatively small signal of interest such as a heartbeat against the background of much larger signals. Essentially a small signal would have to be determined by subtracting the measured value of two or more relatively large static potential signals. This type of measurement would be limited by the unknown variations in the coupling of each sensor to the static potential the calibration precision of the sensor components and the dynamic range of the differencing system. The calibration precision of the sensor components and the dynamic range of the differencing system can be improved through increased complexity of the measuring system and increased cost associated with improving the quality of the measuring system s parts. However the unknown variations of the coupling of each sensor is a fundamental problem for capacitors in a static electric field. Of course the variations in coupling to the static electric potential can be minimized by positioning the sensors firmly against the measured object. However such an approach is not compatible with non invasive measuring. For example such a technique would not work with sensors located in clothing.

There is inherently a lack of precision and repeatability in the coupling efficiency of a capacitive sensor to the static potential due to changes in the capacitance electrode that couples to the potential. If the fraction of the static signal coupled to two different types of sensors is different then subtracting their outputs will not cancel the static signal even if the sensors are identical. The variation in coupling efficiency can be understood by the following example. Say a signal presented at the input of a first stage amplifier of a capacitor sensor is determined by a potential divider network comprised of an electrode capacitance and an input capacitance of an amplifier. On a human body variations in the electrode capacitance can occur due to variations in the thickness of the outer skin layer variations in the thickness of the clothing between the electrode and the subject and a relative motion between the electrode and the subject.

Based on the above there exists a need in the art for a system that is able to reduce the effect of a background static electric field when making high sensitivity capacitive measurements of the electric potential in the vicinity of an object of interest while not interfering with the overall goals of a non invasive measuring system. Another aspect of the invention is to make the signal measured by a capacitive electrode less susceptible to the differences in electrode capacitance.

The invention generally pertains to reducing artifact noise signals that are generally present when non invasive capacitive type measurements are taken of a body. More specifically the invention pertains to reducing the artifact signals measured by a capacitive sensor when the sensor is operated in a static electric field produced by an object of interest. According to a first preferred embodiment of the invention a given artifact signal can be reduced by minimizing the potential difference between a sensor circuit ground point and the potential of the object. According to a second preferred embodiment of the invention the change in signal due to the sensor s motion in the field produced by the object is minimized by reducing the impact of changes in coupling to the signal source.

The invention generally includes a sensor system for measuring an electric potential signal generated by an object. A first signal sensor is provided including a capacitive type electrode and an amplifier with a DC supply a local ground connection an input connected to the capacitive type electrode and an output sending a signal. A second signal sensor is provided including a capacitive type electrode and an amplifier with a DC supply a local ground connection an input connected to the capacitive type electrode and an output sending a signal. A differential amplifier including a first input connected to the output of the first signal sensor and a second input connected to the output of the second signal sensor has an output sending a signal of interest proportional to the difference between the signal of the first signal sensor and the signal of the second signal sensor. Processing circuitry includes an input connected to the output of the differential amplifier and a local ground connection. A ground sensor includes a first ground electrode a second ground electrode and an amplifier with a DC supply. A ground connection is attached to the first ground electrode and a universal ground. An input is connected to the second ground electrode and an output is connected to the ground connection of the amplifier of the first signal sensor and the amplifier of the second electrode. By this arrangement a voltage present at the local ground connections of the first and second signal sensors is forced to be the same as the voltage present at the second ground electrode so as to reduce an effect of a change in static potential on the signal of interest.

In another embodiment a capacitor is inserted in series between the electrode and the amplifier of the first signal sensor while the electrode of the first signal sensor and the body are separated by a relatively large distance. In yet another embodiment the electrode of the first signal sensor and the body are connected by an electrically conducting fluid. In a still further embodiment a feedback network including an amplifier and a series capacitor are included. The gain of the amplifier in the feedback circuit is set to 1 plus the input capacitance of the high impedance amplifier connected to the electrode including other stray capacitances in the system divided by the value of the series capacitor of the feedback network. Such an arrangement will produce a negative capacitance that will compensate for not only the capacitance between the amplifier and ground but also other stray capacitance present in the system.

Additional objects features and advantages of the present invention will become more readily apparent from the following detailed description of preferred embodiments when taken in conjunction with the drawings wherein like reference numerals refer to corresponding parts in the several views.

The overall system for measuring a signal can be generally discussed with reference to . An object or body has a source of alternating current type voltage located therein. This voltage source produces a voltage signal of interest that is to be measured. Object is large compared to the spatial variation of the signal of interest produced by voltage source . Object is charged to a static potential relative to a distant point which we will define as a ground having a voltage or potential of zero. The conductivity of object is such that the static potential at its surface is substantially uniform compared to the spatial variation of the signal of interest. Further object maintains this spatial uniformity over the timescales of interest even when the static potential suddenly changes. An example of such an object would be an aircraft a human body or a partly conducting shield placed over a sensor to protect it from the environment. Source for the signal of interest could be inside object . For example in the case of a human body the heart may be source of the signal of interest. Although not shown the signal could also be produced outside object . For example the source could be the field created by a moving projectile.

One or more capacitive sensors and are located sufficiently close to object such that the magnitude of the influence of the static potential at the point of measurement is comparable to the signal of interest. Sensors and can be located adjacent to each other at approximately the same distance from object as shown in or in line with each other in a direction normal to the object s surface as shown by reference numerals and in . At this point it should be realized that other combinations of the two arrangements for the sensors and could also be employed.

The large almost constant electrical potential present on the object is referred to as electrical static potential . The charge is usually produced by a triboelectric phenomena. Electrical static potential is extremely large in comparison to the signals of interest in most applications. Indeed static potential can easily be greater than 10 000 V but the signal of interest may only be on the order of 1 V to 1 mV. A true capacitive sensor will not actually measure static potential directly because a DC current provides no reading in a capacitive sensor as the transfer function goes to zero when sensed voltage is not oscillating. However changes in the static potential due to tribocharging or a change in the capacitance of object relative to ground can be measured and may be greater than the maximum input range of measurement electronics incorporated into a sensor system such as shown in which is typically less than 10V.

While a sensor system of the present invention may by used in many different environments for convenience it will be described in relation to the case of measuring a biological potential such as performing an electrocardiogram or electroencephalogram on human body object . Of course it will be appreciated that the present invention applies to cases in which one desires to minimize the effect of a large static potential on a sensitive measurement taken in a minimally invasive manner.

With reference to there are shown four capacitive sensors positioned in proximity to human body object . Preferably sensors employ a capacitive coupling to sense voltage source of interest such as a beating heart. Sensors and are shown as being approximately the same distance from human body object . However this need not be the case. Sensors and may be stacked on top of one another so that one is further distant from body surface as shown in and represented by sensors and wherein sensor is closer to object than sensor . In any case as will become fully evident below the exact arrangement or positioning of the sensors relative to the body of interest can vary in accordance with the invention. At this point it is only important to note that capacitive type sensors are being employed.

With reference to sensor system is tied to static potential of object so that the changes in static potential are transferred to a common ground G. Typically a battery terminal is utilized as common ground although when describing the present invention one of the voltage circuits defines common ground G. In the preferred embodiment first sensor is placed in close proximity to object . Sensor includes a capacitive electrode and an amplifier . An electrical connection is provided between electrode and non inverting terminal of amplifier . Of course amplifier is powered by a source such as a battery not shown . Electrical power travels to amplifier and then to common ground G. A capacitive connection is shown in the path between electrode and both non inverting amplifier input and common ground G. Also an output of amplifier branches into two lines. The first line is fed back to inverting terminal of amplifier to produce a high impedance voltage follower and thus ensures amplifier stays in its operating range. The other branch of the output is connected to a differential amplifier .

Second sensor is also placed in close proximity to object . Sensor includes a capacitive electrode and an operational amplifier . An electrical connection is provided between electrode and non inverting terminal of operational amplifier . Of course amplifier is powered by a source such as a battery not shown . Electrical power travels to amplifier and then to common ground G. A capacitive connection is shown between the path in electrode and both non inverting amplifier input and common ground G. Also an output of amplifier branches into two lines. The first line is fed back to an inverting terminal of amplifier to produce a high impedance voltage follower and thus ensures amplifier stays in its operating range. The other branch of output is connected to differential amplifier .

Differential amplifier takes two signals one at each input and from two sensors and finds the difference between signals and generates an output signal at output proportional to that difference. Output connects with control and processing circuitry that further processes the output signal. Power is supplied to differential amplifier from the battery. Amplifier has a terminal connected to the same common ground G as sensor amplifiers and .

A ground sensing circuit is also provided in sensor system . Ground sensing circuit includes a nominal ground electrode or first connection and a ground sensing electrode or second connection . An output of the ground sensing circuit drives common ground G of sensors and used to measure the signal of interest. The result is to minimize the static induced potential difference across inputs and of sensors and . As shown nominal ground electrode includes an electrical connector that forms a connection to object at a location where the signal of interest formed by voltage source is expected to be small. The connection is preferably a capacitive type connection but may be a resistive type connection. The resistive type connection can be made by a weak resistive connection such as by a dry metal electrode on the skin of a test subject. In such an arrangement the capacitive connection would be implemented via a conducting fabric or a simple conducting surface that is electrically insulated from the skin. Preferably the connection between nominal ground electrode and common ground G has a low electrical impedance.

Ground sensing electrode is also connected to object where the signal of interest formed by voltage source is expected to be small. Ground sensing electrode is preferably placed near nominal ground electrode . Like nominal ground electrode ground sensing electrode may be a capacitive or resistive type electrode. For instance the ground connection can be made by a weak resistive connection such as by a dry metal electrode on the skin of a test subject. The connection may also be a capacitive connection such as via a conducting fabric or a simple conducting surface that is electrically insulated from the skin.

In contrast to nominal ground electrode that measures a nominal ground ground sensing electrode has an electrical connection through a resistor to the input of a high impedance amplifier . Preferably the impedance of high impedance amplifier is on the order of a terra ohm. The function of ground sensing electrode is to measure static potential of object . The output of high impedance amplifier is fed back to its inverting input terminal and is also connected to common ground G of the sensors and used to measure the signal of interest.

The ground sensing circuit can be better understood when one considers that ideally a battery common ground G of a ground sensing circuit would be the same potential as object . However because the connection of the nominal ground electrode to object is poor battery common ground G will not in general be that of body potential but rather at some intermediate potential between object and other objects around it. For instance consider a sudden change in static potential e.g. V static of 20 volts and a change of the voltage of battery common ground G of the ground sensing circuit of 15 volts. The reason why battery common ground G voltage differs from the V static is because of the potential divider network formed by the impedance of the common ground G to object and capacitive coupling of ground sensor to its local environment which is taken to be a zero voltage relative to body potential . As noted ground sensing electrode is connected to high impedance amplifier and so the potential represented at the input to ground sensing circuit is very close to V static say 19.9 volts in the example. Amplifier is connected in a voltage follower configuration and so the output of ground sensing circuit is 19.9 volts minus 15 volts or 4.9 volts relative to its nominal ground of 15 volts. As a result the output of ground sensing circuit is 19.9 volts very close to V static of 20 volts.

The output of ground sensing circuit is preferably used to control the common ground G for other sensors and used to measure the biological potential signal of interest. Common ground G can also be used to drive the ground point of subsequent filtering and data acquisition stages such as processing circuitry thereby allowing such circuitry to have a large electric coupling to their environment than would otherwise be possible. Note output from ground sensing circuit going to the ground point of circuitry . For example a battery powered acquisition system placed on a desk will typically be at significantly different instantaneous static potential than that on a human body within one meter of it. Such a large difference can push the sensor output outside the dynamic range of the acquisition system processing circuitry and introduce artifact effect signals and noise. By driving the ground point of the acquisition system processing circuitry via output of ground system circuit such problems and artifact signals or noise can be significantly reduced. This capability enables capacitive electrodes to be coupled to recording systems having processing circuitry not located on the object .

The ground sensing circuit is able to produce a potential that matches the change in static potential very closely provided the voltage drop across nominal ground electrode is less than the output voltage that can be produced by ground sensing circuit . This output range can be increased by additional amplifiers and larger voltage rails but in general a range of 10 volts to 10 volts is adequate for use on a clothed human body.

It should be further appreciated that the performance of ground sensing circuit can be improved or the requirements on it alleviated by reducing the generation of static electricity by sensors and rubbing on skin and or by reducing capacitive coupling of the system to the local environment ground . A reduction in static electricity generation can be minimized by coating sensors and . Also sensors and can be separated from object to minimize direct rubbing.

Capacitive coupling of the system to its environment can be reduced by reducing system size. For example one could power both ground sensing circuit and sensors and themselves from a single battery or power supply. To do this the power source would employ inductive or capacitive isolation to drive separate circuits that are de coupled from each other at the frequency of interest. The system size may also be reduced by using sensor components optimized to reduce power thereby allowing the use of a very small battery. Additionally sensors and could be used that only swing voltage from zero to either a positive or negative voltage. This reduces the number of cables linking sensors and to the rest of the system from three to two thus reducing the capacitive coupling.

Capacitive coupling of the system to its environment could also be reduced by improving the performance of ground sensing circuit by reducing the requirements on it. For example one or more of the components could be located off of or spaced from object and linked via a wireless link not shown . Such a link can transmit analog or digital information and therefore allow data acquisition from a data storage and data display system to be located off of object . Such an approach removes an effective capacitance coupling sensor system to the environment.

In operation of sensor system occasionally a portion of object where ground sensing circuit is attached is also coupled in a low impedance manner to the ground of the data acquisition processing circuitry . Such a ground may occur if the processing circuitry is housed in a conducting case that touches object . Also processing circuitry may be used to collect data from another sensor or system which establishes a low impedance contact with object . When such a ground connection occurs current flows down the common ground G of ground sensing circuit to processing circuitry and back to object . Such a current can be reduced to negligible levels by modifying ground sensing circuit and sensor system as shown in .

More specifically in the output of ground sensing circuit is not directly connected to ground of processing circuitry as previously shown in . Instead ground of processing circuitry is connected to a common ground G. The output of amplifier is not connected to the control and processing circuitry . Instead the output from yet another differential amplifier the inputs for which are common ground G and the output from the first differential amplifier is connected to the control and processing circuitry . The ground for the differential amplifier is common ground G.

As seen in a common mode source such as a 60 Hz AC power line may be present. Such a source may cause an artifact signal to pass through a weak capacitive coupling not shown to object and then through another capacitive coupling between object and ground . The sensitivity of sensor system is reduced in a manner corresponding to that set forth above to compensate for this artifact signal.

Further improvements may also be made to the system. For example the current flow to object in all circumstances may be reduced by placing resistors and in series with electrodes and . Resistors not shown may be also placed in series with coupling capacitive type electrodes and the inputs to amplifiers and and any of the guard circuits that have appreciable coupling to object . The addition of resistors in these paths limits the current flowing to object in case of faults with sensors and . This potential feature is particularly useful in case switch sensors are used to measured signals from a human body.

To reduce the relative effect of variations in the static field note that the distance of sensors and from object can be increased as shown in which has the effect of adding a series capacitance and reducing the dependence of the coupling efficiency on the electrode capacitance. Optionally a wet region between sensors and and object may be provided with a mildly conducting fluid in order to reduce variations in the electrical properties of the outer skin.

In another embodiment that may be used alone or in conjunction with the previous embodiments the circuit for the sensor itself may be modified so that it is less susceptible to differences in coupling of the electrode to the object . shows a simple form of a sensor . Sensor includes a capacitive electrode having a value Cin connected to object and an operational amplifier . An electrical connection is provided between electrode and a non inverting terminal of operational amplifier . Of course amplifier is powered by a source such as a battery not shown . Electrical power travels to amplifier and then to the common ground G. A connection is provided from output to an inverting terminal to produce a high impedance voltage follower. A resistor represents the combination of the amplifier input resistance and shunt resistance added to amplifier to stabilize amplifier with respect to its bias current. Capacitor represents the amplifier input capacitance value CA. Amplifier and the value of resistor are preferably selected so that the overall range is approximately from 1 Hz to 50 Hz and the effect of resistor on the circuit transfer function is negligible. In the circuit s functional form the value of resistor can be neglected and the fraction of the signal N coupled to amplifier input is given by the ratio Cin Cin CA .

To this point it should be realized that the combination of resistor and capacitors and produce a high pass filter effect on signals detected from object . The high pass action has RC time constant R Cin CA and corner frequency c 1 . A phase shift is introduced between signals from object and signals measured by amplifier by the high pass action of the combination of resistor and capacitors and even at frequencies above c. In applications involving two sensors such as those shown in each sensor has a slightly different corner frequency. This is due to variations in C Cin and R in both circuits the values for which are often difficult to control. Consequently there exists a different phase shift for each sensor. Any mismatch in the phase shifts for the two sensors limit the performance of amplifier to take a high common mode difference. To minimize this effect values of R and C are preferably selected such that c is less than 40 mHz.

As shown in there is a modified form of sensor including a feedback network that has improved properties in that is less susceptible to changes in Cin. In this circuit sensor includes a capacitive electrode having a value Cin and an amplifier . An electrical connection is provided between electrode and a non inverting terminal of amplifier . Of course amplifier is powered by a source such as a battery not shown . Electrical power travels to amplifier and then to the common ground G. A connection is provided from output to inverting terminal to produce a high impedance voltage follower. A resistor represents the combination of the amplifier input resistance and shunt resistance added to amplifier to stabilize it with respect to its bias current. Capacitor represents the amplifier input capacitance value CA including residual stray capacitances. Additionally current is fed back into amplifier terminal to cancel the current that flows into amplifier . Specifically output of amplifier travels through an amplifier . The output not separately labeled of amplifier is fed to an inverting input not separately labeled of amplifier through a resistor having a value of RF. The inverting input of amplifier is further connected to ground through resistor . A resistor is provided at the non inverting terminal not separately labeled of amplifier and a capacitor having the value CF is also provided in the feedback loop. This feedback has the effect of reducing the effective value of CA and constitutes a negative impedance converter. The efficiency of such a circuit is given by in in where G is the gain of the feedback path and can be adjusted via feedback resistor . G is tuned to equal 1 Ca CF in which case 1 and more importantly does not depend on the value of Cin i.e. is less affected by variations in Cin. Using this approach 99.9 cancellation of the static signal can be achieved between capacitive sensors even through clothing. Both the capacitance of the amplifier and the residual stray capacitance of the system can be controlled in this manner.

Turning now to there is shown a version of the circuit which embodies a DC offset compensation. The sensor includes a capacitive electrode connected to object . An electrical connection is provided between electrode and a non inverting terminal of an operational amplifier . Of course amplifier is powered by a source such as a battery not shown . Electrical power travels to amplifier and then to the common ground G. A connection is provided from output to inverting terminal to produce a high impedance voltage follower. A feedback circuit is provided through an amplifier . A bias resistor is provided between the output of the feedback circuit and non inverting terminal . A resistor having a value R is located between non inverting terminal not labeled of amplifier and ground G. Another resistor having a value R is located at the non inverting terminal not separately labeled of amplifier . A resistor having a value R and a capacitor having a value C are provided in parallel between the output of amplifier and its inverting input. With this arrangement a low pass filtered version of the output voltage is fed back into the input through bias resistor . The values R R and C are chosen to set the frequency of the low pass filter particularly to a frequency less than the frequency of the required band width.

Turning now to a sensor is shown including a capacitive electrode connected to object and an operational amplifier . An electrical connection is provided between electrode and a non inverting terminal of operational amplifier . Of course amplifier is powered by a source such as a battery not shown . Electrical power travels to amplifier and then to the common ground G. A connection is provided from an output to an inverting terminal to produce a high impedance amplifier. A feedback circuit is provided through a resistor having a value R. In addition resistors and are provided having values R and R respectively. Between resistors and an output connects an electrical signal to the input of resistor through a capacitor having a value C. Finally a resistor is optionally provided to ground and creates a path for the bias current. The capacitor constrains the bias current to flow through resistor and resistor . This version of the circuit embodies partial guarding of bias resistor to lower the effective frequency of the high pass filter formed by the resistor capacitor combination. The ratio of R and R sets the ratio of the extension to low frequency of the RC filter in accordance with the equation shown below 11 apparent 11 1 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 It should be noted that capacitor is included to allow for the circuit to be employed with other circuitry. If no other circuitry is used of course this capacitor could be replaced with a short.

Turning to a sensor is shown including a capacitive electrode connected to object and an operation amplifier . An electrical connection is provided between electrode and a non inverting terminal of operational amplifier . Of course amplifier is powered by a source such as a battery not shown . Electrical power travels to amplifier and then to the common ground G. A connection is provided from an output of amplifier to an inverting terminal to produce a high impedance follower. Additionally a resistor having a value of R is provided to ground. A feedback circuit is provided through a resistor having a value of R. A pair of diodes and are provided as part of a diode package. Leading to the diode package is a switch controlled by a control logic . With this arrangement circuit constitutes an active saturation recovery circuit. Circuit detects when the output voltage strays outside of its normal operating range. Upon detection of this event the input circuit is driven with feedback to zero voltage. The feedback gain is preferably 1000 but could range from 1 to 10 000. This feedback is applied for a fixed period of time after the circuit recovers below the operating voltage range. During normal operation a guard signal is fed to the bottom of the diode package to maintain high input impedance.

Based on the above it should be readily apparent that each of the embodiments of the invention described above advantageously employs capacitive sensors for non invasive measurements while providing additional circuitry to effectively reduce artifact noise signals. Although described with reference to preferred embodiments of the invention it should be readily understood that various changes and or modifications could be made to the invention without departing from the spirit thereof. For example instead of using switch and control logic the feedback circuit of could be constructed using passive components. Diodes and resistors could be configured to switch diodes and between ground and guard i.e. output of of amplifier . In general the invention is only intended to be limited by the scope of the following claims.

