---

title: Article comprising polyester multilayer film
abstract: Articles comprising multilayer coextruded films having polyester and polyamide layers adhered with a copolymer of polyester and a sulfonic acid or its derivative, having high oxygen barrier properties and temperature resistance that are capable of being heated to 425° F. in a conventional oven are disclosed. The articles are packages, such as bags, pouches, and casings that are particularly useful for packaging and cooking foodstuffs such as meat, poultry, seafood and the like.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09126389&OS=09126389&RS=09126389
owner: DUPONT TEIJIN FILMS U.S. LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
number: 09126389
owner_city: Chester
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050621
---
The invention claims the priority to the U.S. provisional application Ser. No. 60 581 420 filed Jun. 21 2004 the entire disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference.

This invention relates to an article including package and comprising a multilayer film comprising polyester.

Articles such as food items such as specifically meat poultry and seafood products are often packaged in thermoplastic films or laminates in order to protect the product to be packaged from exterior abuse and environmental contamination and to provide a convenient and durable package for distribution of the product and display in a display case or other point of sale. For several years the food packaging industry has also used packaging films from which bags and casings have been made that are of improved structural soundness such that they have been fully characterized as cook in. These packages allow for production of a precooked food product that has been attractively packaged using a film within which the product was precooked. The films have been used primarily for cook and ship end use wherein a meat product is packaged in the film and cooked while in the film and is thereafter cooled and shipped to wholesaler retailer or consumer without being over wrapped and without having the film stripped therefrom and thereafter being re packaged in another film.

Cook in packaged foods are essentially pre packaged pre cooked foods that may be directly transferred to the consumer in this form. Cook in packaging materials maintain seal integrity i.e. any heat sealed seams should resist being pulled apart during cook in and are typically conformable to the contained food product. For example conformability is achieved by the film being heat shrinkable so as to form a tightly fitting package. Additional desirable characteristics of films for use in cook in applications include delamination resistance low O permeability heat shrinkability and optical clarity. When dealing with meat products in particular it is usually desirable to provide a film having good oxygen barrier characteristics in order to reduce the passage of oxygen through the film so that detrimental effects on freshness color and other properties of the meat product are minimized.

Cook in films preferably have a tendency for adhesion to the food product thereby preventing cook out i.e. purge . This meat adhesion characteristic of the meat contact layer serves to both prevent cook out and thereby prevent an unattractive package or the need to strip the film from the meat and repackage the meat to increase product yield and to prevent the meat from losing juices which improve its edible character. The term adhere with respect to meat adhesion refers to a meat contact surface of the film which bonds during cook in to the contained food product to an extent sufficient to substantially prevent accumulation of fluids between the film and the contained meat product. See e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 6 346 285 and U.S. Patent Application 2002 0160129.

It is desirable to provide a package for foodstuffs comprising a film with increased heat resistance allowing for heating at higher temperatures while maintaining seal quality and barrier properties. Such packages are suitable for heating or cooking in conventional convection or microwave ovens dual ovenable or for heating in boiling water. The convenience of being able to purchase a fresh partially cooked or value added foodstuff in a package at the retail level and be able to insert the package directly into a conventional oven or microwave and cook the foodstuff in the package is highly desirable.

Polyethylene terephthalate PET films have high heat resistance making them suitable for cook in and ovenable uses. Such films provide strength and protection though they typically have the drawback that they are sealed with an adhesive since polyester is not heat sealable except at exceptionally high temperatures. Packages such as bags sealed with adhesive are generally not as strong in the seal area as heat sealed packages and cannot be closed on the open end by existing heat seal equipment. It is desirable to provide a package with high heat resistance and low O permeability that can be heat sealed by existing heat seal equipment. Other desirable attributes include puncture resistance from internal or external puncture sources ability to withstand freezer temperatures of 40 F. heat shrinkability ability to be self venting venting during cooking by temperature dependent processes and optical clarity. These attributes can be achieved by using coextruded multilayer film structures having polyester based copolymers. See e.g. Japanese Patents JP2663578B2 JP4051423B and JP5043584B.

The invention includes an article comprising or produced from a coextruded multilayer film having an oxygen permeability of less than 2 cc 100 inchesin 24 hours and being capable of being heated to 425 F. in a conventional oven and the article can be a package including bag pouch or both casing or other converted film product. The article can have polyester sealed to polyester. The polyester sealant may optionally have a Tg below 65 C.

In the film disclosed above the indefinite article a is not the same as one and can be more than one. The term first second or third etc. is for easy identification which does not mean the order of the layer and each can include more than one.

The package can be used for packaging a wide variety of foodstuffs such as meat products and additional ingredients may be pre cooked or ready to cook by the consumer. The product may be refrigerated or frozen and the package provides a refrigerated shelf life of at least ten days. The packaged product may be taken from the refrigerator or freezer and placed directly in a conventional convection or microwave oven for heating the foodstuff by the consumer without removing the packaging material. Depending on the sealant combinations the package may be vented prior to heating or may be self venting.

The sulfobenzenedicarboxylic acid comonomer units in the sulfur containing polyester can be in the form of a salt with one or more alkali alkali metal or metal counterions such as calcium zinc or sodium counterion. The sulfobenzenedicarboxylic acid comonomer can be present in an amount from 0.05 to 2.5 mol of the copolymer.

The optional layer c can be an oxygen barrier layer. The barrier layer may comprise a single polymeric material or may comprise a blend of two or more materials such as nanocomposites of the barrier materials that provide improved moisture vapor transmission rates.

In one embodiment multilayer film can comprise 1 at least one layer comprising the first polyester 2 the second layer can comprise the first polyamide or a blend of amorphous and semicrystalline polyamides 3 a sulfur containing polyester layer comprising repeat units derived from about 0.01 to about 5 mol of a sulfonic acid comonomer or its derivative and 4 at least one optional layer that comprises at least the polymeric including ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer polyester polyester copolymer polyamide polyamide copolymer polyvinylidene chloride polyalkylene carbonate an amorphous polyamide or combinations of two or more thereof. Layer 4 can be an O barrier layer and or a sealant layer.

The sulfobenzenedicarboxylic acid comonomer can be in the form of a salt with one or more alkali alkali metal or metal counterion such as calcium zinc lithium sodium or combinations of two or more thereof. The comonomer can be present in an amount from 0.05 to 2.5 mol of the copolymer.

In preferred embodiments the polyamide layer comprises or produced from polyamide 6 and at least one polyamide selected from the group consisting of polyamide 6 6 polyamide 6 10 polyamide 6 12 polyamide 6I polyamide 6T polyamide 6I 6T polyamide 6 9 and copolyamides and nanocomposites thereof. The polyamide layer may also include one or more polyamide nanocomposites such as those available commercially under the tradename Aegis from Honeywell or Imperm MXD6 from Mitsubishi Gas Chemicals Nanocor. Nanocomposites are well known to one skilled in the art and are commercially available the description of which is omitted herein for the interest of brevity. The polyamide layer may comprise polyamide 6 in an amount of from about 40 to 90 weight and an aromatic or partially aromatic polyamide selected from polyamide 6I 6T or polyamide MXD6.

The multilayer film can be biaxially oriented to provide embodiments that are shrink shrinkable films. The film may have a free shrink at 185 F. of at least 10 in one direction or both directions.

The article can be a package in the form of bag pouch casing or other converted film product comprising a multilayer film disclosed herein. The bag can be an end seal bag or a side seal bag and the package can be in the form of a thermoformed pouch with a lidding film.

A packaged product can comprise a package and a product in the package. The package comprises the multilayer film disclosed herein. The product can comprise a foodstuff e.g. cooked meat within the package. Package refers to packaging materials configured around a product being packaged and packaged product refers to the combination of a product that is surrounded by a packaging material.

 Cook in refers to the process of cooking a product packaged in a material capable of withstanding exposure to long and slow cooking conditions while containing the food product for example 57 C. to 121 C. 135 F. to 250 F. for 2 to 12 hours or by submersion in water at 57 C. to 100 C. 135 F. to 212 F. for 2 to 12 hours. Cook in packaged foods are essentially pre packaged precooked foods that may be directly transferred to the consumer in this form. These types of foods may be consumed with or without warming. Cook in packaging materials maintain seal integrity and in the case of multilayer films are delamination resistant at the cook in temperatures. Cook in films may have a tendency for adhesion to the food product thereby preventing cook out which is the collection of juices between the outer surface of the food product and the meat contact surface of the film i.e. the surface in direct contact with the meat. Additional optional characteristics of films for use in cook in applications include low oxygen permeability heat shrinkability representing about 20 50 biaxial shrinkage at about 85 C. 185 F. and optical clarity. For hermetically sealed bags it is preferred that the external surface of the package is subject to a temperature of at least about 150 F. or from about 150 F. to 212 F. about 160 F. to 212 F. about 165 F. to 200 F. or about 170 F. to 180 F.

 Ovenable refers to the being capable of being cooked in an oven cooking product packaged in a material capable of withstanding exposure to cooking conditions while containing the product e.g. at temperatures ranging from 120 C. to 220 C. 250 F. to 425 F. for 1 to 12 hours from 120 C. to 175 C. 250 F. to 350 F. for 3 to 12 hours or from 175 C. to 220 C. 350 F. to 425 F. for 1 to 3 hours. The term dual ovenable refers to the process of cooking a product packaged in a material capable of withstanding temperatures up to 220 C. 425 F. in a conventional oven 205 C. 400 F. in a convection oven or heating or cooking in a microwave oven.

The term film generically include plastic web can be film or sheet and may have a thickness of 0.25 mm or less. Lay flat film refers to a film that has been extruded as a wide thin walled circular tube usually blown cooled then gathered by converging sets of rollers and wound up in flattened form and lay flat width refers to half of the circumference of the inflated film tube. A film may be produced by casting from a flat die onto a chilled roll.

The term seal refers to any seal of a first region of a film surface to a second region of a film surface where the seal is formed by heating the regions to at least their respective seal initiation temperatures. The sealing can be performed by any one or more of a variety of manners such as using a heated bar hot air hot wire infrared radiation ultrasonic sealing radio frequency sealing etc. A sealing mechanism may be a seal made on a bag machine using a hot wire.

 Oriented refers to a polymer containing material that has been elongated generally at an elevated temperature the orientation temperature followed by being set in the elongated configuration by cooling the material while substantially retaining the elongated dimensions. This combination of elongation and cooling causes an alignment of the polymer chains to a more parallel configuration thereby improving the mechanical properties of the film. Upon subsequently heating unrestrained non annealed oriented polymer containing material to its orientation temperature heat shrinkage is produced almost to the original dimensions i.e. pre elongation dimensions. Orienting in one direction is uniaxial orientation and in two directions is biaxial orientation . In oriented plastic films there can be internal stress remaining in the plastic sheet that can be relieved by reheating the film to a temperature above that at which it was oriented. Upon reheating such a film the film tends to shrink back to the original dimensions it had before it was oriented. Films that shrink upon being heated are generally referred to as heat shrinkable films.

 Orientation ratio refers to the multiplication product of the extent to which the plastic film material is oriented in several directions usually two directions perpendicular to one another. Orientation in the machine direction is herein referred to as drawing whereas orientation in the transverse direction is herein referred to as stretching . For films extruded through an annular die stretching is obtained by blowing the film to produce a bubble. For such films drawing is obtained by passing the film through two sets of powered nip rolls with the downstream set having a higher surface speed than the upstream set with the resulting draw ratio being the surface speed of the downstream set of nip rolls divided by the surface speed of the upstream set of nip rolls. The degree of orientation is also referred to as the orientation ratio also known as the racking ratio . The ratio of the final film thickness to the original film thickness can be considered to be the orientation ratio.

In condensation polymers such as polyesters comonomers combine by for example esterification or transesterification reactions with the elimination of water or low molecular weight alcohols. Polyesters comprise repeat units derived from at least one alcohol and at least one dicarboxylic acid.

 Polymer includes homopolymers or copolymers. Copolymer includes terpolymers tetrapolymers random copolymers block copolymers or graft copolymers. In general the layers of a film can comprise or consist essentially of a single polymer or can have additional polymers together therewith i.e. blended therewith. Similarly polymerization includes homopolymerizations copolymerizations terpolymerizations etc. and all types of copolymerizations such as random graft block etc. The polymers in the films herein can be produced by any suitable polymerization process including slurry polymerization gas phase polymerization high pressure polymerization and solid phase polymerization processes.

As used herein terms identifying polymers such as polyamide polyester polyurethane etc. include polymers comprising repeat units derived from monomers known to polymerize to form a polymer of the named type but are also inclusive of comonomers derivatives etc. which can be copolymerized with monomers known to polymerize to produce the named polymer. For example the term polyamide encompasses both polymers comprising repeat units derived from monomers such as caprolactam which polymerize to form a polyamide as well as copolymers derived from the copolymerization of caprolactam with a comonomer which when polymerized alone does not result in the formation of a polyamide. Terms identifying polymers also includes blends of such polymers with other polymers of a different type.

 Polyester includes for example polyethylene terephthalate PET polypropylene terephthalate PPT polybutylene terephthalate PBT and blends with additional components such as modifiers and tougheners for example PBT and or PET blends . Preferred polyester composition comprises at least about 80 or at least about 90 weight PET either a homopolymer or copolymer of PET. The term copolymer of PET means any polymer comprising or derived from at least about 50 mole PET and the remainder being derived from monomers other than terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol or their ester forming equivalents . Other comonomers include for example diacids such as succinic acid adipic acid azelaic acid sebacic acid glutaric acid 1 10 decanedicarboxylic acid phthalic acid isophthalic acid dodecanedioic acid and the like and ester forming equivalents thereof diols such as propylene glycol methoxypolyalkylene glycol neopentyl glycol trimethylene glycol tetramethylene glycol hexamethylene glycol diethylene glycol polyethylene glycol cyclohexane dimethanol and the like.

Tougheners include but not limitation ethylene copolymers such as ethylene alkyl meth acrylate copolymers e.g. ethylene methyl acrylate ethylene alkyl acrylate glycidyl meth acrylate copolymers and ethylene acrylic acid copolymers e.g. ethylene n butyl acrylate glycidyl methacrylate and ionomers thereof. Toughened polyesters can comprise from about 3 to about 20 weight of tougheners.

The copolymer of polyester and a sulfobenzenedicarboxylic acid used herein includes any polymer comprising repeat units derived from sulfobenzenedicarboxylic acid or its salt or ester . Other repeat units include terephthalic acid dimethyl terephthalate and ethylene glycol in amounts such that the copolymer comprises at least about 50 mole ethylene terephthalate and the remainder of the polymer being derived from monomers comprising a sulfo i.e. sulfonic acid moiety such as sulfoterephthalic acid or 5 sulfoisophthalic acid their salts and or ester forming equivalents thereof. The copolymer may be in the neutralized form in the form of an alkali alkali metal or metal salt . When in the salt form these copolymers are also known as polyester ionomers sulfonate polyesters or metal sulfonate polyesters. The term sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer denotes such copolymers including the salt form. Suitable polyester ionomers are disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 437 054 and 5 171 308 disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference certain sulfonated aliphatic aromatic copolyesters incorporating 5 to 40 mole of an aliphatic dicarboxylic acid 1 to 30 mole of glycol including diethylene glycol and triethylene glycol 0.1 to 2.5 mole of a sulfonate component and 0 to 40 mole of a hydroxy acid component . An example is 5 sulfoisophthalic acid sodium salt of 5 sulfo 1 3 dimethyl ester 1 3 benzenedicarboxylic acid also known as 5 sodium sulfodimethylisophthalate CAS Registry No. 3965 55 7 . The copolymer can have an inherent viscosity IV from 0.2 to 1.2 or 0.5 to 0.85.

Polyamide includes polyamide 6 polyamide 9 polyamide 10 polyamide 11 polyamide 12 polyamide 6 6 polyamide 6 10 polyamide 6 12 polyamide 6I polyamide 6T polyamide 6 9 as well as polyamides prepared from terephthalic acid and or isophthalic acid and trimethylhexamethylenediamine from adipic acid azelaic acid 2 2 bis p aminocyclohexyl propane and from terephthalic acid and 4 4 diaminocyclohexylmethane. Polyamide also includes mixtures and or copolymers of two or more of the foregoing polyamides or prepolymers thereof respectively.

Polyamides may be made by any known method including the polymerization of a monoamino monocarboxylic acid or a lactam thereof having at least two carbon atoms between the amino group and carboxylic acid group of substantially equimolar proportions of a diamine which contains at least two carbon atoms between the amino groups and a dicarboxylic acid or of a monoaminocarboxylic acid or a lactam thereof as define above together with substantially equimolar portions of a diamine and a dicarboxylic acid. This dicarboxylic acid may be used in the form of a functional derivative thereof for example a salt an ester or acid chloride. A detailed description of polyamides and precursors thereof is disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 755 566 4 732 938 4 659 760 and 4 315 086 each disclosure is incorporated herein by reference. The polyamide used may also be one or more of those referred to as toughened nylons which are often prepared by blending one or more polyamides with one or more polymeric or copolymeric elastomeric toughening agents. See e.g. U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 174 358 4 474 927 4 346 194 4 251 644 3 884 882 and 4 147 740.

The polyamide can comprise polyamide 6 polyamide 9 polyamide 10 polyamide 11 polyamide 12 polyamide 6 6 polyamide 6 10 polyamide 6 12 polyamide 6I polyamide 6T polyamide 6 9 or copolymers of two or more thereof.

The polyamide layer can further comprise a polymer that retards the crystallization of the polyamide in the layer. This crystallization retarding polymer comprises one or more polyolefins or another polyamide having a crystal structure different from the major polyamide in the polyamide layer of the multilayer film.

The polyamide layer may comprise another polymer that disrupts the crystallinity of the polyamide. The composition as disclosed immediately above facilitates orientation of a tape to get the resultant multilayer film. This is also preferred for orientation out of hot water.

The polyamide and polyester layers may provide adequate barriers to oxygen. At least one optional film layer may also serve as an additional O barrier layer and comprises ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer EVOH polyamide polyvinylidene chloride polyalkylene carbonate or combinations of two or more thereof. This O barrier layer serves to layer impervious to atmospheric oxygen which results in increasing the shelf life of the packaged product. EVOH also includes saponified or hydrolyzed ethylene vinyl acetate copolymers and refers to a EVOH having an ethylene comonomer EVOH copolymers typically have from 27 to 44 mole ethylene and prepared by for example hydrolysis of vinyl acetate copolymers or by chemical reactions with polyvinyl alcohol. The degree of hydrolysis can range from about 50 to about 100 or about 85 to about 100 mole . EVOH is available under from Kuraray and under the trademark Noltex from Nippon Goshei.

Appropriate amounts of various additives can be present in the respective polymeric compositions and film layers thereof including the presence of tie layers and the like. Additives can include antioxidants radiation stabilizers thermal stabilizers and ultraviolet UV light stabilizers pigments and dyes fillers delustrants anti slip agents slip agents such as talc plasticizers anti block agents antistatic agents other processing aids elastomers and the like.

 Inner layer and internal layer refer to any layer of a multilayer film having both of its principal surfaces directly adhered to another layer of the film. Inside layer refers to an outer film layer of a multilayer film packaging a product which is closest to the product relative to the other layers of the multilayer film and sometimes refers to the innermost layer of a plurality of concentrically arranged layers simultaneously coextruded through an annular die.

 Outer layer refers to any film layer of film having less than two of its principal surfaces directly adhered to another layer of the film. All multilayer films have two and only two outer layers each of which has a principal surface adhered to only one other layer of the multilayer film. Outside layer refers to the outer layer of a multilayer film packaging a product that is furthest from the product relative to the other layers of the multilayer film and can refer to the outermost layer of a plurality of concentrically arranged layers simultaneously coextruded through an annular die.

 Directly adhered is adhesion of the subject film layer to the object film layer without an intervening tie layer adhesive layer or other layer. In contrast the word between as applied to a film layer expressed as being between two other specified layers includes both direct adherence of the subject layer between to the two other layers it is between as well as including a lack of direct adherence to either or both of the two other layers the subject layer is between i.e. one or more optional layers can be imposed between the subject layer and one or more of the layers the subject layer is between.

 Core or core layer refers to any inner film layer which has a primary function other than serving as an adhesive or compatibilizer for adhering two layers to one another. The core layer or layers can provide the multilayer film with a desired level of strength i.e. modulus and or optics and or added abuse resistance and or specific impermeability.

 Seal layer sealing layer heat seal layer or sealant layer refers to an outer film layer or layers involved in the sealing of the film to itself another film layer of the same or another film and or another article that is not a film. Up to the outer 3 mils of a film can be involved in the sealing of the film to itself or another layer. As to packages having only fin type seals as opposed to lap type seals sealant layer refers to the inside film layer of a package as well as supporting layers within 3 mils of the inside surface of the sealant layer the inside layer frequently also serving as a food contact layer in the packaging of foods. Sealant layers employed in the packaging art include thermoplastic polymers including polyolefin polyamide polyester and polyvinyl chloride.

 Tie layer refers to any inner film layer having the primary purpose of adhering two layers to one another. Tie layers can comprise any polymer having a polar group thereon or any other polymer that provides sufficient interlayer adhesion to adjacent layers comprising otherwise non adhering polymers.

 Bulk layer refers to any layer of a film that is present for the purpose of increasing the abuse resistance toughness modulus etc. of a multilayer film. Bulk layers generally comprise polymers that are inexpensive relative to other polymers in the film that provide some specific purpose unrelated to abuse resistance modulus etc.

The term barrier and the phrase barrier layer as applied to films and or film layers refers to the ability of a film or film layer to serve as a barrier to one or more gases. In the packaging art oxygen gaseous O barrier layers include for example hydrolyzed or saponified ethylene vinyl acetate copolymer EVOH and HEVA and also referred to as ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer polyalcohol ethers polyvinylidene chloride PVDC polyamide polyester polyacrylonitrile wholly aromatic polyesters resorcinol diacetic acid based copolyesters polyalcohol amines isophthalate containing polyesters polyethylene naphthalate and its copolymers and mixtures thereof etc. as known to those of skill in the art. These materials may be used neat or further modified to improve their physical properties including the addition of nanoparticles to improve barrier properties such as those available from Nanocor Southern Clay Products Rheox and others.

 Abuse layer as well as the phrase puncture resistant layer refers to an outer film layer and or an inner film layer so long as the film layer serves to resist abrasion puncture and other potential causes of reduction of package integrity as well as potential causes of reduction of package appearance quality. Skin layer refers to an outside layer of a multilayer film in packaging a product this skin layer being subject to abuse.

 Food contact layer or meat contact layer refers to a layer of a multilayer film that is in direct contact with the food meat in the package comprising the film. In a multilayer film a food contact layer is always an outer film layer as the food contact layer is in direct contact with the food product within the package. The food contact layer is an inside layer that with respect to the packaged food product is the inside layer i.e. innermost layer of the package. Food contact surface and meat contact surface refer to an outer surface of a food contact layer this outer surface being in direct contact with the food within the package.

In packages the inside innermost layer of the package can serve as both the food contact layer and the sealant layer.

 Meat adhesion film to meat adhesion film to food adhesion or adhered refers to maintaining direct contact between the meat surface and the meat contact surface of the film so that there is an absence of a substantial amount of free moisture i.e. purge which is water and juices emitted outside of the food meat product. Free moisture may be present from 0 to about 2 0 to about 1 0 to 0.5 or 0 to 0.01 based on the weight of the meat product before cooking.

 Meat pull off refers to that portion of a cook in meat product that is torn off of the meat product upon stripping the cook in film from the cooked meat product.

 Extrusion is the process of forming continuous shapes by forcing a molten plastic material through a die followed by cooling or chemical hardening. Immediately prior to extrusion through the die the relatively high viscosity polymer is fed into a rotating screw of variable pitch i.e. an extruder which forces the polymer through the die. Coextrusion refers to the process by which the outputs of two or more extruders are brought smoothly together in a feed block to form a multilayer stream that is fed to a die to produce a layered extrudate. Coextrusion can be employed in film blowing sheet and flat film extrusion blow molding and extrusion coating. Coextruded films are films prepared by coextrusion.

 Machine direction MD refers to a direction along the length of the film i.e. in the direction of the film as the film is formed during extrusion and or coating. Transverse direction TD refers to a direction across the film perpendicular to the machine or longitudinal direction.

 Free shrink refers to the dimensional change in a 10 cm 10 cm specimen of film when shrunk at 185 F. with the quantitative determination being carried out according to ASTM D 2732 as set forth in the 1990 Annual Book of ASTM Standards Vol. 08.02 pp. 368 371 which is incorporated in its entirety by reference hereto.

The multilayer film disclosed herein has at least 2 layers preferably 2 to 20 layers and preferably have at least 3 layers or 3 to 12 layers or from 3 to 11 layers or from 3 to 8 layers. So long as the multilayer film has at least 2 layers the multilayer film can have any further number of optional layers desired and have the desired properties for packaging operation in which the film is used e.g. O barrier characteristics free shrink shrink tension optics modulus seal strength etc.

A coextruded film is a multilayer polymeric sheet involving at least three categorical layers including but not limited to a base film layer a structural or abuse layer an optional barrier layer an innermost sealant layer and optionally one or more adhesive or tie layers there between. In some cases a composition may be suitable to function as one or more categorical layers. In those cases a single layer of polymer composition may fulfill the role of one or more categorical layers. For example a single polyamide layer may fulfill the roles of both structural or abuse layer and barrier layer. A polyester layer may fulfill the roles of both base layer and sealant layer.

The multilayer film can have any total thickness desired to provide the desired properties for the particular packaging operation in which the film is used such as a total thickness a combined thickness of all layers of from about 0.3 to about 15 mils 1 mil equals 0.001 inch 0.00254 cm about 1 to about 10 mils or 1.5 to 8 mils. For shrinkable bags the range can be from 1.5 3 mils and for non shrinkable articles the range can be from 4 8 mils. The O barrier layer may have a thickness of about 0.05 to 5 mils 0.05 to 0.5 mil 0.1 to 0.3 mil or about 0.12 to 0.17 mils.

Multiple film layers provide the multilayer film with the desired abuse shrink and optical characteristics. In some cases structure abuse or bulking layers may be present. Such layers can comprise polymers having relatively low cost while providing these characteristics. These layers can comprise polyamide polyester or both.

Polyester based copolymers may serve as tie layers having a relatively high degree of compatibility with the polyester and polyamide layers and any optional barrier layers such as polymerized EVOH. A tie layer may comprise the sulfonic acid or its derivative containing polyester copolymers.

The multilayer film can be produced by coextrusion. Orientation either uniaxially or biaxially can be effected by various methodologies e.g. blown film mechanical stretching or the like .

Coextrusion can be carried out according to any known coextrusion methods. For example a film can be manufactured by extrusion using so called blown film or flat die methods. A blown film is prepared by coextruding the individual polymeric compositions through an annular die such that a seamless tubular multilayer film having concentric layers of the compositions is prepared. Expanding the resulting tubular film with an air current provides a blown film. Cast flat films are prepared by coextruding the individual compositions through a flat die to provide a laminar flow of the layered compositions. The molten laminar flow leaving the die is cooled by at least one roll containing internally circulating fluid a chill roll or by a water bath to provide a cast film. The film can be sized by conventional techniques such as slitting to provide a packaging film. A film disclosed may have a width of about 25 to 60 cm about one to two feet .

A film disclosed here can be further oriented beyond the immediate quenching or casting of the film by extruding a laminar flow of molten polymer to produce an extrudate quenching the extrudate and orienting the quenched extrudate in at least one or more directions. Quenched describes an extrudate that has been substantially cooled below its melting point in order to obtain a solid film material.

The film can be unoriented oriented in a uniaxial direction e.g. machine direction or oriented in a biaxial direction e.g. machine direction and transverse direction . The film may be biaxially oriented by drawing in two mutually perpendicular directions in the plane of the film to achieve a satisfactory combination of mechanical and physical properties.

Orientation and stretching apparatus to uniaxially or biaxially stretch film are known in the art and may be adapted by those skilled in the art to produce films of the present invention. See e.g. apparatus and processes disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 3 278 663 3 337 665 3 456 044 4 590 106 4 760 116 4 769 421 4 797 235 and 4 886 634.

A blown film may be oriented using a double bubble extrusion process where simultaneous biaxial orientation may be effected by extruding a primary tube which is subsequently quenched reheated and then expanded by internal gas pressure to induce transverse orientation and drawn by differential speed nip or conveying rollers at a rate which will induce longitudinal orientation.

An oriented blown film may be made by any methods known in the art such as disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 3 456 044. A primary tube may be melt extruded from an annular die. This extruded primary tube is cooled quickly to minimize crystallization. It is then heated to its orientation temperature for example by means of a water bath . In the orientation zone of the film fabrication unit a secondary tube is formed by inflation thereby the film is radially expanded in the transverse direction and pulled or stretched in the machine direction at a temperature such that expansion occurs in both directions preferably simultaneously the expansion of the tubing being accompanied by a sharp sudden reduction of thickness at the draw point. The tubular film is then again flattened through nip rolls. The film may be reinflated and passed through an annealing step thermofixation during which step it is heated once more to adjust the shrink properties.

The film may be formed by an extrusion process that causes the polymer chains in the film to be generally aligned in the direction of extrusion. Linear polymers after being highly oriented uniaxially possess considerable strength in the orientation direction but less strength in the transverse direction. This alignment may add strength to the film in the direction of extrusion.

The multilayer film may have a free shrink of from about 5 to about 70 in one or both directions i.e longitudinal direction L also referred to as machine direction and transverse direction T at 185 F. determined according to ASTM D 2732 83 more preferably from about 10 to about 50 at 185 F. still more preferably from about 15 to about 35 at 185 F. Preferably the multilayer film is biaxially oriented.

The multilayer film may be oriented and then heatset or annealed. The multilayer film preferably has a transverse direction free shrink of about 0 to 20 at 185 F. or about 2 to 10 .

The films are further defined as being biaxially oriented so that they have less than about 20 shrink or less than about 5 shrink.

Certain packaging operations involve the use of a heat shrinkable bag to package and cook a turkey product. In these applications it is often desirable to obtain a product after cooking which has a profile similar to a turkey breast. It may be desirable to obtain a high a level of shrink tension in order to achieve the proper shape. The presence of the second layer of the multilayer film helps provide the multilayer shrink film with the desired shrink and shrink tension characteristics in order to achieve the proper product profile after cooking.

The invention includes an article comprising a multilayer film comprising a at least one layer comprising a polyester e.g. PET blended with a copolymer of polyester and a sulfobenzenedicarboxylic acid a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer e.g. copolymer derived from ethylene glycol terephthalic acid and 5 sulfoisophthalic acid b at least one polyamide layer and optionally c at least one optional layer that serves as an oxygen barrier layer. Blend ratios can be from 1 to 99 or from 2 to 49 weight sulfoisophthalic acid copolymer. Examples include a two layer structure consisting of a first layer comprising a blend of polyester and a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer and a second layer comprising polyamide. Either the first or the second layer may serve as the food contact sealant layer.

Also an example is a three layer structure consisting of a first layer comprising a blend of polyester and a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer a second layer comprising polyamide and a third layer comprising a blend of polyester and a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer. Either the first or the third layer may serve as the food contact sealant layer.

Also an example is a four layer structure consisting of a first layer comprising a blend of polyester and a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer a second layer comprising polyamide a third layer comprising an EVOH layer as a barrier layer and a fourth layer comprising polyamide. Either the first or the fourth layer may serve as the food contact sealant layer.

Another example is a five layer structure consisting of a first layer comprising a blend of polyester and a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer a second layer comprising polyamide a third layer comprising an EVOH barrier layer a fourth layer comprising polyamide and a fifth layer comprising a blend of polyester and a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer. Either the first or the fifth layer may serve as the food contact sealant layer.

The layer s comprising a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer serve as tie layer s in the multilayer structure.

An example is a three layer structure consisting of a first layer comprising polyester a second layer comprising a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer and a third layer comprising polyamide. Either the first or the third layer can serve as the food contact sealant layer.

Another example is a four layer structure consisting of a first layer comprising polyester a second layer comprising a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer a third layer comprising polyamide and a fourth layer comprising polyamide. Either the first or the fourth layer can serve as the food contact sealant layer.

Another example is a five layer structure consisting of a first layer comprising polyester a second layer comprising a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer a third layer comprising polyamide a fourth layer comprising an EVOH layer as a barrier layer and a fifth layer comprising polyamide. Either the first or the fifth layer can serve as the food contact sealant layer.

Another example is a five layer structure consisting of a first layer comprising polyester a second layer comprising a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer a third layer comprising polyamide a fourth layer comprising a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer and a fifth layer comprising polyester. Either the first or the fifth layer can serve as the food contact sealant layer.

Another example is a seven layer structure consisting of a first layer comprising polyester a second layer comprising a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer a third layer comprising polyamide a fourth layer comprising an EVOH layer as a barrier layer a fifth layer comprising polyamide a sixth layer comprising a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer and a seventh layer comprising polyester. Either the first or the seventh layer can serve as the food contact sealant layer.

Vent areas may be made anywhere on the package simply by providing a slit in the package face at the time of heating.

A package may be prepared from a multilayer film without opening or slitting for venting prior to cooking i.e. self venting . This may allow for an atmosphere exchange and promotes browning of the foodstuff being cooked. At the same time the foodstuff rests in the package and cooks in the natural juices that are exuded. This may keep the foodstuff moist tender and tasty and also can speed cook time. A package may be made self venting by incorporating a tie layer comprising a composition that will soften and rupture between 250 F. and 450 F. about 120 and about 235 C. or about 300 F. about 150 C. next to the food contact layer. On heating the package above 250 F. in an oven the temperature dependent tie layer fails and the multilayer structure delaminates. The food contact layer may not be supported by the rest of the multilayer structure and can rupture because of the internal pressure resulting from cooking the foodstuff allowing contact with the atmosphere around the package.

Tie layers used in providing a temperature dependent self venting feature include blends of ethylene maleic anhydride graft copolymers with ethylene methyl acrylate copolymers.

An example of a self venting package comprises a seven layer film structure consisting of a first layer comprising polyester a second layer comprising a sulfonic acid containing polyester copolymer a third layer comprising polyamide a fourth layer comprising an EVOH layer as a barrier layer a fifth layer comprising polyamide a sixth layer comprising a blend of an ethylene maleic anhydride graft copolymer with an ethylene methyl acrylate copolymer and a seventh layer comprising polyester. The sixth layer can be the self venting temperature dependent tie layer and the seventh layer can be the food contact sealant layer.

Films may be printable to provide the consumer with product information cooking instructions and the like and or to provide a pleasing appearance to the package prepared from the film.

The package can be cooked in directly due to the material construction providing the convenience of being able to purchase a fresh frozen partially cooked or value added foodstuff in a package at the retail level and be able to insert the package containing the foodstuff directly into a conventional convection or microwave oven and cook in the package is unique. Removing the foodstuff from the package and transfer it to another container for cooking can be eliminated. Value added foodstuff describes a foodstuff that has some additional preparation elements provided before packaging. For example a value added foodstuff comprises at least one food portion and additional components such as seasonings sauces marinades and the like. It may also comprise a mixture of different food components such as a meat portion and at least one vegetable portion that provides a meal.

Examples of foodstuffs that may be packaged in packages of this invention include processed meats such as sausages hot dogs and the like. Other examples include cooked meat product such as poultry pork including ham roast beef liver sausage mortadella bologna goat and lamb. The cooked meat product can comprise poultry ham or roast beef. The foodstuffs also include value added seasoned marinated and or precooked meat products or prepared meals. The foodstuffs may also be whole muscle and or bone in meat and poultry portions such as for example but not limitation pork loin comprises pork boneless ham turkey or chicken breasts and the like. Poultry also includes ready to cook or pre cooked whole birds. Ham or ham products includes ham with natural juices ham with water added and ham and water product. The ham with natural juices comprises at least 17 protein fat free while the ham with water added comprises at least 16 protein fat free. The ham and water product on the other hand comprises at least 16 protein fat free but also comprises added ingredients in an amount of about 35 weight based on the weight of the product. Because of relatively high percentage of added ingredients in the ham and water product it may be difficult to obtain adequate film to meat adhesion to the ham and water product than to the other above identified ham products. The above description of ham products are known to those of skill in the art and moreover are disclosed in the Encyclopedia of Labeling Meat and Poultry Products Eighth Edition Meat Plant Magazine St. Louis Mo.

Packages may also be used to package fresh meat poultry and seafood in modified atmospheric packaging applications or vacuum packaging applications. The barrier features combined with a sealant that can seal through contamination can provide greater economic benefit due to reducing the materials and labor in fresh product packaging operations. Such packages are ovenable as described herein and may become self venting once the internal temperature and pressure reach the softening point of the sealant.

Packages may incorporate other features such as perforations tear zones and the like that facilitate opening the package. Polyamide and PET combinations provide directional tear properties in that a pre notched package may be torn open in a straight line in either the machine direction or transverse directions. These tear properties allow for great flexibility in package configuration and design. Thus the opening area to access the foodstuff after heating is not limited to a particular part e.g. the top of the package. This allows for strategically locating a notch at the side of the package in the desired area for opening.

The packaged product may be made by a process comprising A filling an article the article being a bag casing pouch etc. with a meat product B closing the open end of the filled article so that the meat product is encased by the closed article and optionally C cooking the meat product encased in the closed article by subjecting the meat to cook in so that the meat product adheres to the inside surface of the closed article. The packaged product may be refrigerated and or frozen and subsequently reheated cooked and the like inside the package by the consumer prior to consumption. The article used for the packaged product is an article disclosed above.

The following Examples are merely illustrative and are not to be construed as limiting the scope of the invention. Unless stated otherwise all percentages parts etc. are by weight.

PET 1 Toughened PET available under the tradename Crystar 5005 from E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company DuPont Wilmington Del.

PET 3 Low heat seal initiation temperature PET copolymer available under the tradename Crystar 4446 from DuPont.

AEMA 1 Anhydride modified ethylene methyl acrylate copolymer available under the tradename Bynel 21 E810 from DuPont.

An eighteen inch wide 3 mil thick coextruded flat film was produced by casting on a chilled drum under standard cast film forming conditions to prepare a film of Example 1. The tie layers were about 0.1 to 0.3 mils thick and the polyamide layer was about 0.5 mils thick. Examples 2 through 6 were prepared similarly. Example 4 was designed to be self venting when heated in an oven above 250 F. by the use of the AEMA 1 tie layer. The cross section of each film was reported in Table 1 wherein indicates a boundary between layers.

Sixteen inch wide lay flat dimension multilayer blown film tubes called tapes were produced by the blown film coextrusion process under standard conditions wherein the tape cross section from outside of tube to inside of tube of each is reported in Table 2.

Bags were made from the oriented tubing under a preferred set of conditions by making a transverse heat seal across the width of the tubing and then severing the tubing parallel to and immediately behind the seal.

Foodstuffs may be placed in the bag and the open end sealed by a transverse heat seal across the width of the tubing.

In Example 13 an eighteen inch wide 15 mil thick coextruded flat sheet was produced by casting on a chilled drum under standard cast sheet forming conditions. The tie layers were about 0.3 to 0.5 mils thick and the polyamide layer was about 2.0 mils thick. This sheet was suitable as a thermoformable web to prepare a pouch for containing a food product.

The sheet was thermoformed under standard forming conditions to form a cavity appropriately sized to hold a foodstuff for example a turkey breast .

A lidding film of the construction reported for Example 1 was placed over the thermoformed web and heat sealed to the web thereby enclosing the foodstuff.

