---

title: Multi-channel digital wireless audio system
abstract: In a multi-channel digital wireless audio system with at least one transmit node and at least one receive node, each node can both receive and transmit digital audio signals. Signals sent from a receive node to a transmit node may acknowledge satisfactory signal receipt, or may requesting retransmission of data packets received in a corrupted state. Original and retransmitted signals may be sent in compressed form to enable use of narrow-band digital radios. The system preferably incorporates a dual control channel to enable transmission of meta data. Each system node preferably incorporates a hardware-multithreaded processor adapted to implement various functions such as baseband functions, RF protocol functions, error correction functions, and audio processing functions, with each independent thread being adapted to implement a different functional block.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08050203&OS=08050203&RS=08050203
owner: 
number: 08050203
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20051220
---
This application claims the benefit pursuant to 35 U.S.C. 119 e of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 637 772 filed on Dec. 22 2004 and said provisional application is hereby incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The present invention relates to wireless audio systems and in particular to digital wireless audio systems in which system latency is configurable within a selected range.

Terms acronyms and abbreviations appearing in the Glossary section of this patent document are intended to be understood in accordance with the definitions or explanations set out in the Glossary unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Terms not appearing in the Glossary or otherwise defined in this specification are intended to have the meanings generally understood by persons skilled in the art of the invention.

In this document the word comprising is used in its non limiting sense to mean that items following that word are included but items not specifically mentioned are not excluded. A reference to an element by the indefinite article a does not exclude the possibility that more than one of the element is present unless the context clearly requires that there be one and only one such element.

A variety of wireless audio systems may be found in the prior art. The following general categories of prior art wireless audio systems are of particular relevance to the present invention especially as they pertain to creating good quality of service in the domain of audio information transmission and delivery 

Pro Audio FM analog solutions achieve high quality of service QoS by using two transmit frequencies at the receive side to ensure continuity of signal transmission if one of the frequencies fails e.g. if a frequency is interfered with or experiences extreme path loss such as with a multipath null . An objective of the present invention is to provide a wireless audio system capable of achieving levels of QoS and frequency diversity comparable to those achievable with Pro Audio but using digital frequency agile radios i.e. digital wireless audio DWA . It is a further objective to provide a wireless audio system that does not require multiple radios at each system node thus reducing system cost compared to known wireless systems.

One aspect of fidelity in multi channel audio solution is synchronization between channels. For example without precise synchronization between left and right channels of a stereo signal the sound image will be grossly distorted.

Another objective is to provide high QoS using busy ISM bands that do not have licensing requirements such as the 2.400 2.483 GHz band while coexisting with other signal traffic in the target radio band. This objective makes it desirable to use relatively low data rate narrow band radios i.e. having a narrow footprint in the band such radios are more likely to be able to find clean operating frequencies within the band that will not be interfered with by traffic from other devices. The basic rule here is that the fewer bits of payload that are sent the less exposed the data is in the air and thus the greater the QoS.

Achieving desirable performance in audio fidelity in a DWA system entails consideration of generally known principles of digital audio. Fidelity can be measured with such metrics as frequency response pass band ripple total harmonic distortion signal to noise ratio and the like. The challenge comes in implementing the general case in which fidelity and QoS must be maintained at or above desired minimum levels while end to end system latency is kept to at or below a desired maximum level. There are other global considerations such as system size cost and power consumption that typically have hard constraints in practical embodiments. In view of such constraints it is commonly necessary to make tradeoffs between fidelity QoS and latency. There is accordingly a need for new DWA systems having improved fidelity QoS and latency characteristics but without increasing system size cost or power consumption compared with known systems of similar performance. The present invention is directed to the foregoing needs and objectives.

In general terms the invention is a multi channel digital wireless audio DWA system having at least one transmit node and at least one receive node for receiving digital audio signals from the transmit node or nodes. In simpler embodiments the DWA system may incorporate a single transmit node and a single receive node. In one preferred embodiment the DWA system incorporates a single transmit node and multiple receive nodes. In another preferred embodiment the DWA system incorporates multiple transmit nodes and a single receive node.

Each transmit node incorporates a radio frequency RF transceiver or alternatively an RF transmitter and an RF receiver. Each receive node also incorporates an RF transceiver or alternatively an RF transmitter and an RF receiver such that each receive node can also send digital signals to the transmit node or nodes. Signals sent from a receive node to a transmit node may contain information confirming satisfactory receipt of audio signals from the transmit node or alternatively requesting retransmission of data packets that arrived at the receive node in a corrupted state. In preferred embodiments each transmit node is adapted to compress audio signals transmitted to the receive node or nodes whether as original transmissions or retransmissions in response to requests from the receive node and each receive node is adapted to decompress signals from the transmit node. Similarly each receive node in preferred embodiments is adapted to compress signals sent to the transmit node as described above and each transmit node is adapted to decompress signals from the receive node.

Preferred embodiments of the invention enable the use of relatively inexpensive narrow band digital radios such as those used in digital cordless telephones while still achieving high QoS by utilizing audio compression and decompression techniques to reduce data payload requirements. One embodiment uses a single radio transceiver on each node to reduced cost and power consumption while using digital techniques to create fidelity and QoS comparable to or better than the fidelity and QoS achieved by more expensive analog pro audio solutions. This embodiment may be used to implement high QoS to several remote speakers.

Each transmit node and each receive node preferably incorporates a hardware multithreaded processor adapted to implement various functions such as baseband functions RF protocol functions error correction functions and audio processing functions including but not limited to compression and decompression functions all of which functions are well known and understood by persons skilled in the art of the invention. A hardware multithreaded processor with for example eight separate hardware threads may be used with each independent thread being adapted to implement a different functional block.

Accordingly in a first aspect the invention is a system for wireless transmission of audio signals said system comprising a single transmit node and one or more receive nodes wherein 

In a second aspect the present invention is a system for wireless transmission of audio data comprising a single receive node and one or more transmit nodes wherein 

In a third aspect the invention is a system for wireless transmission of audio signals comprising a single transmit node and one or more receive nodes wherein 

In a preferred embodiment the system has one or more open loop receive nodes and one or more closed loop receive nodes with the one or more open loop receive nodes being adapted to utilize packets retransmitted by the transmit node as requested by the one or more open loop receive nodes to replace corrupted packets previously received by the one or more open loop receive nodes.

In a fourth aspect the invention is a system for wireless radio transmission of audio signals said system comprising a single transmit node and one or more receive nodes wherein 

In a fifth aspect the invention is a system for wireless radio transmission of audio signals said system comprising a single transmit node and one or more receive nodes wherein 

In preferred embodiments the system is adapted such that retransmitted data will be compressed to a different extent different than when originally transmitted.

In alternative embodiments each receive node is adapted to output as an audio signal only such audio packets as are tagged by the transmit node as being specifically destined for that receive node and to make retransmission requests to the transmit node in cases where corrupted packets are received only with respect to packets tagged by the transmit node as being specifically destined for that receive node.

In a further alternative embodiment the transmit node incorporates multiple radio frequency transceivers and each receive node incorporates a single radio frequency transceiver.

In the preferred embodiment the transmit node and the receive nodes are each implemented in the form of a wireless audio module with each module comprising a processor PCBA containing the corresponding node s processor and audio signal circuitry and a radio PCBA containing the corresponding node s radio frequency circuitry. Preferably the processor PCBA and the radio PCBA of each module may be tested independently of one another the processor PCBA and the radio PCBA of each module are electrically interconnected via a first electrical interface and each module interfaces with a motherboard via a second electrical interface located on the associated processor PCBA.

An alternative embodiment of the invention incorporates two or more transmit nodes and two or more receive nodes with the system being adapted such that each receive node upon being powered up will bond with a selected transmit node and each receive node comprises bond rejection means which may be activated to reject the bond with the selected transmit node and to cause the receive node to bond to the next available transmit node thus enabling a user to select a desired audio source.

In preferred embodiments the system of the invention is adapted to implement an adaptive frequency hopping technique. In such embodiments the system stores a primary palette of multiple primary frequencies and a secondary palette of multiple secondary frequencies. Primary frequencies are identified by the system as superior throughput performing frequencies and are used by the system for sending first copies of packets and copies of packets resulting from retransmission requests. Secondary frequencies are identified by the system as second tier throughput performing frequencies and are used by the system for concurrent scouting of frequencies and transmission of redundant packets. The frequencies in the secondary palette of are changed on a regular basis to facilitate the system collecting throughput statistics on a maximum number of frequencies in the band. The system collects and records packet throughput statistics on all primary and secondary frequencies. When a particular secondary frequency is found over a selected sample period to have a higher average throughput than the primary frequency having the lowest average throughput over the sample period that secondary frequency is added to the primary palette and the primary frequency having the lowest average throughput is dropped from the primary palette and moved to the secondary palette. The system hops on a combined palette comprising both the primary palette and secondary palette and each packet is transmitted two or more times without a retransmission request. The system may be further adapted to configure audio data into a compressed base layer and one or more enhancement layers with base layer packets being sent on primary frequencies and enhancement layer packets being sent on secondary frequencies.

In preferred embodiments the processor of each node is adapted to implement a clock synchronization function for increasing or decreasing the node s audio clock frequency so that it will be synchronized with the audio clock frequency of a selected other system node. The means for increasing or decreasing audio clock frequency may comprise a voltage controlled oscillator or varactor.

In an alternative embodiment the processor in the transmit node engages two or more baseband units enabling said processor to drive one or more radio frequency transceivers the baseband units and the transmit node processor are implemented on a common semiconductor die.

The DWA system of the invention may have two or more receive nodes adapted to receive identical audio signals or different audio signals from the transmit node. Alternatively the receive nodes may be adapted to receive a combination of identical and different audio signals from the receive node.

In preferred embodiments of the system of the invention a hardware multithreaded processor engages one or more baseband units and an equal number of radio frequency transceivers on a common semiconductor die.

Also in preferred embodiments two or more processors run software which implements a duplex control channel between the transmit node and one or more of the receive nodes thereby enabling meta data to be sent on the same physical radio medium that transports the audio signal and the duplex control channel is used to transport control information which has been received by an optical receiver at the receive node and which is rebroadcast by an optical transmitter at the transmit node.

It will be apparent in view of the previous discussion that receive nodes C and D will have a lower QoS than receive nodes A and B. However what may not be as readily apparent is that receive nodes C and D will have a QoS that is better than the system in . This is because receive nodes C and D are able to take advantage of resent packets that are requested by receive nodes A and B. In cases where interference causes packet corruption and where receive nodes C and D are set to receive and output the same audio information as receive nodes A and B the resent packet requested by receive nodes A and B will also be useful to receive nodes C and D and will be used as available.

This scenario illustrates an important aspect of the invention. All audio information transmitted by the transmit node is available to all receive nodes . Depending on their individual settings each receive node may output or ignore certain portions of the transmitted audio information .

In contrast illustrates an embodiment similar to but in which receive nodes C and D have RF transceivers C and D respectively rather than RF receivers. In the embodiment of transmit node transmits audio programs W X Y and Z while each receive node delivers only one program to its corresponding speaker. Accordingly the payload that transmit node must send is four times the payload that each receive node must receive. For example if the payload per audio program is 250 kbps all nodes must be equipped with radio transceivers capable of transporting a payload of 4 250 kbps 1000 kbps because the receive nodes must be able to transfer data at the same rate as the transmit node . However the transceivers in the receive nodes will be idle 75 of the time. In other words the transceivers in the receive nodes only deliver 25 of the value that has been paid for. Therefore in the system shown in a total capacity of 5 1000 kbps 5000 kbps is provided and paid for but only 1 1000 kbps 4 256 kbps 2000 kbps are used on average. This results in significant waste in terms of payload capacity and cost.

This is an important kind of waste the reduction of which may be addressed in accordance with the present invention. shows how the waste can be reduced by adding a second RF transceiver to transmit node . Carrying on with the example numbers from the discussion of each of the transceivers and in transmit node transmits only two audio programs either W X or Y Z and therefore must be capable of 2 250 kbps 500 kbps which still amounts to a total transmission capacity of 1000 kbps since there are two transceivers. However each transceiver A B C and D in receive nodes A B C and D now only needs to be capable of 500 kbps and will be idle only 50 of the time instead of 75 of the time as in . In this case therefore a total capacity of 2 500 kbps 4 500 kbps 3000 kbps are paid for while 2000 kbps is used on average as before . Waste has thus been reduced from 3000 kbps to 1000 kbps average .

Although shows transmit node as having two transceivers and each with its own antenna or in alternative embodiments the transceivers may share a common antenna. It will also be readily appreciated that additional waste may be eliminated by adding a third transceiver and so forth. Efficiencies are gained by having the transceivers at transmit node served by a single hardware multithreaded processor T however the system may also work with multiple processors e.g. one per transceiver .

The difference in input and output blocks is shown greatly exaggerated in in which the amount of time required to input a given number of audio samples at the transmit node is graphically shown as being less than the amount of time for the same number of samples to be output at the receive node . As is apparent when it takes longer to output a block of samples than it takes to input them the system will have a problem. The opposite problem is also possible. If the transmit node clock is slower than the receive node clock the receive node will be outputting data faster than it is coming in and it will run out of samples. These problems are virtually certain to happen in actual implementation since crystals always have variance.

Previously discussed were the benefits of driving more than one radio with a single hardware multithreaded processor as shown in . shows how this can be accomplished in the processor itself in association with a transmit node having two RF transceivers and . The processor is shown as having eight logical thread processors each with access to common memory and a common internal peripheral bus. Engaged with the peripheral bus are numerous I O blocks including two baseband units BBUs marked in as BBU and BBU. These hardware I O peripherals perform the interface function with digital radios including bit and word synchronization FEC coding and other required functions. In this configuration a single processor thread can drive both BBUs and hence both transceivers or separate threads can drive each BBU. Here BBUs are shown on chip and the radio transceivers and are shown off chip however other configurations are also viable such as having one or both BBUs off chip. Alternatively single chip solutions i.e. with the processor one or both BBUs and one or both radios all on the same silicon die are also possible. The I O blocks indicated by reference number in could be any of several types of prior art processor components that are not relevant to the present invention for example digital audio serial interface vector processing unit and serial peripheral interface bus host slave controllers .

Power consumption reduction is a very desirable result in battery operated DWA devices such as wireless headphones. illustrates how some threads of hardware multithreaded processor may have a duty cycle type operation in which one or more threads do not need to be running all the time. The processor shuts down one or more threads for periods when they are not in use as shown for thread in by way of example . Power is conserved because a thread that is shut down does not use power accessing memory and other blocks within the processor. Further the processor also shuts down other peripheral devices when they are not needed or for part of a duty cycle whenever possible. This includes peripheral blocks such as the BBUs see and external peripheral devices such as the RF transceivers RF power amplifiers and RF low noise amplifiers if present.

Other examples would use control channel in the other direction or both directions. For instance in multipoint configurations such as in and volume control buttons on the receive nodes can be used to set volume parameters at the transmit node which the transmit node then distributes to all receive nodes via control channel thereby changing volume at any speaker changes the volume for the whole system. Another possible application could involve sending song title information from the transmit node to the receive node and displaying it on an LCD screen at the speaker. Other uses for control channel are possible and more than one of these applications can be implemented concurrently in the same product.

Packet resends are an important technique in creating high QoS. Sending replacement packets with a higher level of error protection is an important technique for making sure the replacement packets get through. In the case where a primary packet has arrived corrupted there is a great deal of time pressure to ensure that the replacement packet arrives before that time slot hole in the buffer is output to the associated speaker. Therefore in order to ensure that the duplicate resent packet gets through a higher strength FEC technique may be used on the resent packet. A higher strength FEC technique means that a greater level of redundant information is embedded into the packet than usual i.e. more redundant information than a primary packet which in fact may have none such that any bit corruption that may occur during transmission through the air is more likely to be something the receive side can repair without requiring yet another resend.

In DWA devices there is typically a planned difference between the gross data rate of the RF PHY and the net data rate of the intended payload. This is because protocol overheads take up some of the RF PHY s available data rate but even more importantly excess extra data rate is required in case resends are required in order to maintain a high QoS. This planned difference is sometimes called the data rate margin and can be 2 1 or higher as a general guideline for a good system. Accordingly for a system intended to carry a payload of for example 480 kbps a 1.1 Mbps PHY would be a reasonable choice resulting in some built in or planned spare time for the PHY. During this spare time it is desirable for the PHY to listen to other channels or send dummy or redundant packets on other channels.

A related technique may also be used to scout RF channels by just tuning to them and listening without sending dummy packets this technique may be referred to as passive scouting . This technique has the benefits of consuming less power and not polluting the band with additional RF traffic however it does not provide channel performance statistics that are as definitive as the active scouting method. The reason for this is that interference is not the only thing that makes a channel bad . A channel may be bad because of path loss characteristics because of multipath nulls or because the RF PHY on one or both ends performs poorly on that RF frequency. The most definitive channel performance statistics come from actively testing the channel to determine whether the data makes it through .

As already mentioned a downside of active scouting is that it creates RF pollution the dummy packets sent in active scouting tend to congest the band even further making successful co existence with other devices operating in the band more challenging. A further downside of active scouting is power consumption since actually transmitting data always requires more power than just listening. Active scouting may be done with a known dummy packet or simply with duplicate audio packets copies of already sent audio packets . Both techniques have advantages. Using duplicate audio packets reduces the need for retransmission requests in cases where the duplicate audio actually solves a problem for the receive node if the original audio packet arrived corrupted . Using known dummy packets has the benefit that both transmit and receive nodes already know what is in the dummy packet therefore the bit errors in a received dummy packet can be analyzed instead of just tagging the whole packet as corrupt or not corrupt i.e. finer grained more meaningful statistics may be collected if bit errors can be seen rather than just packet errors.

Either method of scouting passive or active enables adaptive frequency hopping and other methods of adaptive use of the RF band. Adaptive frequency hopping may also be achieved without scouting of any kind simply by using the real payload packets to collect the RF channel performance statistics and recovering from packet failures via retransmissions.

An advanced method of adaptive use of the RF band is enabled by the listening technique of passive scouting described above. In this method signals listened to from other devices using the band are classified and the reaction by the system is dependent on the classification. For instance one classification could be for a type of device that will not benefit from avoidance such as a microwave oven another classification could be for a type of device where avoidance attempts would be ineffective such as a fast frequency hopping device and another classification would be for a type of device where both the system and the other device would benefit from the system s avoidance reaction such as a DSSS device .

The real data rate available to the solution varies with time. In cases where the instantaneous data rate can dip far below the requirement but where the average data rate over a particular period of time X ms is sufficient to maintain satisfactory QoS using a buffer on the receive node of at least X ms will enable the system to operate reliably. Naturally buffers introduce latency and this is undesirable in some applications. Therefore it is preferable to use a buffer of a size large enough to handle the variability in available data rate but not larger than necessary. Buffer size may be made to be configurable by the product manufacturer or even the end user and to be set according to the type of use and the harshness of the environment. It may also be desirable for the system to reconfigure its own buffer size. For example in a home theater application an application where low latency is desirable the system may start up with very small buffers on its receive nodes and if it encounters a problem e.g. if its buffers empty and the system is forced to mute the output it can mute increase its buffer size and then un mute when its buffer is sufficiently full. This way although the system may mute a few times to begin with the buffer size will be set only as large as necessary.

In preferred embodiments the system is adapted to adjust the buffer size on the basis of actual system performance in prevailing environmental conditions.

Executing a soft mute upon emptying of the buffer is an important feature. It is more desirable from the listener s point of view to hear a mute than any sort of corrupted data crackling popping etc. . A mute should be at least 0.5 seconds in duration to be least obtrusive to the listener. Also the beginning and the end of the mute must be softened i.e. audio signal amplitude ramped down and up so as not to offend the ears of the listener. An algorithm may be implemented to insert calculated samples to bring the last real output sample safely down to zero. Ending mute may be done by scaling the data from zero up to the actual data over a few samples. This is effectively a rapid turn down of the volume and turn up of the volume rather than an abrupt cut out and cut in with associated transient pop sounds .

Similarly if the entire home theater solution also includes some wired speakers delay lines can be introduced in front of the wired speakers that add a latency to them that matches the video latency as well thus enabling all audio channels and the video to be once again in sync .

DWA latency will likely be the longest in the total home theater solution. In this case it is desirable to minimize the latency of the DWA speakers by using only as much buffer as required as discussed previously and then to add delay lines to any wired speakers such that their latency matches that of the DWA speakers thus enabling accurate recreation of the sound field. It is actually more important to have the audio channels synchronized than to have the audio in tight sync with the video most people have a high tolerance for audio video sync mismatch in the order of 100 ms but much lower tolerance for audio audio sync mismatch 20 ms or less .

Alternative ways of using acknowledgments will also yield efficiency improvements. For instance the receive node can be configured to never send ACKs and instead to send only non acknowledgement messages NACKs when a packet has arrived corrupted. This eliminates much wasted time but also introduces some risk. Another method would be for the receive side to never send NACKs but to have the transmit node understand that the absence of an ACK constitutes a NACK.

It will be readily appreciated by those skilled in the art that various modifications of the present invention may be devised without departing from the essential concept of the invention and all such modifications are intended to be included in the scope of the claims appended hereto.

This section sets out definitions and explanations of various terms acronyms and abbreviations as used in this patent specification.

Active Mode Used to describe a closed loop audio delivery system where the receive node sends requests for retransmission to the transmit node in cases where packets have arrived at the receive node corrupted bad packets .

ACK Acknowledged short message sent from receive node to transmit node to inform it that the last packet was received ok 

AC3 The compressed combined 6 channel digital audio stream used by Dolby Digital audio systems 5.1 channel audio systems for example .

Adaptive Frequency Hopping A process of upgrading the hopping palette based on the system collecting RF channel performance statistics. Such statistics may be collected simply by passing payload packets through RF channels or by various scouting techniques. Channels that are performing well i.e. better than one of the channels currently in the palette are added to the palette while the poor performers are deleted hence the system adapts to avoids the other traffic in the band as long as it is static or slow moving in the frequencies used . See also FHSS. ADPCM A low latency compression algorithm that does not require floating point math and that is implemented in the time domain. aLaw or A Law A logarithmic sample wise compression achieves lossy compression of up to 2 to 1 similar to Law a time domain technique. API Application Programming Interface this term has its roots in computer operating systems such as Mac OS and Microsoft Windows. Many useful system routines are made available to application programmers so they do not have to reinvent the wheel every time they write a new program for that operating system. In addition to writing application specific code the programmer makes system calls which do things like open windows and provide pull down menus. The code for this is pre existing and made available to the programmer to make application development faster more consistent and more reliable. Band The band of RF frequencies used by a DWA system. For example the 2.4 GHz ISM band extends from 2.400 GHz to 2.483 GHz and requires no license. Multiple RF channels may be defined and used within a band. Typically a system will use one band. Otherwise it is called a multiband system. The system synthesizes center frequencies for each channel it will use in the band. This process generates a discrete number of channels the system can select from. Some systems use just one channel others hop across hundreds or thousands of channels. As an example for a particular system the total number of synthesizable channels in the 2.4 GHz ISM band may be 85 whereas the hopping palette i.e. subset of channels the system is hopping on may be only 15 of those 85. Other systems change channels only if required e.g. if there is interference on the current channel . Baseband In digital wireless systems a broad term used to describe low level processing of an outgoing signal before it is sent to the RF PHY. Also used to describe the low level processing of incoming signals retrieved from the RF PHY. This term has acquired a different meaning in the realm of digital wireless systems than its typical usage meaning in older wireless systems. Baseband Unit An I O subsystem used to implement baseband processing of signals. Bond The process of system nodes finding and connecting with each other following power up. CD Compact Disc CD data rate 16 bits 44.1 ksamples s 2 channels 1.4112 Mbps raw data no compression as it is on a store bought compact disc . Checksum A number generated from the data in a packet. This can be done as easily as adding up each byte in the packet possibly truncating the resulting most significant digits . This checksum can be calculated again at the receive node and compared with the one received with the packet. If the 2 checksums match there s a high assurance that the packet has arrived error free. Coexistence In cases where two or more systems are using a frequency band concurrently the degree to which the systems can all enjoy good QoS in other words the degree to which they can avoid collisions with each other. To achieve good coexistence ALL systems operating in the band must have good QoS not just some of them. DAB Digital Audio Broadcast Data link margin ratio or bps The difference between the maximum raw bps that the physical layer is capable of and the required bps of the payload. In practice twice the PHY must support a bps of approximately twice the phy because of the overheads of packet framing and QoS techniques. Data Rate The rate in bits per second at which data is read written transmitted or received 

Dolby 2.1 Home theater surround standard promoted by Dolby Laboratories the number 2.1 represents two speakers 200 Hz 20 kHz and one LFE subwoofer 

Dolby 5.1 Home theater surround standard promoted by Dolby Laboratories the number 5.1 represents five speakers L R center rear L and rear R and an LFE.

DSSS Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum a type technique of sending a payload of X bits with a pattern of Y bits typically where Y X. Because the number of legal bit patterns legal Y s are few even a damaged pattern can often be recognized by the receiver and the corresponding X bits recovered. Can be considered a type of FEC. DTS A competing format to Dolby Digital Dolby 5.1 6.1 7.1 . Duplex Communication in 2 directions. DWA Digital Wireless Audio. Environmental Conditions In the RF context a combination of factors that affect the performance of an RF transmission system. Environmental factors include the amount and type of RF interference present in the band used e.g. from non system devices the amount of path loss between system nodes including obstacles in the way attenuation due to poor antenna orientation moisture in the air etc. and multipath nulls that may be present due to RF reflections and others. Error correction In the event that a data packet arrives at its destination corrupted methods to repair or replace the data. FEC Forward Error Correction various techniques of embedding redundant information in transmitted information such that some bit damage can be fixed at the receive side without a packet resend being required. FHSS Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum a method of statistically ensuring that at least some data gets through a system. The system hops on a set of RF channels rather than transmitting the payload on a single channel. The hopping is a way to spread the data transmission across many RF frequencies. FM Frequency Modulation a common analog RF method for transmission of audio signals which is susceptible to several forms of audible noise due to interference and other RF channel problems. FFT Fast Fourier Transform a technique for a computer to quickly compute a fourier transform of a group of data samples a time domain to frequency domain transform . HiFi or Hi Fi High fidelity generally taken as supporting audio ranging from 20 Hz to 20 kHz in frequency sometimes also implying a stereo signal. Frequency domain Technique Algorithms operating on an audio data stream by taking windows of data groups of samples and performing a fourier transform on them to get the frequency content of the window. After the frequency content has been manipulated the resulting altered frequency domain information is transformed back to the time domain for output. Such techniques are used to implement audio filters and some types of compression algorithms. Frequency Hopping See FHSS. Full Duplex Communication in two directions concurrently. Half Duplex Communication in two directions but not at the same time by time sharing of resources . Hopping Palette Of the total number of RF PHY channels defined by the system for use in the band a subset of these on which the RF PHY hops in a sequence. The sequence can be random pseudo random or predefined. The palette can also be adaptive i.e. automatically upgraded by the system due to other RF traffic in the band . See Adaptive Frequency Hopping. Image or stereo image A true representation of a stereo soundfield. Immersed in a complex soundfield the combination of the differences in exact levels differences in arrival times and differences in spectral coloration experienced by two ears can produce an accurate multi dimensional picture of multiple instruments to the human brain. When instead captured by two microphones and then later reproduced by two speakers a true image of the original soundfield can be recreated. If the sound reproduction system introduces issues such as a sync problem e.g. L and R speakers are not exactly synchronized in the information they are outputting the resulting distorted signals no longer present a true stereo image to the human brain. The concept of an image can be extended to more complex audio systems with more than two channels. I O Input Output IR Infrared data or controls sent over infrared invisible to the eye light. ISM or ISM Band Industrial Scientific Medical a number of bands set aside by the government regulatory agencies for unlicensed use by commercial and consumer products. Examples are the 2.4 GHz ISM band from 2400 MHz to 2483 MHz worldwide and the 900 MHz ISM band from 902 MHz to 928 MHz in the U.S. and Canada . ksamples s Thousand samples per second Latency The amount of end to end delay introduced by a DWA system usually measured in ms milliseconds LFE Low Frequency Effects the audio channel in multi channel audio that is sent to the subwoofer. For example the 0.1 in Dolby 5.1 refers to the LFE channel. Lossless Compression schemes where no information is lost examples are FLAC Apple Lossless . Lossy Compression schemes where some information is lost examples are MP3 AAC Ogvorbis Law AC3 ADPCM . Mating The permanent process of selecting a mating ID which identifies all nodes in the same system. Measurements of Frequency 

 Law or mu law A logarithmic sample wise compression achieves lossy compression of up to 2 to 1 a time domain technique.

Multi channel Compressed Audio Typically audio streams with more than two channels e.g. Dolby Digital AC3 which has five channels of surround audio and one LFE channel .

Multipath Null Radio signals often travel to a destination by more than one route. If for example there are two routes one may be a reflection off of some surface the total travel distance is different for the two paths and so the two copies of the signal will arrive at the destination point with some phase relationship. If they are exactly in phase they will create a peak of signal constructive interference known as a multipath peak. If they arrive out of phase they will create a null in signal known as a multipath null a lack of signal . Dealing with multipath nulls usually involves changing frequency effectively changes the position of a multipath null or using two antennas usually at the receive node and intelligently picking the best one the one not in a multipath null for best performance in real time. Multipoint Point to Multipoint A configuration with one transmit node and multiple receive nodes or conversely multiple transmit nodes and one receive node . NACK Not acknowledged short message sent from receive node to transmit node to inform it that the last packet was NOT received ok . Nyquist rate Twice the highest audio frequency in the analog source signal therefore if the source is limited to content 20 kHz and below audible content the corresponding Nyquist rate is 40 kHz. The Nyquist rate is the lowest sampling rate that can capture all the information in the source signal. The CD standard uses a sampling rate of 44.1 ksamples s which is greater than the minimum 48 ksamples is also a popular sampling rate for digital audio. Packet Throughput The percentage of data packets that are successfully transmitted from one system node to another i.e. packets that arrive uncorrupted or that may be repaired via available error correction mechanisms . Packet throughput varies depending on system performance environmental conditions and range. Path loss The normal degradation in RF signal experienced by an RF PHY increases with distance range obstacles especially metallic ones moisture in the air etc. typically measured in dB. Payload The data or data rate of the actual information that is desired to be transported. Does not include any overheads of framing checksums resends or any other overheads that are required to implement RF protocols. PCBA Printed Circuit Board Assembly meaning the combination of a printed circuit board and the components mounted on it. PHY Physical layer. Physical layer phy In wireless systems the RF layer of the communication solution as implemented by the selected radio frequency transmitter receiver or transceivers. PLL Phase Locked Loop in wireless systems a device in an RF PHY which is used for one radio receiver to lock on to and sync up with the transmitted RF signal of another radio transmitter . PLL lock always takes time the amount of time varies by radio model. In other systems a control system which allows one oscillator to match the frequency and phase of another osciallator. Point to Point A configuration topology with a single transmit node and a single receive node. Protocol Predetermined set of rules for how devices will communicate transfer data from point A to point B . Often this is done with packets of data. Often there are special rules about what happens in the case a corrupt packet is received. QoS Quality of Service a term for reliability in wireless systems. In wireless audio systems good QoS is very important and very difficult to achieve since what is being transported is a real time signal. Real time signals are fleeting thus the transmit node cannot take whatever time is required to transmit the data the data must be transferred as a stream to the receive node. Any break in this stream will result in dropouts or crackles pops in the resulting audio poor QoS . A reliable stream with no discontinuities is considered good QoS. QoS may be measured quantitatively by placing the wireless system at a fixed range in a predetermined environment and measuring MTBF i.e. mean time between failures . RAM Random Access Memory volatile memory that is lost on power down can be read from or written to. RF Radio Frequency. RF Band The range of frequencies usedby a wireless system. For DWA applications typically ISM bands are used. ROM Read Only Memory permanent memory that is retained even when power is removed can be read from but not written to. Rx Receive or receiver or receive node. Sample Time Sample period which equals the reciprocal of the sample rate. For example the sample time of a 48 ksample second audio signal is 1 48 000 seconds 20.83 microseconds. Scouting The assessment of RF channel performance by speculatively passing low importance data through the frequency and recording throughput statistics. Can also be done by listening only although this method has the disadvantage that the channel is not actually tested. Listening methods are superior from a coexistence perspective however since the system does not transmit any RF energy thereby one the whole allowing more devices to coexist in the band concurrently.

