---

title: Facilitating presentation and monitoring of electronic mail messages with reply by constraints
abstract: A method, system, and program for facilitating presentation and monitoring of electronic mail messages with reply by constraints are provided. Within a network environment, a server receives electronic mail messages with separate selected reply by dates, wherein each electronic mail message is addressed for delivery by the server to at least one particular recipient. The server enables, for display within a user interface accessible to the particular recipient, a separate record for each electronic mail message within an inbox. The inbox include at least one selectable sublevel, wherein upon selection of the particular selectable sublevel of the inbox, only a selection of records for electronic mail messages with a same reply by date as the selectable sublevel are displayed within the user interface.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07912913&OS=07912913&RS=07912913
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 07912913
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050915
---
The present invention relates in general to improved email communication service and in particular to facilitating composition presentation and monitoring of electronic mail messages with reply by constraints.

Electronic mail email continues to provide a key method of communication between users across the world where access to the Internet or other network is available. Many email systems receive emails addressed to a particular user and deliver the emails to a computer system at which the particular user is logged in to receive delivery of emails. An email application or web browser executing on the computer system typically receive delivery of emails and present a selectable entry for each email in an inbox. A user may select to open an email from by selecting the entry for that email in the inbox. In addition the entry for each email in the inbox may include graphical indicators showing whether the email has been opened and whether the email has been replied to.

Many users will receive large volumes of new emails in an inbox each day. With a large volume of emails in an inbox a user may not be able to open each new email each day. Further with a large volume of emails in an inbox a user may open emails but loose track of which emails the user needs to reply to. Even though the inbox may include graphical indicators of those messages already replied to a user cannot tell just by looking at entries within the inbox which entries were just for reading and which entries need to be replied to and by when a reply would be timely.

Some inboxes allow users to create separate folders outside the inbox and move emails from the inbox into a folder for purposes of organization. While a user may create a folder for messages that need to be replied to to actually use the folder the user must then open each email message evaluate whether the email message needs to be replied to and then drag the email into the folder. When a user receives a large volume of emails manually opening each email evaluating what folder to place the email within and then dragging the email to the folder is a limited time intensive solution that requires user performance.

Therefore in view of the foregoing it would have advantageous to provide a method system and program for facilitating user selection of a reply by date on the sending side and then automatically organizing emails with reply by dates within the inbox of the recipient such that the recipient can quickly view within the inbox those emails which need to be replied to each day.

Therefore the present invention provides an improved email communication network environment for facilitating composition presentation and monitoring of electronic mail messages with reply by constraints.

In one embodiment within a network environment a server receives electronic mail messages with separate selected reply by dates wherein each electronic mail message is addressed for delivery by the server to at least one particular recipient. The server enables for display within a user interface accessible to the particular recipient a separate record for each electronic mail message within an inbox. The inbox include at least one selectable sublevel wherein upon selection of the particular selectable sublevel of the inbox only a selection of records for electronic mail messages with a same reply by date as the selectable sublevel are displayed within the user interface.

The server may receive electronic mail messages from a sending client system that facilitates selection of the reply by date by a user composing and sending the electronic mail message. In addition electronic mail message may include other reply by constraints such as designating only a selection of the total recipients of the electronic mail message to receive the reply by date and designating the type of reply requested.

The server monitors electronic mail messages sent with reply by dates and detects when a reply is not received to a particular electronic mail message prior to the expiration of the reply by date for the electronic mail message. Upon detection of an unreplied to electronic mail message with an expired reply by date or an almost expired reply by date the server may detect whether the intended recipient is available for chat communications and automatically initiate a chat session between the sending user and an available intended recipient.

In addition the server monitors whether electronic mail messages are actually delivered to intended recipients prior to the expiration of the reply by date and may automatically alert a sender if the current date passes the reply by date and the server has not been able to deliver a particular electronic mail message to an intended recipient.

The server detects replies to electronic mail messages marks the record for an electronic mail message if a reply is composed and sent. In addition when the server detects a reply electronic mail message the server adjusts the display of the record for the originating electronic mail message within the user interface into the general inbox level or another folder.

In addition the server monitors records under sublevels of the inbox and adjusts a graphical indicator for each sublevel to indicate the proximity to the current date of the reply by date for each sublevel. Additionally the server may prompt a recipient with a listing of the records still within a sublevel with the reply by date matching the current date.

With reference now to a block diagram depicts a network environment for supporting email communications between email clients. It will be understood that the distributed network environment depicted is one example of a network environment for supporting email communications between email clients other embodiments of systems enabled to communicate via a connection may support the email communications of the present invention.

In the embodiment a network environment includes a network which is the medium used to provide communications links between various devices and computers connected together within network environment . Network may include multiple types of combinations of connections including but not limited to permanent connections such as wire or fiber optics cables temporary connections made through telephone connections and wireless transmission connections.

In addition in the embodiment network environment includes email servers and and email clients and each communicatively connected to network . Each of email servers and and email clients and represent computer systems or groupings of computer systems where a computer system is further described with reference to . In addition it will be understood that other email servers email clients and other types of computer systems may be communicatively connected to network for supporting email communications.

In general email server and email server are described with reference to the facilitating email transmissions between email clients and . Email clients and are described with reference to providing a user interface for composing and reading emails and facilitating communications with an email server or for sending and receipt of emails. It will be understood however that each of email servers and may perform additional functions including any of the functions described with reference to email clients and that each of email clients and may perform additional functions including any of the functions described with reference to email servers.

Email servers and and email clients and may be connected within network environment in conformance with different network architectures. In one example within a client server architecture network environment includes the Internet and network represents a worldwide collection of networks and gateways that the use the transmission control protocol internet protocol TCP IP suite of protocols to communicate with each other in another example network environment includes an intranet and network facilitates a local area network LAN or wide area network WAN . Additionally within a peer to peer architecture email clients and may directly communicate with each other by sending email messages via network without an email server acting as an intermediary. Further software function calls as may be defined in an application programming interface API executing on each of the computer systems email servers and and email clients and may be used to implement communication between the computer systems or computer systems may communication by passing email messages for example directly through a commonly defined message passing port interface or indirectly through reading and writing shared memory.

In one example users are provided with an email address supported by a particular email service provider. In one example the email service provider is a business enterprise that provides email service to its employees as email subscribers. In another example the email service provider is an independent provider to which individuals and business subscribe for service. It will be understood that in alternate embodiments other types of email service providers may provide email service to subscribers.

In particular the email service provider acts as an intermediary for receiving emails addressed to a particular user s email address and for delivering emails sent by the particular user. In addition the email service provider may allocate a predetermined amount of storage space for each user for storage of sent and received emails. Each of email servers and may support the email services provided by one or more email services providers.

In the embodiment users log in at email clients and to access the email service of a particular email service provider. In particular email clients and may facilitate subscriber email communication through a web browser application through a collaboration application such as Lotus Notes or through other application software that enables a computing system to facilitate email communication for a user.

In one example user A is a subscriber of the email service provider A which is supported by email server and user B is a subscriber of the email service provider B which is supported by email server . User A while logged in at email client sends an email addressed to user B . Email client sends the email to email server . Email server locates the email service provider for user B and forwards the email to email server . When user B logs in to receive email service from email service provider B for example at email client email client requests delivery of any previously undelivered emails to user B . In addition to delivering the previously undelivered email from user A email server may also provide user B with access through email client to all other emails stored by email server in a mailbox storage space for user B .

In general an email client such as email client or facilitates a user interface for composition of emails. In facilitating user composition of a single email email composition interface may provide an interface with a header portion and a message portion. The header portion may include prompts for entry of information such as the email address for the sender the email address for one or more recipients and a subject of the email. The message portion may include a space in which a user may insert text audio video graphics and attachments. When a user selects to send the composed email and the email is delivered additional information may be added to the header such as a time submitted a time delivered and routing information.

In addition in general the email client such as email client or facilitates a user interface for presenting records of emails for selection by a user and for displaying emails for the user to read. In one example an email client presents a record for each incoming email in an inbox list. The user is then enabled to search through the records in the inbox list and select a record to open the email associated with the record. Additionally in presenting records of emails for selection by a user records of emails sent by the user may be presented in an outbox list. The user is then enabled to search through the records in the outbox list and select a record to open the email associated with the record and sent by the user.

According to an advantage an email client such as email client or includes a prompt within the header portion of composition interface for user entry of a reply by entry. The reply by entry may include multiple selectable fields of information including but not limited to a reply by date the recipients to which the reply by date is applicable and the type of reply expected.

In one embodiment the email client such as email client or from which the email with a reply by entry is sent in storing a record for the sent email may add a sublevel to the outbox list that indicates the date specified in the reply by entry for the email. In addition any email servers such as email server or receiving the email with a reply by entry may store a record for the email. Further any email clients such as email client or receiving the email with a reply by entry in presenting a record for the received email with a reply by entry may add a sublevel to the inbox list that indicates the date specified in the reply by entry for the email. By including records of emails with reply by entries within the inbox list and the outbox list but automatically organized under a sublevel specified by the date in the reply by entry a user is able to quickly select to view only those emails that the user sent or needs to reply to with reply by dates for a particular day or time.

Each of the email clients and email servers storing a record of the email with a reply by entry may monitor whether the email is delivered to the intended recipient prior to passing the reply by date and whether a recipient replies to the email within the reply by date and may prompt a sender and intended recipient with information about the email with the reply by date according to user preferences and according to business preferences. In one embodiment if a business provides email address subscriptions to employees then the business may also specify preferences for information included in a reply by entry and responses by an email client or email server to emails with reply by dates.

In addition to facilitating email communications between email clients in network environment email servers and email clients and and other server and client systems may facilitate chat communications where chat communications are real time communications exchanged in a chat session opened between at least two users. In facilitating chat communications the presence of a user that indicates the user s availability to participate in chat communications is accessible by other users with chat service accessible. In one embodiment an email service provider facilitates both email based and chat based communications for a subscriber.

Referring now to a block diagram depicts one embodiment of a computing system through which the email server or email client and the present method and program product may be implemented. The present invention may be executed in a variety of systems including a variety of computing systems and electronic devices.

Computer system includes a bus or other communication device for communicating information within computer system and at least one processing device such as processor coupled to bus for processing information. Bus preferably includes low latency and higher latency paths that are connected by bridges and adapters and controlled within computer system by multiple bus controllers. When implemented as an email server computer system may include multiple processors designed to improve network servicing power.

Processor may be a general purpose processor such as IBM s POwerPC processor that during normal operation processes data under the control of an operating system application software middleware not depicted and other code accessible from a dynamic storage device such as random access memory RAM a static storage device such as Read Only Memory ROM a data storage device such as mass storage device or other data storage medium. Operating system may provide a graphical user interface GUI to the user. In one embodiment application software contains machine executable instructions for controlling email communications that when executed on processor carry out the operations depicted in the flowcharts of and other operations described herein with reference to the controllers in the email servers and chat clients. Alternatively the steps of the present invention might be performed by specific hardware components that contain hardwired logic for performing the steps or by any combination of programmed computer components and custom hardware components.

The email communications of the present invention may be provided as a computer program product included on a machine readable medium having stored thereon the machine executable instructions used to program computer system to perform a process according to the present invention. The term machine readable medium as used herein includes any medium that participates in providing instructions to processor or other components of computer system for execution. Such a medium may take many forms including but not limited to non volatile media volatile media and transmission media. Common forms of non volatile media include for example a floppy disk a flexible disk a hard disk magnetic tape or any other magnetic medium a compact disc ROM CD ROM or any other optical medium punch cards or any other physical medium with patterns of holes a programmable ROM PROM an erasable PROM EPROM electrically EPROM EEPROM a flash memory any other memory chip or cartridge or any other medium from which computer system can read and which is suitable for storing instructions. In the present embodiment an example of a non volatile medium is mass storage device which as depicted is an internal component of computer system but will be understood to also be provided by an external device. Volatile media include dynamic memory such as RAM . Transmission media include coaxial cables copper wire or fiber optics including the wires that comprise bus . Transmission media can also take the form of acoustic or light waves such as those generated during radio frequency or infrared data communications.

Moreover the present invention may be downloaded as a computer program product wherein the program instructions may be transferred from a remote computer such as a server or client system to requesting computer system by way of data signals embodied in a carrier wave or other propagation medium via a network link e.g. a modem or network connection to a communications interface coupled to bus . Communications interface provides a two way data communications coupling to network link that may be connected for example to a local area network LAN wide area network WAN or directly to an Internet Service Provider ISP . In particular network link may provide wired and or wireless network communications to one or more networks such as network .

Network link and network both use electrical electromagnetic or optical signals that carry digital data streams. The signals through the various networks and the signals on network link and through communication interface which carry the digital data to and from computer system are exemplary forms of carrier waves transporting the information.

When implemented as an email server computer system may include multiple communication interfaces accessible via multiple peripheral component interconnect PCI bus bridges connected to an input output controller. In this manner computer system allows connections to multiple network computers via multiple separate ports.

In addition computer system typically includes multiple peripheral components that facilitate communication. These peripheral components are connected to multiple controllers adapters and expansion slots such as input output I O interface coupled to one of the multiple levels of bus . For example input device may include for example a microphone a keyboard a mouse or other input peripheral device communicatively enabled on bus via I O interface controlling inputs. In addition for example a display device communicatively enabled on bus via I O interface for controlling outputs may include for example one or more graphical display devices but may also include other output interfaces such as an audio output interface. In alternate embodiments of the present invention additional input and output peripheral components may be added.

Those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the hardware depicted in may vary. Furthermore those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the depicted example is not meant to imply architectural limitations with respect to the present invention.

With reference now to a block diagram depicts examples of functional components of an email server for supporting email communications in accordance with the method system and program of the present invention. In particular examples of functional components of email server are depicted. The functional components of email server may be implemented within multiple network architectural layers depending on the server system including but not limited to the network layers the operating system layer the middleware layer and the application layer. In addition it will be understood that additional functional components may be included in email server and the functional components depicted may be performed by multiple email server such as email server and may be distributed across multiple email client and server systems. Further email server may support email communications for a single or multiple email service providers.

As illustrated email server includes an email storage controller that controls receipt of emails into an email storage system . In addition as illustrated email server includes an email distribution controller that controls distribution of emails from email storage system to another email server or to an email client.

Email storage system may be implemented through multiple types of data storage structures. In particular email storage system may organize emails for storage according to email address. In one example email storage controller receives and stores emails for user A and user C in email storage system where email storage system includes a first separate logical storage area for the emails sent by and received for user A and a second separate logical storage area for the emails sent by and received for user C .

In addition as emails are received by and sent from email server a record for each email stored in email storage system is created and updated. For example when user A sends an email the email is first received by email storage controller and stored in email storage system . Email distribution controller locates the email service provider that provides service for each addressed recipient in the email such as user B delivers the email to the email server facilitating the email service for user B and records the delivery date time and success of delivery with the email record in email storage system . In another example when user C sends an email to user A email storage controller receives the email and stores the email in email storage system for user A with the record for the email marked as undelivered. An email client through which user A is logged on requests delivery of all undelivered emails for user A from email server . Email distribution controller searches the records of emails in email storage system for all undelivered emails addressed to user A such as the email from user C and controls delivery of the undelivered emails to the email client once the emails are delivered distribution controller updates the records for those emails to indicate a delivery date and time.

In addition email server includes a reply by controller . Reply by controller manages actions by email server in response to email server facilitating delivery of emails that include a reply by entry. In particular each email subscriber to the email service provided by email server may select preferences for actions to be taken by email server with respect to emails to or from that email subscriber that include a reply by entry. Each email subscriber s preferences are included in a reply by preferences database . In addition the email service provider or business subscriber may specify general preferences with respect to actions to be taken by email server with respect to emails that include a reply by entry.

In particular reply by controller monitors email records that include a reply by entry. Referring now to an illustrative diagram depicts the presentation of emails with reply by entries filtered from email storage system by subscriber. In particular mail storage depicts a portion of the email records for emails being held for delivery to user A within email storage system . In the example each email record includes a reply by entry a sender address from a subject an indicator of whether the email has been delivered to user A an indicator of whether the sender has been alerted that the email has not been delivered and an indicator of whether the recipient has replied to the email. In addition to marking a Y for yes or N for no in mail storage for each record additional information such as a date and time routing paths and other pertinent information may be included for each email record.

The reply by preferences in reply by preferences database for a particular user or the general preferences specify the actions to be taken responsive to the conditions of each email record with a reply by entry. For example a reply by preference for user A may request that if emails have not yet been delivered to user A and the current date is past the reply by date for the email then reply by controller should compose and send an email or other communication indicating that user A has not logged on to receive delivery of the email prior to the reply by date.

In the example illustrated in where the current date is 2005 10 13 then the current date is past the reply by dates for entry entry and entry and the current date is the same as the reply by date for entry . Entry and entry have already been delivered to user A but entry has not been delivered to user A . Entry indicates however that reply by controller detected the undelivered email with an expired reply by date and alerted the sender of the email that the email is not yet delivered. In addition in the example if the email for entry is not delivered as of the end of the day 2005 10 13 then reply by controller would alert the sender of the entry email that the email is not yet delivered from the email server to the and the reply by date is past due.

In another example a reply by preference may specify an action to be taken if a reply to an email with a reply by entry is not detected by reply by controller before the expiration of the reply by date. For example an email service subscriber such as a business may set a preference that if an email sent by an employee subscriber with a reply by date has not been replied to by the reply by date but the email has been delivered then reply by controller should automatically create a reminder email addressed to the intended recipient that reminds the intended recipient to reply to the email. In another example a subscriber may set a preference for reply by controller to prompt the subscriber each day with emails with past due reply by entries and allow the subscriber to select which emails reply by controller should send a reminder email for. Further a subscriber may select a preference for reply by controller to detect whether the addressee of an email with a reply by date that is past due is available for chat communications and either inform the subscriber that the addressee is available or automatically initiate a chat communication with the addressee with a reminder to reply to the email.

In the example illustrated in entry indicates that the associated email was delivered the sender was alerted to a late delivery but user A has not replied to the email. When reply by controller detects that user A is available to receive communications reply by controller will perform an action triggered by the applicable reply by preferences. For example reply by controller may send a communication to user A prompting user A to reply to the email identified by entry

In particular reply by controller or another controller marking an email as replied to may for example detect an email with header information that indicates the original email being replied to or detect a subject line with re and the subject or some other indicator that the email is a reply to a previous email and mark the record for the replied to email. For example if reply by controller detects a reply to the email identified by entry then reply by controller would mark the record as now replied to. In another example reply by controller may perform other types of analysis such as scanning the message portion of newly received emails for matches with previous emails waiting to be replied to. Further an email service provider may specify other proprietary types of indicators detectable by reply by controller of a reply email within the header or message of the reply email.

It is important to note that while email storage system email storage controller email distribution controller reply by controller and reply by preferences database are illustrated as separate functional components any combination of these components may be integrated into a single functional components. Further any of these components may be integrated as a plug in to any of the other components on email server .

With reference now to a block diagram depicts examples of functional components of an email client for supporting email communications in accordance with the method system and program of the present invention. In particular examples of functional components of email client are depicted. The functional components of email client may be implemented within multiple network architectural layers depending on the client system including but not limited to the network layers the operating system layer the middleware layer and the application layer. In addition it will be understood that additional functional components may be included in email client and the functional components depicted may be performed by multiple physical client systems and may be distributed across multiple email client and server systems. Further email client may support email communications for a single or multiple email service providers.

As illustrated email client includes a mailbox controller for controlling the delivery of composed emails to an email server and for receiving delivery of emails addressed to a subscriber from an email server. A user may select to trigger mailbox controller to deliver or request delivery of emails from an email server. In addition mailbox controller while a subscriber is logged in may automatically deliver and request delivery of emails periodically. Further mailbox controller may manage multiple email subscriber addresses for a single or multiple users subscribing to a single or multiple separate email service providers.

In addition as illustrated email client includes a mailbox storage system . Mailbox storage system may include emails composed by the subscriber as drafts that are not yet sent emails composed and delivered by mailbox controller and emails delivered to the subscriber as retrieved by mailbox controller .

Mailbox controller also controls the presentation to the subscriber of records of emails stored in mailbox storage system . In one embodiment mailbox controller displays emails that are received in an inbox displays emails that are sent in an outbox and displays emails that are stored as drafts in a drafts box.

According to an advantage reply by controller automatically organizes the presentation of emails that include reply by entries under sublevels of the inbox and outbox where each sublevel is specified by a reply by date. In addition reply by controller monitors the emails with reply by entries both in the inbox and outbox and triggers actions responsive to applicable preferences within reply by preferences as will be further described.

A mail composition controller facilitates subscriber composition of emails and viewing of emails as selected from the records in the inbox outbox drafts box or other record presentation. In particular mail composition controller may facilitate subscriber composition of a reply email to an email received by the subscriber. In one example in the interface for displaying the received email mail composition controller provides the user with a selectable option to reply to the received email. Upon user selection to reply to the received email mail composition controller opens a new composition window with a subject line in the header automatically filled in with the received email subject line preceded by re and with the message portion already filled in with message of the received email. In other examples other types of indicators may be added to an email to indicate that the email is a reply email.

Further according to an advantage mail composition controller facilitates subscriber composition of email that includes a reply by entry in the header of the email. In particular a user may specify for any email composition a reply by date which addresses to constrain to the reply by date and the type of reply requested as will be further described with reference to .

Referring now to an illustrative diagram depicts a user interface for a sender composition of an email that includes a reply by entry. As illustrated a sender composes an email within email composition interface . Email composition interface may include multiple selectable options such as send button . Upon user selection of send button the information entered in email composition interface is transferred as an email message.

In specifying an email a user may designate a from field with a particular address of a sender a to field with one or more addresses of intended recipients a cc field with one or more addresses of intended recipients to receive a carbon copy of the email a subject field with a specified subject of the email and a reply by field with multiple entry fields. Further a message field includes the message content of the email. It will be understood that additional fields may be included in the header of email composition interface for specifying an email.

In selecting addresses for to field and cc field a user may select from a pull down menu of addresses or from a directory of addresses. A user may organize email addresses in a directory under different groupings such that a user may also select the grouping to select all the email addresses under that grouping.

In the example depicted reply by field includes multiple subfields with pull down menus of available options including a date field an applicable recipients field and a type of reply field . In the example a user may select from the pull down menus for each of the subfields by positioning a cursor and entering another input.

For date field in the example a user may enter a date or the user may select a date from the pull down menu which includes selectable dates of 1 hour 1 day 2 days 3 days and additional selectable options of select from calendar which triggers a selectable calendar within the display area project A deadline which triggers a date specified in a calendar or user preferences for the deadline or no reply by date. It will be understood that a user may specify selectable dates and additional selectable options for display within the pull down menu for date field . In addition previous date entries by the user may be automatically added to the pull down menu for date field .

For applicable recipients field in the example a user may select to apply the reply by entries to all recipients those recipients listed in to field those recipients listed in cc field or those recipients who addresses are included in a directory under a business group folder. In addition the pull down menu may include other selectable options for specifying the applicable recipients. It will be understood that the user may specify applicable recipient options for display in the pull down menu for applicable recipients field .

For type of reply field in the example a user may select to specify the type of reply required by entering a type of reply or selecting from the pull down menu which includes selections of reply message and check read box . In the example if the user selects for the type of reply to be check read box then a selectable button may be added to the email such as within message . In addition in the example if the user selects a reply type then a textual or graphical addition may be included in message indicating the type of reply required.

With reference now to an illustrative diagram depicts examples of reply by preferences for a particular user. In the example reply by preferences include sending preferences for actions to be triggered for emails sent by the user with reply to entries and receiving preferences for actions to be triggered for emails received by the user with reply to entries.

In the example sending preferences includes a preference to trigger a prompt window at sign on each day where the window includes the emails sent by the user that have not been replied to and the reply to date is the current date. A user may select a preference for other types of prompts that are triggered at other times.

In addition in the example sending preferences includes a preference for automatically setting the reply by date when composing emails. In the example the user selects a preference for the default date of 1 day and a specialized preference for the date set for messages sent to users with addresses included under the group project team in the user s address directory. It will be understood that a user may select preferences for automatically filling each of the subfields for a reply by entry. In addition a user may specify in sending preferences the selectable options to include in a pull down menu for a reply by entry field such as the pull down menus illustrated in for each reply by entry field.

Further in the example sending preferences includes a preference for responding to emails with reply by dates that are past due. In the example a user sets a preference for the reply by controller to automatically detect whether the recipient of the past due reply to date email is available for chat communication and if the recipient is available for chat communication initiate a chat session with the user. In addition if the recipient is not available the user selects a preference for the reply controller automatically sends a reminder to the recipient to reply to the email.

In addition in the example sending preferences includes a preference for adjusting the graphical indications of the reply by sublevels of the sending user s outbox where each sublevel includes records of the emails sent by the user with reply by dates for the same day. In the example sublevels for reply by dates that have 2 or more days remaining are green sublevels for reply by dates that have 1 day remaining are yellow and sublevels for reply by dates that are past due are red.

Further in the example sending preferences includes a preference for abandoning a reply by entry of an email. In the example if a reply by date for an email is 4 days or more overdue and a reminder was set to the recipient to reply but no reply has been received then user s preference is for the reply by controller to abandon the reply by entry and move the email out of a reply by sublevel and into the general outbox.

In the example receiving preferences include a preference to trigger a prompt window hourly with an updated list of the emails still remaining to reply to with reply to dates matching the current date.

In addition receiving preferences include a preference for adjusting the graphical indications of the reply by sublevels of the receiving user s inbox where each sublevel includes records of the emails received by the user with reply by dates for the same day. In the example sublevels for reply by dates that have 3 or more days remaining are green sublevels for reply by dates that have 1 2 days remaining are yellow and sublevels for reply by dates that are past due are red.

Referring now to an illustrative diagram depicts the presentation of emails with reply by entries received within a mailbox. Mailbox includes a record display area for displaying records for multiple emails received or sent by the user. Examples of several of the records for emails received by the user are depicted at reference numeral . A return R column indicates for each email record whether the recipient has replied to the email.

Records for new emails are generally organized in association with inbox . In alternate embodiments records for new emails may also be automatically placed in a folder such as the folders project A and project B illustrated at reference numeral . Additionally records for email that a spam filter labels as spam may be automatically placed in a folder rather than in association with inbox .

Inbox indicates the number of email records organized under inbox . Selection of the label for inbox as indicated by the shading using cursor or other selection tool triggers display of the email records organized under inbox such as the records indicated at reference numeral .

In addition inbox includes multiple sublevels as illustrated at reference numeral where each sublevel is graphically indicated by a different color and indicates the number of email records falling within the sublevel. In the example the sublevels indicated at reference numeral are graphically indicated by different colors according to the preferences specified in the example of user preferences in . In particular the current date is indicated as 2005 10 13 so the sublevel for 2005 10 12 is past due and the sublevel for 2005 10 13 is still considered 1 day remaining until the end of the day.

As illustrated initially a user selects to view the records listed generally under inbox . As a user selects to view the records listed under the sublevel such as the reply by sublevel for 2005 10 12 as indicated by the shading at reference numeral only those email records with reply by dates of 2005 10 12 are displayed within record display area as indicated at reference numeral . When a user replies to an email however such as one of the emails indicated by the records at reference numeral the email record is updated so that the return R field for the record indicates that the recipient has replied to the email. In addition once a user replies to one of the emails indicated by the records at reference numeral the record for that email is moved out of the reply by sublevel and into the general inbox level. As a user replies to emails when a reply by sublevel is empty the reply by controller may remove the sublevel from inbox .

In one embodiment once each of the records for new emails with reply by entries are placed under a corresponding reply by levels such as the one of the reply by levels indicated at reference numeral the user may select one of the sublevels and move individual records from one sublevel to another to set a recipient specified reply by date. In one example a user may only be permitted to move email records from one sublevel to another sublevel with a reply by date closer to the current date. In another example if a user selects to move an email record from one sublevel to another sublevel with a reply by date later than the one set by the sender then the reply by controller may automatically compose and send and message to the sender indicating that the recipient has adjusted the reply by date.

With reference now to an illustrative diagram depicts the presentation of emails with reply by entries sent by a user. Mailbox includes a record display area for displaying records for multiple emails received by sent by the user. An example of a record for an email sent by the user is depicted at reference numeral . A return reply RR column indicates for each email record whether a reply to the email has been received.

In the example mailbox includes email records for emails received for the user organized under an inbox . In addition mailbox includes email records for emails sent by the user under an outbox . Both inbox and outbox indicate the number of records under each organizational level.

In a similar manner as described with reference to inbox of inbox and outbox includes multiple sublevels as illustrated in outbox at reference numeral where each sublevel is graphically indicated by a different color and indicates the number of email records falling within the sublevel. In the example the sublevels indicated at reference numeral are graphically indicated by different colors according to the preferences specified in the example of user preferences in .

As illustrated as a user selects to view the records listed under a sublevel using cursor such as the reply by sublevel for 2005 10 12 as indicated by the shading at reference numeral only those email records for emails sent with reply by dates of 2005 10 12 are displayed within record display area as indicated at reference numeral . When a reply to the record indicated at reference numeral is received the email record will be updated so that the return reply RR field for the record indicates that the sender has received an email in reply to the email indicated by the record. In addition a return reply to an email is marked in the record indicated at reference numeral the email record is moved out of the reply by sublevel and into the general outbox level. As return replies are received when a reply by sublevel is empty the reply by controller may remove the sublevel from outbox .

Referring to a high level logic flowchart depicts a process and program for managing emails with a reply by entry sent from an email client. As illustrated the process starts at block and thereafter proceeds to block . Block depicts facilitating selection of a reply by entry and the process passes to block . In one embodiment the constraints of a reply by entry are automatically filled in based on user preferences or business rules. In another embodiment a user selects the specific constrains for the reply by entry.

Block depicts a determination whether the user selects to send the email with the reply by entry. If the user selects not to send the email then the process passes to block . Block depicts storing a copy of the email in a drafts queue that is sorted by reply by date. Next block depicts a determination of whether the current date matches the date in the reply by entry. If the current date does not match the date in the reply by entry then the process iterates at block . When the current date reaches the date in the reply by entry the process passes to block . Block depicts prompting the user to select to delete the draft send the draft or send the draft with new constraints in the reply by entry. In addition a user may continue to store the draft without a reply by entry or with new constraints in the reply by entry. Block depicts a determination whether user selects to send the draft now as an email then the process passes to block . If the user does not select to send the draft now then the process passes to block . Block depicts modifying the draft in the drafts queue according to the user selection and the process ends.

Returning to block if the user selects to send the email with the reply by entry then the process passes to block . Block depicts sending the email with a header that includes the reply by entry to the email server for delivery. Next block depicts storing the email in the email storage database. Thereafter block illustrates adding a record of the email to the outbox under a sublevel listed by the reply by date in the reply by entry and the process passes to block .

Block depicts a determination whether a reply to the email is detected. If a reply to the email is detected then the process passes to block . Block illustrates marking the record for the email as replied to and moving the record into the general outbox. Otherwise at block if no reply to the email is detected yet then the process passes to block . Block depicts a determination whether an action is triggered by the current status of the reply by entry of the email. If an action is not triggered by the current status then the process returns to block . If an action is triggered by the current status then the process passes to block . Block depicts performing the triggered action. Next block depicts a determination of whether the email reply by entry is abandoned by the triggered action. If the email reply by entry is not abandoned then the process returns to block . If the email reply by entry is abandoned then the process passes to block . Block depicts marking the record of the email with an abandoned reply to entry and moving the email into the general sent file and the process ends.

With reference to a high level logic flowchart depicts a process and program for managing emails with reply by entries at an email server. As illustrated the process starts at block and thereafter proceeds to block . Block depicts receiving a new email for delivery to a recipient user at an email server. Next block illustrates storing the new email in a mailbox for the recipient in the email storage system and the process passes to block .

Block depicts a determination whether the email includes a reply by entry. If the email does not include a reply by entry then the process ends. Otherwise if the email includes a reply by entry then the process passes to block . Block illustrates adding a record for the email to an undelivered list under a sublevel specified for the date in the reply by entry and the process passes to block . It will be understood that in alternate embodiments other data management techniques may be implemented to track undelivered emails with reply by entries.

Block illustrates a determination whether the reply controller detects that an email in a sublevel has not been delivered the date in the reply entry has passed and the sender has not yet been alerted. If reply controller detects all these conditions then the process passes to block . Block illustrates sending an email to the sender of the undelivered email indicating that the email has not been delivered and the reply by date has passed and marking the record for the email with the sender alert date and the process returns to block . In addition although not depicted when the reply controller detects overdue reply by dates for undelivered messages the reply controller may attempt to locate the recipient via a chat communication and prompt the recipient to request delivery of the undelivered emails. Additionally the reply controller may alert the sender or attempt to locate the recipient prior to the expiration of a reply date.

Returning to block if the reply controller does not detect all the conditions then the process passes to block . Block depicts a determination whether a mail client logged into by the recipient requests delivery of the undelivered email. If no delivery request is detected then the process returns to block . If a delivery request is detected then the process passes to block . Block depicts delivering emails with records in the undelivered list to the recipient mail client and removing the records for those emails for the undelivered list and the process ends.

Referring now to a high level logic flowchart depicts a process and program from managing receipt of emails with reply by entries. As depicted the process starts at block and thereafter proceeds to block . Block depicts receiving delivery of the previously undelivered emails for a recipient at the recipient mail client and the process passes to block .

Block illustrates a determination whether each newly delivered email include a reply by entry. If a newly delivered email includes a reply by entry then the process passes to block . Block depicts adding a sublevel to the inbox for each reply by date that in the newly delivered email that is not already created in the inbox. Next block illustrates adding a record for each newly delivered email with a reply by date to the inbox inserted in corresponding reply by date sublevels and the process ends.

Returning to block if a newly delivered email does not include a reply by entry then the process passes to block . Block illustrates adding a record for each newly delivered email without a reply by entry to the general inbox for the recipient and the process ends.

With reference now to a high level logic flowchart depicts a process and program for managing emails with reply by entries after receipt. As illustrated the process starts at block and thereafter proceeds to block . Block depicts a determination whether there are emails in the inbox under the reply to sublevels. When there are emails in the inbox under the reply to sublevels then the process passes to block .

Block depicts a determination whether the reply controller detects a reply to an email with a reply by date still pending. If a reply to an email with a reply by date is not detected then the process passes to block . Block depicts a determination whether the unreplied to emails trigger actions based on the user preferences. If unreplied to emails do not trigger actions based on the user preferences then the process returns to block . If unreplied to emails trigger actions based on user preferences then the process passes to block . Block depicts performing triggered actions such as adjusting the graphical indicators for the reply by sublevels in view of the current date and prompting the recipient with a list of email records from the reply by level with the current date and the process returns to block .

Returning to block if a user replies to an email with a reply by date still pending then the process passes to block . Block depicts moving the record for the replied to email from the reply by sublevel to the general inbox. Next block illustrates a determination whether the reply by sublevel is empty after removal of the email record. If the reply by sublevel is not empty then the process returns to block . If the reply by sublevel is empty after removal of the email record then the process passes to block . Block depicts deleting the empty sublevel from the inbox.

While the invention has been particularly shown and described with reference to a preferred embodiment it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes in form and detail may be made therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

