---

title: Azulenyl nitrone spin trapping agents, methods of making and using same
abstract: 

url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07910729&OS=07910729&RS=07910729
owner: The Florida International University Board of Trustees
number: 07910729
owner_city: Miami
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050922
---
This is the U.S. national phase application of International Application No. PCT US2005 034091 filed Sep. 22 2005 which claims the benefit of U.S. provisional application No. 60 612 143 filed Sep. 22 2004.

The present invention relates to chromotropic azulenyl nitrone spin trapping agents methods of making these agents compositions comprising same and methods of their use. In particular azulenyl nitrones of the present invention are effective agents for trapping and identifying free radical species and find use as efficient antioxidants in physicochemical and biological systems.

Nitrones behave as spin trapping agents when a diamagnetic nitrone compound the spin trap reacts with a transient free radical species having the spin to provide a relatively more stable radical species referred to as the spin adduct . The spin adduct may be detectable by electron paramagnetic resonance EPR spectroscopy if the spin adduct has a reasonable lifetime. Thus information about the spin can be gleaned from a study of the structure and spectroscopic characteristics of the spin adduct. For example the toxicity of synthetic beta amyloid peptide preparations toward glutamine synthetase could be correlated with the characteristics of the EPR signal generated by the spin adduct formed from each batch of synthetic beta amyloid peptide and the spin trap PBN. See Hensley K. et al. in 1995 6 489 492. Beta amyloid peptides are neurotoxic substances that are postulated to be involved in the etiology of Alzheimer s disease.

Low molecular weight nitroxides are non immunogenic. Moreover they are typically cell permeable and can exist as a non toxic stable free radical capable of partitioning among various cellular compartments. Being paramagnetic nitroxides are detectable by electron paramagnetic resonance EPR spectrometry and may serve as contrast agents in magnetic resonance imaging MRI . See Brasch R. C in 1983 147 781 Keana J. F. and Van N. F. in 1984 16 477. Nitroxides have also been used as biophysical markers to probe cellular metabolism oxygen level intracellular pH protein lipid mobility and membrane structure. Hence nitroxides find use in a number of diagnostic methods to determine the physiological medical condition of a subject or the biophysical characteristics of a given sample including samples obtained from a biological fluid.

Free radicals and oxidative damage have been implicated in brain aging and several neurodegenerative diseases. See Socci D. J. et al. in 1995 693 1 2 88 91. Chronic treatment of aged rats with certain compounds including the spin trapping agent alpha phenyl N tert butylnitrone PBN and the antioxidant alpha tocopherol vitamin E was found to benefit i.e. improve age related changes in cognitive performance.

In vitro and in vivo evidence is mounting that the administration of antioxidants can strongly reduce the rate of progression of lesion formation associated with the process of atherosclerosis. Based on several experimental models including low density lipoprotein LDL receptor deficient rabbits cholesterol fed rabbits and cholesterol fed non human primates several antioxidants have manifested a 50 80 reduction in the rate of progression of lesions. The effectiveness of probucol butylated hydroxytoluene BHI N N diphenylphenylenediamine and vitamin E are attributed to their respective antioxidant potentials and to the proposition that oxidative modification of LDL contributes to the progression of atherosclerosis. See Steinberg D. in 1995 346 8966 36 38. The one electron oxidative potential vs. NHE of vitamin E in an aqueous solution at pH 7 and 20 C. is 0.48 V. The oxidative potentials of PBN POBN and DMPO range from about 1.5 2.0 V.

Further Downs T. R. et al in . 1995 17 7 571 580 have shown that a cyclic nitrone antioxidant MDL 101 002 reduces organ dysfunction and cytokine secretion induced by lipopolysaccharide LPS administered to rats. These authors also tested the ability of MDL 101 002 to prevent LPS induced pulmonary edema leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. They found that MDL 101 002 prevented pulmonary edema partially reduced thrombocytopenia but failed to prevent leukopenia. These workers found that their results were consistent with the role that oxygen free radicals played in the development of endotoxin induced organ dysfunction and shock. They further suggest that free radical scavengers could reduce the mortality consequent to sepsis by organ dysfunction at least in part through a reduction in free radical stimulated cytokine secretion.

Allergic reactions generate reactive oxygen species including superoxide anions which usher the influx of inflammatory cells to the site of allergen challenge and contribute to allergic inflammation. The inflammation may in turn lead to cell or tissue injury. For allergic reactions in the lung these processes are also accompanied by increased vascular permeability and changes in airway mechanics. See Sanders S. P. et al. in . 1995 151 1725 1733. Thus the administration of spin trapping agents to the site of challenge may reduce the inflammatory response and help reduce tissue or cell damage.

Separately oxygen derived free radicals are suspected in playing a role in cytotoxicity during episodes of allograft rejection destruction following infiltration of the graft by mononuclear cells. The administration of radical scavengers may thus inhibit or reduce the incidence of allograft rejection. See Roza A. M. et al. in 1994 26 2 544 545.

New reagents that could visually signal the formation of oxidative species would be extremely useful not only in skin tests or in cell culture but also in determining for example the compatibility of a patient s white blood cells with a particular kidney dialysis membrane. In vitro calorimetric assays would be of great utility.

PBN has been shown to offer protection in the cardiovascular disease area in particular by trapping free radicals generated during ischemia reperfision mediated injury to the heart. See e.g. Bolli R. et al. . 1988 82 476. The benefits of trapping free radicals generated in similar types of injury to the brain of experimental animals has also been demonstrated. See e.g. Oliver C. N. et al. 1990 87 5144 Carney J. M. et al. Ibid. 1991 88 3636 Floyd R. A. 1991 254 1597. Oxidative damage to protein and DNA is mediated by oxygen free radical intermediates leading to strand breaks and base modifications. Enzymes such as glutamine synthetase can also be inactivated by oxidative processes. Such damage can be observed for example in animals subjected to brain ischemia reperfusion injury. See Floyd R. A. and Carney . 1992 32 S22 S27.

Evidence is also available that PBN inhibits oxidative modification of cholesterol and triglycerides of Low Density Lipoproteins LDL . Oxidative modification of LDL along with lipid peroxidation and free radical mediated reactions is a process that is implicated in the initiation of atherosclerosis. See e.g. Steinberg D. et al. . 1989 320 915 Esterbauer H. et al. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1989 570 254.

Free radicals and oxidative damage have been proposed as the underlying reasons for aging chronic and degenerative diseases of aging and acute clinical conditions. Daily administration by intraperitoneal injection of PBN to an aged animal model showed that PBN offered a remarkable extension of the lifespan in both male and female populations. See Packer L. et al. in . 1995 211 3 847 849. These authors conclude that PBN could have prophylatic value against the onset of at least pathological senescence.

Bruce N. Ames and co workers in an article published in the 1995 92 4337 4341 found support for the hypothesis that oxidative DNA damage contributes to replicative cessation in human diploid fibroblast cells. These workers found that senescent cells those cells that have ceased growth in culture after a finite number of population doublings excise from DNA four times more 8 oxoguanine per day than do early passage young cells. Also levels of 8 oxo 2 deoxyguanosine in DNA of senescent cells are about a third higher than those found in DNA of young cells. Most interestingly they found that PBN perhaps acting as either an antioxidant or as a spin trapping agent effectively delayed the onset of senescence and rejuvenated near senescent cells.

International Application No. PCT US96 18570 filed Nov. 15 1996 discloses certain chromotropic nitrone spin trapping agents methods for making these agents and methods for their use. These compounds are effective in trapping free radicals and thus have utility as antioxidants in biological systems. A series of U.S. Patents has issued based on this International Application including U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 083 988 6 197 825 and 6 291 702.

Additional research with these and similar compounds was published on 3 Apr. 2002 in the Journal of the American Chemical Society Becker et al. Stilbazulenyl Nitrone STAZN A Nitronyl Substituted Hydrocarbon with the Potency of Classical Phenolic Chain Breaking Antioxidants 2002 124 4678 84.

While the foregoing patents and related research presents demonstrates and covers the structure and utility of a group of azulenyl nitrones there exists a continuing need to discover additional new and effective substances exhibiting free radical spin trapping and or antioxidant activity which are potentially useful for a wide range of analytical preservative diagnostic prophylactic and therapeutic applications. Accordingly it is toward the satisfaction of such continuing need that the present invention is directed.

Accordingly the present invention provides new and additional members of a class of azulenyl nitrone spin trapping agents that for example can be efficiently prepared from abundant sesquiterpenes or their synthetic analogs. The azulenyl nitrones of the present invention expand upon the family of compounds described and covered in the above recited related patents commonly assigned herewith and further validate the therapeutic significance and value of this family. The activity of the compounds of the invention supports the utility of this family of azulenyl nitrones for alleviating a host of ill effects caused generally by reactive free radicals or oxidative processes in biological systems.

Therefore it is an objective of the present invention to provide a compound of the general formula below 

In another aspect the present invention provides pharmaceutical compositions comprising an azulenyl nitrone of the invention. The pharmaceutical compositions of the invention comprise an amount of the azulenyl nitrone effective to treat or prevent an oxidative ischemic ischemia reperfusion related or chemokine mediated condition in a subject. The compositions may be administered by a variety of routes including by example orally and parenterally. In advantageous embodiments the compounds are formulated for oral administration.

In a further aspect the present invention provides unit dosage forms of an azulenyl nitrone of the invention for treating or preventing an oxidative ischemic ischemia reperfusion related or chemokine mediated condition in a subject. In certain embodiments the unit dosage forms comprise a pharmaceutical composition of an azulenyl nitrone in an amount effective to treat or prevent oxidative ischemic ischemia reperfusion related or chemokine mediated condition in a subject.

In a method of treatment or prophylaxis aspect this invention provides a method of treating or prophylaxing a mammal susceptible to or afflicted with an oxidative ischemic or ischemia reperfusion related condition. Exemplary conditions include but are not limited to neurological cardiovascular and organ transplant related conditions. The method comprises administering an effective amount of one or more of the azulenyl nitrones or pharmaceutical compositions described above. The compounds can be administered according to any technique known to those of skill in the art. In advantageous embodiments the compounds are administered orally.

In a further method of treatment prohpylaxis aspect the present invention provides a method of treating or prophylaxing a mammal susceptible to or afflicted with a condition modulated by a chemokine function or activity. Such conditions include but are not limited to neurodegenerative disease peripheral neuropathies infections sequelae of infections and autoimmune diseases. The method comprises administering an effective amount of one or more of the azulenyl nitrones or pharmaceutical compositions described above.

In additional aspects this invention provides methods for synthesizing the azulenyl nitrones of the invention.

The present invention provides the azulenyl nitrones compositions comprising the azulenyl nitrones and methods of their use for treating or preventing oxidative ischemic ischemia reperfusion related or chemokine mediated disorders.

When describing the azulenyl nitrones pharmaceutical compositions and methods of this invention the following terms have the following meanings unless otherwise specified.

 Acylamino refers to the group NRC O R where each R is independently hydrogen alkyl aryl or cycloalkyl.

 Alkenyl refers to a monovalent branched or unbranched unsaturated hydrocarbon group preferably having from 2 to 10 carbon atoms and more preferably 2 to 8 carbon atoms and having at least 1 and preferably from 1 2 sites of carbon carbon double bond unsaturation. Preferred alkenyl groups include ethenyl CH CH n propenyl CHCH CH isopropenyl C CH CH and the like.

 Substituted alkenyl refers to an alkenyl group having 1 or more substituents for instance from 1 to 5 substituents and preferably from 1 to 3 substituents selected from the group consisting of acyl acylamino acyloxy alkoxy substituted alkoxy alkoxycarbonyl alkoxycarbonylamino amino substituted amino aminocarbonyl aminocarbonylamino aminocarbonyloxy aryl aryloxy azido carboxyl cyano cycloalkyl substituted cycloalkyl halogen hydroxyl keto nitro thioalkoxy substituted thioalkoxy thioaryloxy thioketo thiol alkyl S O aryl S O alkyl S O and aryl S O .

 Alkoxy refers to the group OR where R is alkyl. Preferred alkoxy groups include by way of example methoxy ethoxy n propoxy isopropoxy n butoxy tert butoxy sec butoxy n pentoxy n hexoxy 1 2 dimethylbutoxy and the like.

 Substituted alkoxy refers to an alkoxy group having 1 or more substituents for instance from 1 to 5 substituents and preferably from 1 to 3 substituents selected from the group consisting of acyl acylamino acyloxy alkoxy substituted alkoxy alkoxycarbonyl alkoxycarbonylamino amino substituted amino aminocarbonyl aminocarbonylamino aminocarbonyloxy aryl aryloxy azido carboxyl cyano cycloalkyl substituted cycloalkyl halogen hydroxyl keto nitro thioalkoxy substituted thioalkoxy thioaryloxy thioketo thiol alkyl S O aryl S O alkyl S O and aryl S O .

 Alkoxycarbonylamino refers to the group NRC O OR where R is hydrogen alkyl aryl or cycloalkyl and R is alkyl or cycloalkyl.

 Alkyl refers to a monovalent branched or unbranched saturated hydrocarbon group preferably having from 1 to about 11 carbon atoms more preferably from 1 to 8 carbon atoms and still more preferably 1 to 6 carbon atoms. This term is exemplified by groups such as methyl ethyl n propyl isopropyl n butyl isobutyl tert butyl n hexyl n octyl tert octyl and the like. The term lower alkyl refers to an alkyl group having from 1 to 11 carbon atoms.

 Substituted alkyl refers to an alkyl group having 1 or more substituents for instance from 1 to 5 substituents and preferably from 1 to 3 substituents selected from the group consisting of acyl acylamino acyloxy alkoxy substituted alkoxy alkoxycarbonyl alkoxycarbonylamino amino substituted amino aminocarbonyl aminocarbonylamino aminocarbonyloxy aryl aryloxy azido carboxyl cyano cycloalkyl substituted cycloalkyl halogen hydroxyl keto nitro thioalkoxy substituted thioalkoxy thioaryloxy thioketo thiol alkyl S O aryl S O alkyl S O and aryl S O .

 Alkylene refers to a divalent branched or unbranched saturated hydrocarbon group preferably having from 1 to 10 carbon atoms and more preferably from 1 to 6 carbon atoms. This term is exemplified by groups such as methylene CH ethylene CHCH the propylene isomers e.g. CHCHCH and CH CH CH and the like.

 Substituted alkylene refers to an alkylene group having 1 or more substituents for instance from 1 to 5 substituents and preferably from 1 to 3 substituents selected from the group consisting of acyl acylamino acyloxy alkoxy substituted alkoxy alkoxycarbonyl alkoxycarbonylamino amino substituted amino aminocarbonyl aminocarbonylamino aminocarbonyloxy aryl aryloxy azido carboxyl cyano halogen hydroxyl keto nitro thioalkoxy substituted thioalkoxy thioaryloxy thioketo thiol alkyl S O aryl S O alkyl S O and aryl S O .

 Alkynyl refers to a monovalent branched or unbranched unsaturated hydrocarbon group preferably having from 2 to 10 carbon atoms and more preferably 2 to 6 carbon atoms and having at least 1 and preferably from 1 2 sites of carbon carbon triple bond unsaturation. Preferred alkynyl groups include ethynyl C CH propargyl CHC CH and the like.

 Substituted alkynyl refers to an alkynyl group having 1 or more substituents for instance from 1 to 5 substituents and preferably from 1 to 3 substituents selected from the group consisting of acyl acylamino acyloxy alkoxy substituted alkoxy alkoxycarbonyl alkoxycarbonylamino amino substituted amino aminocarbonyl aminocarbonylamino aminocarbonyloxy aryl aryloxy azido carboxyl cyano cycloalkyl substituted cycloalkyl halogen hydroxyl keto nitro thioalkoxy substituted thioalkoxy thioaryloxy thioketo thiol alkyl S O aryl S O alkyl S O and aryl S O .

 Substituted amino refers to the group N R where each R is independently selected from the group consisting of hydrogen alkyl substituted alkyl alkenyl substituted alkenyl alkynyl substituted alkynyl aryl cycloalkyl substituted cycloalkyl and where both R groups are joined to form an alkylene group. When both R groups are hydrogen N R is an amino group.

 Alkoxyamino refers to a radical N R OR where R is selected from hydrogen alkyl and aryl and R represents an alkyl or cycloalkyl group as defined herein.

 Alkylarylamino refers to a radical NRR where R represents an alkyl or cycloalkyl group and R is an aryl as defined herein.

 Aminocarbonyl or amido refers to the group C O NRR where each R is independently hydrogen alkyl aryl and cycloalkyl or where the R groups are joined to form an alkylene group.

 Aminocarbonylamino refers to the group NRC O NRR where each R is independently hydrogen alkyl aryl or cycloalkyl or where two R groups are joined to form an alkylene group.

 Aminocarbonyloxy refers to the group OC O NRR where each R is independently hydrogen alkyl aryl or cycloalkyl or where the R groups are joined to form an alkylene group.

 Aryl refers to an unsaturated aromatic carbocyclic group of from 6 to 14 carbon atoms having a single ring e.g. phenyl or multiple condensed rings e.g. naphthyl or anthryl . Preferred aryls include phenyl biphenyl naphthyl and the like. Unless otherwise constrained by the definition for the individual substituent such aryl groups can optionally be substituted with 1 or more substituents for instance from 1 to 5 substituents preferably 1 to 3 substituents selected from the group consisting of acyl acylamino acyloxy alkenyl substituted alkenyl alkoxy substituted alkoxy alkoxycarbonyl alkyl substituted alkyl alkynyl substituted alkynyl amino substituted amino aminocarbonyl aminocarbonylamino aminocarbonyloxy aryl aryloxy azido carboxyl cyano cycloalkyl substituted cycloalkyl halogen hydroxyl nitro thioalkoxy substituted thioalkoxy thioaryloxy thiol alkyl S O aryl S O alkyl S O and aryl S O .

 Aralkyl or arylalkyl refers to an alkyl group as defined above substituted with one or more aryl groups as defined above.

 Cycloalkyl refers to a cyclic alkyl group of from 3 to 10 carbon atoms having a single cyclic ring or multiple condensed or bridged rings which can be optionally substituted with from 1 to 3 alkyl groups. Such cycloalkyl groups include by way of example single ring structures such as cyclopropyl cyclobutyl cyclopentyl cyclooctyl 1 methylcyclopropyl 2 methylcyclopentyl 2 methylcyclooctyl and the like or multiple or bridged ring structures such as adamantanyl and the like. The term lower cycloalkyl refers to a cycloalkyl group having from 3 to 6 carbon atoms.

 Substituted cycloalkyl refers to a cycloalkyl group having 1 or more substituents for instance from 1 to 5 substituents and preferably from 1 to 3 substituents selected from the group consisting of acyl acylamino acyloxy alkoxy substituted alkoxy alkoxycarbonyl alkoxycarbonylamino amino substituted amino aminocarbonyl aminocarbonylamino aminocarbonyloxy aryl aryloxy azido carboxyl cyano cycloalkyl substituted cycloalkyl halogen hydroxyl keto nitro thioalkoxy substituted thioalkoxy thioaryloxy thioketo thiol alkyl S O aryl S O alkyl S O and aryl S O .

 Cycloalkoxy refers to the group OR where R is cycloalkyl. Such cycloalkoxy groups include by way of example cyclopentoxy cyclohexoxy and the like.

 Cycloalkenyl refers to a cyclic alkenyl group of from 4 to 10 carbon atoms having a single cyclic ring and at least one point of internal unsaturation which can be optionally substituted with from 1 to 3 alkyl groups. Examples of suitable cycloalkenyl groups include for instance cyclopent 3 enyl cyclohex 2 enyl cyclooct 3 enyl and the like.

 Substituted cycloalkenyl refers to a cycloalkenyl group having 1 or more substituents for instance from 1 to 5 substituents and preferably from 1 to 3 substituents selected from the group consisting of acyl acylamino acyloxy alkoxy substituted alkoxy alkoxycarbonyl alkoxycarbonylamino amino substituted amino aminocarbonyl aminocarbonylamino aminocarbonyloxy aryl aryloxy azido carboxyl cyano cycloalkyl substituted cycloalkyl halogen hydroxyl keto nitro thioalkoxy substituted thioalkoxy thioaryloxy thioketo thiol alkyl S O aryl S O alkyl S O and aryl S O .

As used herein the term cycloheteroalkyl refers to a stable heterocyclic non aromatic ring and fused rings containing one or more heteroatoms independently selected from N O and S. A fused heterocyclic ring system may include carbocyclic rings and need only include one heterocyclic ring. Examples of heterocyclic rings include but are not limited to piperazinyl homopiperazinyl piperidinyl and morpholinyl and are shown in the following illustrative examples 

As used herein the term heteroaryl refers to an aryl ring system having one to four heteroatoms as ring atoms in a heteroaromatic ring system wherein the remainder of the atoms are carbon atoms. Suitable heteroatoms include oxygen sulfur and nitrogen. Preferably the heterocyclic ring system is monocyclic or bicyclic. Nonlimiting examples include the following which may be substituted with one or more R 

 Halo or halogen refers to fluoro chloro bromo and iodo. Preferred halo groups are either fluoro or chloro.

 Substituted thioalkoxy refers to a thioalkoxy group having 1 or more substituents for instance from 1 to 5 substituents and preferably from 1 to 3 substituents selected from the group consisting of acyl acylamino acyloxy alkoxy substituted alkoxy alkoxycarbonyl alkoxycarbonylamino amino substituted amino aminocarbonyl aminocarbonylamino aminocarbonyloxy aryl aryloxy azido carboxyl cyano cycloalkyl substituted cycloalkyl halogen hydroxyl keto nitro thioalkoxy substituted thioalkoxy thioaryloxy thioketo thiol alkyl S O aryl S O alkyl S O and aryl S O .

 Sulfanyl refers to the radical HS . Substituted sulfanyl refers to a radical such as RS wherein R is any substituent described herein. In certain embodiments substituted sulfanyl refers to a radical SR where R is an alkyl or cycloalkyl group as defined herein that may be optionally substituted as defined herein. Representative examples include but are not limited to methylthio ethylthio propylthio butylthio and the like.

 Sulfinyl refers to the radical S O H. Substituted sulfinyl refers to a radical such as S O R wherein R is any substituent described herein.

 Sulfonyl refers to the divalent radical S O . Substituted sulfonyl refers to a radical such as S O R wherein R is any substituent described herein. Aminosulfonyl or Sulfonamide refers to the radical HN O S and substituted aminosulfonyl substituted sulfonamide refers to a radical such as RN O S wherein each R is independently any substituent described herein. In certain embodiments R is selected from H lower alkyl alkyl aryl and heteroaryl.

The term subject refers to an animal such as a mammal including but not limited to primate e.g. human cow sheep goat horse dog cat rabbit rat mouse and the like. In preferred embodiments the subject is a human.

The terms treat treating or treatment as used herein refer to a method of alleviating or abrogating a disorder and or its attendant symptoms. The terms prevent preventing or prevention as used herein refer to a method of barring a subject from acquiring a disorder and or its attendant symptoms. In certain embodiments the terms prevent preventing or prevention refer to a method of reducing the risk of acquiring a disorder and or its attendant symptoms.

 Pharmaceutically acceptable salt refers to any salt of a compound of this invention which retains its biological properties and which is not biologically or otherwise undesirable. Such salts may be derived from a variety of organic and inorganic counter ions well known in the art and include by way of example illustration sodium potassium calcium magnesium ammonium tetraalkylammonium and the like and when the molecule contains a basic functionality salts of organic or inorganic acids such as hydrochloride hydrobromide tartrate mesylate acetate maleate oxalate and the like. The term pharmaceutically acceptable cation refers to a pharmaceutically acceptable cationic counter ion of an acidic functional group. Such cations are exemplified by sodium potassium calcium magnesium ammonium tetraalkylammonium cations and the like.

 Prodrugs refers to compounds including derivatives of the compounds of the invention which have cleavable groups and become by solvolysis or under physiological conditions the compounds of the invention which are pharmaceutically active in vivo. Such examples include but are not limited to choline ester derivatives and the like N alkylmorpholine esters and the like.

 Solvate refers to a compound of the present invention or a salt thereof that further includes a stoichiometric or non stoichiometric amount of solvent bound by non covalent intermolecular forces. Where the solvent is water the solvate is a hydrate.

The therapeutic methods and pharmaceutical compositions of the invention employ one or more azulenyl nitrones as the active agent. For the purposes of this invention the nitrones of formula I are named using conventional nitrone nomenclature i.e. the carbon atom of the carbon nitrogen double bond C N is designated the position and substituents on the nitrogen atom of the carbon nitrogen double bond are given the N prefix.

In some cases the azulenyl nitrones of this invention may contain one or more chiral centers. Typically such compounds will be prepared as a racemic mixture. If desired however such compounds can be prepared or isolated as pure stereoisomers i.e. as individual enantiomers or diastereomers or as stereoisomer enriched mixtures. All such stereoisomers and enriched mixtures of the azulenyl nitrones of formula I are included within the scope of this invention. Pure stereoisomers or enriched mixtures may be prepared using for example optically active starting materials or stereoselective reagents well known in the art. Alternatively racemic mixtures of such compounds can be separated using for example chiral column chromatography chiral resolving agents and the like.

Additionally all geometric isomers of the nitrone compounds of formula I are included within the scope of this invention including for example all isomers i.e. E and Z isomers of the carbon nitrogen double bond of the nitrone functionality.

As used herein the term about refers to a range of tolerance above or below a quantitative amount known to be acceptable to those of skill in the art. For instance a dose of about 1000 mg indicates a dose typically administered under the guidance of a practitioner when a dose of 1000 mg is indicated. In certain embodiments the term about refers to 10 or 5 .

The present invention provides azulenyl nitrones useful for preventing and or treating diseases and disorders related to oxidative conditions ischemic conditions and ischemia reperfusion related or chemokine mediated conditions in mammals.

In formula I Ris selected from substituted or unsubstituted alkyl cycloalkyl heterocycloalkyl and aryl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Rcan be alkyl. In another embodiment Ris methyl ethyl propyl butyl t butyl and the like. In certain embodiments Ris t butyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Rcan be substituted alkyl. In another embodiment Ris substituted t butyl. In further embodiments Ris C CHCHCHOH or C Me CHCHCOH. In certain embodiments Ris C Me CHCHCONa.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Rcan be substituted or unsubstituted cycloalkyl. In another embodiment Ris cyclopropyl cyclobutyl cyclopentyl cyclohexyl or cycloheptyl. In certain embodiments Ris cyclohexyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Rcan be substituted or unsubstituted aryl. In another embodiment Ris substituted aryl. In certain embodiments Ris substituted phenyl. In further embodiments Ris phenyl substituted with SOH. In particular embodiments Ris phenyl substituted with 3 SOH. In further particular embodiments Ris phenyl substituted with 3 SONa.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Ris selected from alkyl. In another embodiment Ris methyl. In a certain embodiment Ris iso propyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I m is selected from 0 1 2 and 3. In another embodiment m is selected from 1 and 2. In a further embodiment m is 2.

In one particular embodiment with respect to formula I m is 2 and both Rs are each methyl. In another embodiment m is 2 and both Rs are each isopropyl. In another embodiment m is 2 and one of the Rs is methyl and other is isopropyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I n is selected from 0 1 2 and 3. In another embodiment n is selected from 1 and 2. In a further embodiment n is 2.

In one particular embodiment with respect to formula I n is 2 and both Rs are each methyl. In another embodiment n is 2 and both Rs are each isopropyl. In another embodiment n is 2 and one of the Rs is methyl and other is isopropyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Ris selected from H alkyl hydroxyl alkoxy COalkyl alkylthio acylamino amido SOH C H NOH. In another embodiment Ris H.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Ris alkyl. In certain embodiments Ris methyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Ris alkoxy. In certain embodiments Ris methoxy.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Ris an ester group. In certain embodiments Ris COalkyl. In further embodiments Ris COMe or CO2Et.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Ris an acylamino group. In certain embodiments Ris NHCOalkyl or NMeCOalkyl. In further embodiments Ris NHCOMe.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Ris an amido group. In certain embodiments Ris CONH CONHalkyl or CON alkyl . In further embodiments Ris CONH. In a further embodiment Ris CONHMe. In a further embodiment Ris CONMe. In a particular embodiment Ris CONH t butyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Ris a sulfonyl group. In certain embodiments Ris SOH. In further embodiments Ris SONa.

In one embodiment with respect to formula I R is alkyl. In a certain embodiment with respect to formula I R is methyl.

In one embodiment with respect to formula I with respect to formula I p is selected from 0 1 and 2. In a certain embodiment p is 2.

In one embodiment with respect to formula I p is selected from 0 1 and 2. In certain embodiments p is 2.

or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt solvate or prodrug thereof and stereoisomers and tautomers thereof.

In formula II Ris selected from substituted alkyl substituted aryl substituted or unsubstituted cycloalkyl and substituted or unsubstituted heterocycloalkyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula II Rcan be substituted alkyl. In another embodiment Ris substituted t butyl. In certain embodiments Ris C CHCHCHOH or C Me CHCHCOH. In certain embodiments Ris C Me CHCHCONa.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula II Rcan be cycloalkyl. In another embodiment Ris cyclopropyl cyclobutyl cyclopentyl cyclohexyl or cycloheptyl. In certain embodiments Ris cyclohexyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula II Rcan be substituted or unsubstituted aryl. In another embodiment Ris substituted aryl. In certain embodiments R is substituted phenyl. In further embodiments Ris phenyl substituted with SOH. In particular embodiments Ris phenyl substituted with 3 SOH. In further particular embodiments Ris phenyl substituted with 3 SONa.

In formula II Ris selected from substituted or unsubstituted alkyl cycloalkyl heterocycloalkyl and aryl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula II R can be alkyl. In another embodiment R is methyl ethyl propyl butyl t butyl and the like. In certain embodiments R is t butyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula II R can be substituted alkyl. In another embodiment R is substituted t butyl. In certain embodiments R is C CHCHCHOH or C Me CHCHCOH. In certain embodiments Ris C Me CHCHCONa.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula II R can be substituted or unsubstituted cycloalkyl. In another embodiment R is cyclopropyl cyclobutyl cyclopentyl cyclohexyl or cycloheptyl. In certain embodiments R is cyclohexyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula II R can be substituted or unsubstituted aryl. In another embodiment R is substituted aryl. In certain embodiments R is substituted phenyl. In further embodiments R is phenyl substituted with SOH. In a particular embodiment R is phenyl substituted with 3 SOH. In further particular embodiments Ris phenyl substituted with 3 SONa.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula II m is selected from 0 1 2 and 3. In another embodiment m is selected from 1 and 2. In a further embodiment m is 2.

In one particular embodiment with respect to formula II m is 2 and both Rs are each methyl. In another embodiment m is 2 and both Rs are each isopropyl. In another embodiment m is 2 and one of the Rs is methyl and other is isopropyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula II n is selected from 0 1 2 and 3. In another embodiment n is selected from 1 and 2. In a further embodiment n is 2.

In one particular embodiment with respect to formula II n is 2 and both Rs are each methyl. In another embodiment n is 2 and both Rs are each isopropyl. In another embodiment n is 2 and one of the Rs is methyl and other is isopropyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula III Ris selected from alkyl. In another embodiment Ris methyl. In a certain embodiment Ris isopropyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula III m is selected from 0 1 2 and 3. In another embodiment m is selected from 1 and 2. In a further embodiment m is 2.

In one particular embodiment with respect to formula III m is 2 and both Rs are each methyl. In another embodiment m is 2 and both Rs are each isopropyl. In another embodiment m is 2 and one of the Rs is methyl and other is isopropyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula III n is selected from 0 1 2 and 3. In another embodiment n is selected from 1 and 2. In a further embodiment n is 2.

In one particular embodiment with respect to formula III n is 2 and both Rs are each methyl. In another embodiment n is 2 and both Rs are each isopropyl. In another embodiment n is 2 and one of the Rs is methyl and other is isopropyl.

In one embodiment with respect to formula III p is selected from 0 1 and 2. In a certain embodiment p is 2.

In one embodiment with respect to formula III p is selected from 0 1 and 2. In certain embodiments p is 2.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IIIa Ris selected from alkyl. In another embodiment Ris methyl. In a certain embodiment Ris isopropyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IIIa m is selected from 0 1 2 and 3. In another embodiment m is selected from 1 and 2. In a further embodiment m is 2.

In one particular embodiment with respect to formula IIIa m is 2 and both Rs are each methyl. In another embodiment m is 2 and both Rs are each isopropyl. In another embodiment m is 2 and one of the Rs is methyl and other is isopropyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IIIa Ris selected from alkyl. In another embodiment Ris methyl. In a certain embodiment Ris isopropyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IIIa n is selected from 0 1 2 and 3. In another embodiment n is selected from 1 and 2. In a further embodiment n is 2.

In one particular embodiment with respect to formula IIIa n is 2 and both Rs are each methyl. In another embodiment n is 2 and both Rs are each isopropyl. In another embodiment n is 2 and one of the Rs is methyl and other is isopropyl.

In one embodiment with respect to formula IIIa p is selected from 0 1 and 2. In a certain embodiment p is 2.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Ris selected from H alkyl hydroxyl alkoxy COalkyl alkylthio acylamino amido SOH C H NOH. In another embodiment Ris H.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IIIa Ris alkyl. In certain embodiments Ris methyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IIIa Ris alkoxy. In certain embodiments Ris methoxy.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IIIa Ris an ester group. In certain embodiments Ris COalkyl. In further embodiments Ris COMe or CO2Et.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IIIa Ris an acylamino group. In certain embodiments Ris NHCOalkyl or NMeCOalkyl. In further embodiments Ris NHCOMe.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IIIa Ris an amido group. In certain embodiments Ris CONH CONHalkyl or CON alkyl . In further embodiments Ris CONH. In a further embodiment Ris CONHMe. In a further embodiment Ris CONMe. In a particular embodiment Ris CONH t butyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IIIa Ris a sulfonyl group. In certain embodiments Ris SOH. In further embodiments Ris SONa.

In formula IV Ris selected from substituted or unsubstituted alkyl cycloalkyl heterocycloalkyl and aryl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IV Rcan be alkyl. In another embodiment Ris methyl ethyl propyl butyl t butyl and the like. In certain embodiments Ris t butyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IV Rcan be substituted or unsubstituted alkyl. In another embodiment Ris substituted t butyl. In certain embodiments Ris C CHCHCHOH or C Me CHCHCOH. In certain embodiments Ris C Me CHCHCONa.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IV Rcan be cycloalkyl. In another embodiment Ris cyclopropyl cyclobutyl cyclopentyl cyclohexyl or cycloheptyl. In certain embodiments Ris cyclohexyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IV Rcan be substituted or unsubstituted aryl. In another embodiment Ris substituted aryl. In certain embodiments Ris substituted phenyl. In further embodiments Ris phenyl substituted with SOH. In a particular embodiment Ris phenyl substituted with 3 SOH. In further particular embodiments Ris phenyl substituted with 3 SONa.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IV Ris selected from H alkyl hydroxyl alkoxy COalkyl alkylthio acylamino amido SOH C H NOH. In another embodiment Ris H.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IV Ris alkyl. In certain embodiments Ris methyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IV Ris alkoxy. In certain embodiments Ris methoxy.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IV Ris an ester group. In certain embodiments Ris COalkyl. In further embodiments Ris COMe or COEt.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IV Ris an acylamino group. In certain embodiments Ris NHCOalkyl or NMeCOalkyl. In further embodiments Ris NHCOMe.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IV Ris an amido group. In certain embodiments Ris CONH CONHalkyl or CON alkyl . In further embodiments Ris CONH. In further embodiment Ris CONHMe. In further embodiment Ris CONMe. In a particular embodiment Ris CONH t butyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula IV Ris a sulfonyl group. In certain embodiments Ris SOH. In further embodiments Ris SONa.

In one embodiment with respect to formula IV R is alkyl. In a certain embodiment with respect to formula IV R is methyl.

In one embodiment with respect to formula IV p is selected from 0 1 and 2. In a certain embodiment with respect to formula IV p is 2.

In one embodiment with respect to formula IV p is selected from 0 1 and 2. In a certain embodiment p is 2.

In formula V Ris selected from substituted alkyl substituted aryl substituted or unsubstituted cycloalkyl and substituted or unsubstituted heterocycloalkyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula V Rcan be substituted alkyl. In another embodiment Ris substituted t butyl. In certain embodiments Ris C CHCHCHOH or C Me CHCHCOH. In certain embodiments Ris C Me CHCHCONa.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula V Rcan be cycloalkyl. In another embodiment Ris cyclopropyl cyclobutyl cyclopentyl cyclohexyl or cycloheptyl. In certain embodiments Ris cyclohexyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula V Rcan be substituted or unsubstituted aryl. In another embodiment Ris substituted aryl. In certain embodiments Ris substituted phenyl. In further embodiments Ris phenyl substituted with SOH. In a particular embodiments Ris phenyl substituted with 3 SOH.

In formula V R is selected from substituted or unsubstituted alkyl cycloalkyl heterocycloalkyl and aryl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula V R can be alkyl. In another embodiment R is methyl ethyl propyl butyl t butyl and the like. In certain embodiments R is t butyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula V R can be substituted alkyl. In another embodiment R is substituted t butyl. In certain embodiments R is C CHCHCHOH or C Me CHCHCOH. In certain embodiments Ris C Me CHCHCONa.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula V R can be substituted or unsubstituted cycloalkyl. In another embodiment R is cyclopropyl cyclobutyl cyclopentyl cyclohexyl or cycloheptyl. In certain embodiments R is cyclohexyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula V R can be substituted or unsubstituted aryl. In another embodiment R is substituted aryl. In certain embodiments R is substituted phenyl. In further embodiments R is phenyl substituted with SOH. In a particular embodiment R is phenyl substituted with 3 SOH.

In one embodiment with respect to formula VI p is selected from 0 1 and 2. In certain embodiments p is 2.

In one embodiment with respect to formula VI p is selected from 0 1 and 2. In certain embodiments p is 2.

In one embodiment with respect to formula VII p is selected from 0 1 and 2. In a certain embodiment p is 2.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula I Ris selected from H alkyl hydroxyl alkoxy COalkyl alkylthio acylamino amido SOH C H NOH. In another embodiment Ris H.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula VII Ris alkyl. In certain embodiments Ris methyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula VII Ris alkoxy. In certain embodiments Ris methoxy.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula VII Ris an ester group. In certain embodiments Ris COalkyl. In further embodiments Ris COMe or COEt.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula VII Ris an acylamino group. In certain embodiments Ris NHCOalkyl or NMeCOalkyl. In further embodiments Ris NHCOMe.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula VII Ris an amido group. In certain embodiments Ris CONH CONHalkyl or CON alkyl . In further embodiments Ris CONH. In a further embodiment Ris CONHMe. In a further embodiment Ris CONMe. In a particular embodiment Ris CONH t butyl.

In one embodiment for example with respect to formula VII Ris a sulfonyl group. In certain embodiments Ris SOH. In further embodiments Ris SONa.

When employed as pharmaceuticals the azulenyl nitrones of this invention are typically administered in the form of a pharmaceutical composition. Such compositions can be prepared in a manner well known in the pharmaceutical art and comprise at least one active compound. In preferred embodiments the active compound is in purified form.

Generally the compounds of this invention are administered in a pharmaceutically effective amount. The amount of the compound actually administered will typically be determined by a physician in the light of the relevant circumstances including the condition to be treated the chosen route of administration the actual compound administered the age weight and response of the individual patient the severity of the patient s symptoms and the like.

The pharmaceutical compositions of this invention can be administered by a variety of routes including oral rectal transdermal subcutaneous intravenous intramuscular and intranasal. Depending on the intended route of delivery the compounds of this invention are preferably formulated as either injectable or oral compositions or as salves as lotions or as patches all for transdermal administration.

The compositions for oral administration can take the form of bulk liquid solutions or suspensions or bulk powders. More commonly however the compositions are presented in unit dosage forms to facilitate accurate dosing. The term unit dosage forms refers to physically discrete units suitable as unitary dosages for human subjects and other mammals each unit containing a predetermined quantity of active material calculated to produce the desired therapeutic effect in association with a suitable pharmaceutical excipient. Typical unit dosage forms include prefilled premeasured ampoules or syringes of the liquid compositions or pills tablets capsules or the like in the case of solid compositions. In such compositions the active agent is usually a minor component from about 0.1 to about 50 by weight or preferably from about 1 to about 40 by weight with the remainder being various vehicles or carriers and processing aids helpful for forming the desired dosing form.

Liquid forms suitable for oral administration may include a suitable aqueous or nonaqueous vehicle with buffers suspending and dispensing agents colorants flavors and the like. Solid forms may include for example any of the following ingredients or compounds of a similar nature a binder such as microcrystalline cellulose gum tragacanth or gelatin an excipient such as starch or lactose a disintegrating agent such as alginic acid Primogel or corn starch a lubricant such as magnesium stearate a glidant such as colloidal silicon dioxide a sweetening agent such as sucrose or saccharin or a flavoring agent such as peppermint methyl salicylate or orange flavoring.

Injectable compositions are typically based upon injectable sterile saline or phosphate buffered saline or other injectable carriers known in the art. As before the active compound in such compositions is typically a minor component often being from about 0.05 to 10 by weight with the remainder being the injectable carrier and the like.

Transdermal compositions are typically formulated as a topical ointment or cream containing the active ingredient s generally in an amount ranging from about 0.01 to about 20 by weight preferably from about 0.1 to about 20 by weight preferably from about 0.1 to about 10 by weight and more preferably from about 0.5 to about 15 by weight. When formulated as a ointment the active ingredients will typically be combined with either a paraffinic or a water miscible ointment base. Alternatively the active ingredients may be formulated in a cream with for example an oil in water cream base. Such transdermal formulations are well known in the art and generally include additional ingredients to enhance the dermal penetration of stability of the active ingredients or the formulation. All such known transdermal formulations and ingredients are included within the scope of this invention.

The compounds of this invention can also be administered by a transdermal device. Accordingly transdermal administration can be accomplished using a patch either of the reservoir or porous membrane type or of a solid matrix variety.

The above described components for orally administrable injectable or topically administrable compositions are merely representative. Other materials as well as processing techniques and the like are set forth in Part 8 of 17th edition 1985 Mack Publishing Company Easton Pa. which is incorporated herein by reference.

The compounds of this invention can also be administered in sustained release forms or from sustained release drug delivery systems. A description of representative sustained release materials can be found in

In another embodiment the pharmaceutical compositions can be in unit dose or unit of use forms or packages. As is known to those of skill in the art a unit dose form or package is a convenient prescription size patient ready unit labeled for direct distribution by health care providers. A unit of use form contains a pharmaceutical composition in an amount necessary for a typical treatment interval and duration for a given indication.

A unit dosage form contains a pharmaceutical composition in an amount necessary for administration of a single dose of the composition. The present invention provides unit dosage forms of pharmaceutical compositions in an amount for delivery of a dose of about 0.1 to 125 mg kg of the azulenyl nitrone to a subject. The subject can be for example a human subject with an average weight of about 80 kg. In certain embodiments the present invention provides a unit dosage form that comprises about 10 25 50 100 500 1000 2000 or 2500 mg of the azulenyl nitrone. In certain embodiments the unit dosage form consists essentially of these amounts of the azulenyl nitrone in other words the unit dosage form can additionally comprise other ingredients for administration of the azulenyl nitrone such as pharmaceutically acceptable carrier excipient or diluent a vial syringe or patch or other ingredients known to those of skill in the art for administering the azulenyl nitrone.

Typical unit dosage forms include prefilled premeasured ampoules or syringes of the injectable compositions or unit dose wrapped tablets or capsules in the case of solid oral compositions. The unit dosage form can be for example a single use vial a pre filled syringe a single transdermal patch and the like.

As is known to those of skill in the art a unit of use form or package is a convenient prescription size patient ready unit labeled for direct distribution by health care providers. A unit of use form contains a pharmaceutical composition in an amount necessary for a typical treatment interval and duration for a given indication. The methods of the invention provide for a unit of use package of a pharmaceutical composition comprising for example an azulenyl nitrone in an amount sufficient to treat an average sized adult male or female with about 10 25 50 100 500 1000 2000 or 2500 mg orally or 10 25 50 500 1000 2000 or 2500 mg subcutaneously three times weekly for one month. Thus a unit of use package as described above would have twelve three times per week injections for four weeks prefilled syringes each containing 10 25 50 500 1000 2000 or 2500 mg of azulenyl nitrone pharmaceutical composition.

The pharmaceutical compositions can be labeled and have accompanying labeling to identify the composition contained therein and other information useful to health care providers and subjects in the treatment of the diseases and or disorders described above including but not limited to instructions for use dose dosing interval duration indication contraindications warnings precautions handling and storage instructions and the like.

The following formulation examples illustrate representative pharmaceutical compositions of this invention. The present invention however is not limited to the following pharmaceutical compositions.

A compound of the invention is admixed as a dry powder with a dry gelatin binder in an approximate 1 2 weight ratio. A minor amount of magnesium stearate is added as a lubricant. The mixture is formed into 240 270 mg tablets 80 90 mg of active amide compound per tablet in a tablet press.

A compound of the invention is admixed as a dry powder with a starch diluent in an approximate 1 1 weight ratio. The mixture is filled into 250 mg capsules 125 mg of active amide compound per capsule .

A compound of the invention 125 mg sucrose 1.75 g and xanthan gum 4 mg are blended passed through a No. 10 mesh U.S. sieve and then mixed with a previously made solution of microcrystalline cellulose and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose 11 89 50 mg in water. Sodium benzoate 10 mg flavor and color are diluted with water and added with stirring. Sufficient water is then added to produce a total volume of 5 mL.

The compound of the invention is admixed as a dry powder with a dry gelatin binder in an approximate 1 2 weight ratio. A minor amount of magnesium stearate is added as a lubricant. The mixture is formed into 450 900 mg tablets 150 300 mg of active amide compound in a tablet press.

The compound of the invention is dissolved or suspended in a buffered sterile saline injectable aqueous medium to a concentration of approximately 5 mg ml.

Stearyl alcohol 250 g and a white petrolatum 250 g are melted at about 75 C. and then a mixture of a compound of the invention 50 g methylparaben 0.25 g propylparaben 0.15 g sodium lauryl sulfate 10 g and propylene glycol 120 g dissolved in water about 370 g is added and the resulting mixture is stirred until it congeals.

The present azulenyl nitrones are used as therapeutic agents for the treatment of conditions in mammals. Accordingly the compounds and pharmaceutical compositions of this invention find use as therapeutics for preventing and or treating oxidative ischemic and ischemia reperfusion related and chemokine mediated conditions in mammals including humans. Ischemia and ischemia reperfusion related conditions include neurological conditions and cardiovascular conditions as described below.

In a method of treatment or prophylaxis aspect this invention provides a method of treating or prohpylaxing a mammal susceptible to or afflicted with a neurological condition such as stroke multi infarct dementia traumatic brain injury spinal cord injury diabetic neuropathy or neurological sequelae of surgical procedures which method comprises administering an effective amount of one or more of the pharmaceutical compositions just described. Neurological sequelae of surgical procedures include those sequelae of surgical procedures known to those of skill in the art such as neurological sequelae following procedures using a heart or a lung machine. In particular embodiments the present invention provides methods of treating or preventing stroke with any compound of the invention.

In yet another method of treatment or prophylaxis aspect this invention provides a method of treating or prophylaxing a mammal susceptible to or afflicted with a cardiovascular condition such as myocardial infarction angina or a non neurological organ or tissue injury following ischemia which method comprises administering an effective amount of one or more of the pharmaceutical compositions just described. Non neurological organ or tissue injury following ischemia include those conditions known to those of skill in the art to follow decreased blood flow or reperfusion following ischemia such as kidney ischemia muscle ischemia and the like.

In a further method of treatment or prophylaxis aspect this invention provides a method of treating or prophylaxing a mammal susceptible to or afflicted with a condition related to chemokine function such as a neurodegenerative disease a peripheral neuropathy an infection a sequela of an infection or an autoimmune disease which method comprises administering an effective amount of one or more of the pharmaceutical compositions just described.

Compounds that inhibit chemokine activity or function may be used for the treatment of diseases that are associated with inflammation including but not limited to inflammatory or allergic diseases such as asthma allergic rhinitis hypersensitivity lung diseases hypersensitivity pneumonitis eosinophilic pneumonias delayed type hypersensitivity interstitial lung disease ILD e.g. idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis or ILD associated with rheumatoid arthritis systemic lupus erythematosus ankylosing spondylitis systemic sclerosis Sj gren s syndrome polymyositis or dermatomyositis systemic anaphylaxis or hypersensitivity responses drug allergies insect sting allergies autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis psoriatic arthritis systemic lupus erythematosus myastenia gravis juvenile onset diabetes glomerulonephritis autoimmune throiditis Alopecia Areata Ankylosing Spondylitis Antiphospholipid Syndrome Autoimmune Addison s Disease Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia Autoimmune Hepatitis Behcet s Disease Bullous Pemphigoid Cardiomyopathy Celiac Sprue Dermatitis Chronic Fatigue Immune Dysfunction Syndrome CFIDS Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy Cicatricial Pemphigoid CREST Syndrome Cold Agglutinin Disease Crohn s Disease Discoid Lupus Essential Mixed Cryoglobulinemia Fibromyalgia Fibromyositis Graves Disease Guillain Barre Hashimoto s Thyroiditis Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis Idiopathic Thrombocytopenia Purpura IgA Nephropathy Insulin dependent Diabetes Juvenile Arthritis Lichen Planus Lupus M ni re s Disease Mixed Connective Tissue Disease Multiple Sclerosis Myasthenia Gravis Pemphigus Vulgaris Pernicious Anemia Polyarteritis Nodosa Polychondritis Polyglandular Syndromes Polymyalgia Rheumatica Polymyositis and Dermatomyositis Primary Agammaglobulinemia Primary Biliary Cirrhosis Psoriasis Raynaud s Phenomenon Reiter s Syndrome Rheumatic Fever Rheumatoid Arthritis Sarcoidosis Scleroderma Sj gren s Syndrome Stiff Man Syndrome Takayasu Arteritis Temporal Arteritis Giant Cell Arteritis Ulcerative Colitis Uveitis Vasculitis Vitiligo Wegener s Granulomatosis Churg Strauss Syndrome Atopic Allergy Autoimmune Atrophic Gastritis Achlorhydra Autoimmune Cushings Syndrome Dermatomyositis Erythematosis Goodpasture s Syndrome Idiopathic Adrenal Atrophy Lambert Eaton Syndrome Lupoid Hepatitis Lymphopenia Phacogenic Uveitis Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis Schmidt s Syndrome Sympathetic Ophthalmia Systemic Lupus Erythematosis Thyrotoxicosis Type B Insulin Resistance Autoimmune ureitis Autoimmune oophoritis and orchitis Dermatitis herpetiformis.graft rejection including allograft rejection or graft versus host disease inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn s disease and ulcerative colitis spondyloarthropathies scleroderma psoriasis including T cell mediated psoriasis and inflammatory dermatoses such as dermatitis eczema atopic dermatitis allergic contact dermatitis urticaria vasculitis e.g. necrotizing cutaneous and hypersensitivity vasculitis eosinphilic myotis eosiniphilic fasciitis and cancers.

In addition compounds that activate or promote chemokine receptor function can be used for the treatment of diseases that are associated with immunosuppression such as individuals undergoing chemotherapy radiation therapy enhanced wound healing and burn treatment therapy for autoimmune disease or other drug therapy e.g. corticosteroid therapy or combination of conventional drugs used in the treatment of autoimmune diseases and graft transplantation rejection which causes immunosuppression immunosuppression due to congenital deficiency in receptor function or other causes and infectious diseases such as parasitic diseases including but not limited to helminth infections such as nematodes round worms Trichuriasis Enterobiasis Ascariasis Hookworm Strongyloidiasis Trichinosis filariasis trematodes visceral worms visceral larva migtrans e.g. Toxocara eosinophilic gastroenteritis e.g. spp. ssp. cutaneous larva migrans the malanra causing protozoan and Kaposi s sarcoma herpesvirus also known as human herpesvirus 8 and poxvirus Moluscum contagiosum.

In certain embodiments the present invention provides any compound of the invention for use in the manufacture of a medicament. In further embodiments the present invention provides any compound of the invention for use in the manufacture of a medicament for the treatment or prevention of any condition identified herein. For instance the present invention provides any compound of the invention for use in the manufacture of a medicament for the treatment and or prevention of oxidative ischemic and ischemia reperfusion related and chemokine mediated conditions in mammals including humans. Such conditions are described in detail herein.

Compounds of the present invention may be used in combination with any other active agents or pharmaceutical compositions where such combined therapy is useful to modulate chemokine receptor activity and thereby prevent and treat inflammatory and immunoregulatory diseases.

Injection dose levels range from about 0.1 mg kg hour to at least 15 mg kg hour all for from about 1 to about 120 hours and especially 24 to 96 hours. A preloading bolus of from about 0.1 mg kg to about 10 mg kg or more may also be administered to achieve adequate steady state levels. The maximum total dose is not expected to exceed about 25 g day for a 40 to 80 kg human patient. The present invention provides doses from about 0.1 mg to about 25 g per day for an 80 kg human patient. In particular embodiments the present invention provides doses from about 0.1 mg to about 20 g per day from about 0.1 mg to about 10 g per day from about 0.1 mg to about 5 g per day from about 0.1 mg to about 1 g per day and from about 0.1 mg to about 0.5 g per day. Preferred doses for ischemic conditions include from about 0.1 mg to about 10 g per day from about 50 mg to about 10 g per day from about 100 mg to about 10 g per day and from about 100 mg to about 1 g per day. Preferred doses for chemokine mediated disorders include from about 0.1 mg to about 10 g per day from about 10 mg to about 1000 mg per day and from about 100 mg to about 1000 mg per day.

For the prevention and or treatment of long term conditions such as neurodegenerative and autoimmune conditions the regimen for treatment usually stretches over many months or years so oral dosing is preferred for patient convenience and tolerance. With oral dosing one to five and especially two to four and typically three oral doses per day are representative regimens. Using these dosing patterns each dose provides from about 0.01 to about 65 mg kg of the azulenyl nitrone with preferred doses each providing from about 0.1 to about 20 mg kg about 0.1 to about 10 mg kg and especially about 1 to about 5 mg kg.

Transdermal doses are generally selected to provide similar or lower blood levels than are achieved using injection doses.

When used to prevent the onset of a neurodegenerative autoimmune or inflammatory condition the azulenyl nitrones of this invention will be administered to a patient at risk for developing the condition typically on the advice and under the supervision of a physician at the dosage levels described above. Patients at risk for developing a particular condition generally include those that have a family history of the condition or those who have been identified by genetic testing or screening to be particularly susceptible to developing the condition.

The compounds of this invention can be administered as the sole active agent or they can be administered in combination with other agents including other active azulenyl nitrones.

The azulenyl nitrones of this invention can be prepared from readily available starting materials using the following general methods and procedures. It will be appreciated that where typical or preferred process conditions i.e. reaction temperatures times mole ratios of reactants solvents pressures etc. are given other proces conditions can also be used unless otherwise stated. Optimum reaction conditions may vary with the particular reactants or solvent used but such conditions can be determined by one skilled in the art by routine optimization procedures.

Additionally as will be apparent to those skilled in the art conventional protecting groups may be necessary to prevent certain functional groups from undergoing undesired reactions. The choice of a suitable protecting group for a particular functional group as well as suitable conditions for protection and deprotection are well known in the art. For example numerous protecting groups and their introduction and removal are described in T. W. Greene and P. G. M. Wuts Second Edition Wiley New York 1991 and references cited therein.

Azulenyl nitrones of the invention can be prepared for example by reaction of an appropriately substituted carboxaldehyde derivative with an appropriately substituted hydroxylamine and the product isolated and purified by known standard procedures. Such procedures include but are not limited to recrystallization column chromatography and HPLC.

The following synthetic and biological examples are offered to illustrate this invention and are not to be construed in any way as limiting the scope of this invention.

In the examples below all temperatures are in degrees Celsius unless otherwise indicated. Examples 1 19 describe the synthesis of various azulenyl nitrones of this invention that have been or could be carried out. The graphical depictions of all the nitrone compounds illustrated herein are not intended to indicate the actual E or Z stereochemistry of the C N double bond of the nitrone group. The present invention provides each stereoisomer of the compounds below.

NMR spectra were recorded employing either deuterated chloroform or DMSO as a solvent and using TMS as internal standard. Chemical shift values are quoted in parts per million ppm and coupling constants J in hertz Hz .

Following a procedure similar of that of Kurokawa et al. guaiazulene 8.0 g 41 mmol was dissolved in 200 ml of dichloromethane. Trichloroacetic anhydride 51 g 166 mmol 4 equiv. was added with stirring at room temperature. After 2 hours TLC showed no starting material. The solution was neutralized by the addition of a standard solution of sodium bicarbonate and vigorous shaking. The black brown colored 3 trichloroacetylguaiazulene was extracted with dichloromethane and the solvent was removed under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved in 450 ml of acetone and 50 ml of water was added to make a 9 1 acetone water solution v v . Dichlordicynoquinone DDQ 27.9 g 123 mmol 3 equiv. was added with stirring at room temperature. After half an hour TLC showed no starting material. Saturated sodium thiosulfate solution 200 ml and saturated sodium bicarbonate solution 200 ml were added to reduce and neutralize unreacted DDQ. Extraction of 18 with organic solvents is difficult because both phases are deeply colored and the propensity of the mixture is to form emulsions.

Extraction with hexane was achieved by adding hexane to the aqueous acetone mixture and decanting the upper phase into a separatory funnel washing with water and discarding the aqueous layer. The red colored organic phase was dried with magnesium sulfate and solvent was removed under reduced pressure until the solution was saturated. The saturated solution was loaded on to a silica gel column with hexane. A solution of 100 1 hexane ethyl acetate v v was used to elute 18 which after evaporation of the solvent produced a red solid in 60 yield.

A solution of aldehyde 18 18.56 g 52 mmol in 1000 ml of acetone was stirred at 50 C. while 16.38 g 38 mmol 1 equiv. of Ba OH in 200 ml of water was added. After 15 minutes the vessel was allowed to cool to room temperature. A layer of hexane was added and 13.88 g 78 mmol 1.5 equiv. of NBS was poured in. The flask was shaken vigorously. The hexane layer immediately became dark purple and the aldehyde 19 was isolated by exhaustive extraction with hexane.

The volume of hexane was reduced until the solution became saturated. The product then was purified on a silica column. First the column was washed with hexane then the bromoaldehyde eluted with 50 1 hexane ethyl acetate to yield 19 as a purple oil 14.27 g 94 . The aldehyde was rather unstable and was used immediately in the coupling reaction. R0.52 EthOAc Hexane 1 9 IR KBr 2959 2927 1647 C O 1496 1447 1365 1283 1209 1119 cm H NMR 400 MHz CDCl 1.39 d J 6.9 Hz 6H 3.16 sept J 6.9 Hz H 3.27 s 3H 7.39 d J 10.8 Hz 1H 7.63 dd J 10.8 2.1 Hz H 8.08 s 1H 9.72 d J 2.1 Hz H 10.20 s H C NMR 100 MHz CDCl 24.7 28.0 39.4 102.6 124.7 134.0 138.7 138.8 139.2 140.0 146.0 150.1 150.5 186.1 LRMS LC MS APCI MeOH m e 291 MH Br 293 MH Br HRMS FAB calculated for CHBrO 290.03063 found 290.0310.

The bromoaldehyde 19 6.94 g 23.8 mmol 2.1 equiv. and trans bis tri n butylstannyl ethylene 6.858 g 11.3 mmol 1 equiv. were dissolved in 50 mL of toluene. The flask was evacuated and filled with argon. Tetrakis triphenylphosphonium palladium 1.4 g 5.8 mmol 5 mol was added. The mixture was stirred under argon at 105 C. for 4 hours. The reaction mixture was chromatographed on a silica column. The column was first washed with hexane and the solvent polarity was slowly increased until the product was eluted with 10 1 hexane ethyl acetate to afford 20 a black solid 4.08 g 81 mp 232 C. R0.15 EtOAc Hexane 1 9 IR KBr 2956 1643 C O 1439 1394 1358 1153 945 749 cm H NMR 400 MHz CDCl 1.43 d J 6.9 Hz 12H 3.17 m 8H 7.34 d J 10.8 Hz 2H 7.56 dd J 10.8 2.1 Hz 2H 7.62 s 2H 8.4 s 2H 9.655 d J 2.1 Hz 2H 10.35 s 2H C NMR 100 MHz CDCl 24.8 29.2 38.5 125.1 126.5 130.2 133.3 138.07 138.13 140.2 142.0 142.1 149.9 150.1 186.9 LRMS LC MS APCI MeOH m e 449 MH HRMS FAB calculated for CHO448.24023 found 448.2422.

Bisaldehyde 20 100 mg 0.22 mmol was dissolved in 2 ml of toluene. Wilkinson s catalyst 209 mg 0.22 mmol was added and the mixture was stirred for 12 hours at 100 C. under argon. TLC showed least polar green di decarbonylated product and brown mono decarbonylated product 34 and a small amount of starting material. The product was isolated by silica gel column chromatography using chloroform as the eluting solvent. R0.3 Chloroform. IR CHCl 2957 1642 H NMR 400 MHz CDCl 1.38 d J 6.8 Hz 6H 1.44 d J 6.8 Hz 6H 3.04 M 1H 3.15 s 3H 3.18 s 3H 3.2 m 1H 6.98 d J 10.6 Hz 1H 7.56 d J 10.6 1H 7.68 d J 15.5 Hz 1H 7.89 d J 15.5 Hz 1H 8.10 s 1H 8.17 s 1H 8.43 s 1H C NMR 100 MHz DO 24.7 24.8 29.02 29.04 37.9 38.5 119.8 124.6 125.2 127.6 128.3 128.6 129.4 130.6 131.2 132.8 133.0 135.2 135.9 137.7 137.9 140.0 142.0 142.1 142.7 144.0 147.4 149.5 150.2 LRMS LC MS APCI MeOH m e 667 MH .

Monoaldehyde 34 was converted to mononitrone A by reaction with N tert butylhydroxylamine hydrochloride in pyridine at 100 C. H NMR 400 MHz CDCl 1.33 d J 6.8 Hz 6H 1.36 d J 6.8 Hz 6H 1.58 s 9H 2.98 m 1H 3.04 m 1H 3.08 s 3H 3.11 s 3H 6.92 d J 10 Hz 1H 7.00 d J 10 Hz 1H 7.22 d J 14.8 Hz 1H 7.32 d J 14.8 Hz 1H 7.69 d J 15.6 Hz 1H 7.95 d J 15.6 Hz 1H 8.02 s 2H 8.09 s 1H 8.17 s 1H 9.70 s 1H .

Bisaldehyde 20 is synthesized using the procedures shown in Example 1. Bisaldehyde 20 is reacted with 4 hydroxyamino 4 3 hydroxypropyl heptane 1 7 diol in pyridine to produce nitrone B.

Bisaldehyde 20 was reacted with one equivalent of N tert butylhydroxylamine hydrochloride to form mononitrone aldehyde 22.

Aldehyde 22 is then reacted with NHOH.HCl in pyridine solvent at elevated temperature to form oxime C.

Mononitrone aldehyde 22 is prepared in accordance with the procedures illustrated in Examples 1 and 3. Aldehyde 22 is dissolved in THF and reacted with 2 2 lithiomethyl 5 5 dimethylpyrroline N oxide in THF at elevated temperature to form derivative D.

Mononitrone A is synthesized in accordance with the procedure illustrated in Example 1 dissolved in pyridine and then reacted with SOin the presence of a sodium bicarbonate catalyst to produce compound E.

Mononitrone aldehyde 22 produced in accordance with the procedure illustrated in Example 2 is dissolved in THF and reacted with

2 trimethyl silyl 1 3dithiane 80 mg 0.41 mmol was dissolved in 0.5 ml THF at 80 C. and 0.23 ml of 2M nBuLi was added with stirring at 80 C. The resulting mixture was added to a solution of mononitrone 22 195 mg 0.38 mmol dissolved in 2 ml THF at 50 C. and allowed to warm slowly to room temperature. The solvent was evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved in chloroform and purified by silica gel column chromatography using chloroform as the eluting solvent R0.63 Chloroform resulting in dithiane nitrone G . IR CHCl 2962 1538 1435 H NMR 400 MHz CDCl 1.36 d J 6.9 Hz 6H 1.37 d J 6.9 Hz 6H 1.75 s 9H 3.0 3.08 multiplet 8H 3.11 s 3H 3.15 s 3H 6.95 d J 10.7 Hz 2H 7.05 d J 10.6 Hz 2H 7.31 s 1H 7.32 s 1H 7.35 d J 10.6 2H 7.46 s 1H 7.77 d J 15.5 Hz 1H 7.92 d J 15.5 Hz 1H 8.15 d J 18 1H 8.19 s 1H 9.73 s 1H C NMR 100 MHz DO 24.7 24.8 28.9 29.2 29.3 30.3 31.1 38.3 38.4 69.9 118.9 123.5 124.0 124.1 125.6 126.3 126.9 129.2 130.3 131.2 132.0 133.9 134.2 135.8 136.1 136.2 137.1 137.6 140.1 141.7 142.4 143.3 148.0 148.3 LRMS LC MS APCI MeOH m e 622 MH .

Dialdehyde 20 is synthesized in accordance with the procedure of Example 1 and then reacted with N cyclohexylhydroxylamine hydrochloride in pyridine to form derivative H .

 Methoxymethyl triphenylphosphonium chloride 64 mg 0.19 mmol was stirred in 1 ml of THF and 0.1 ml of 2M BuLi was added to 25 C. producing a red solution. The red solution was added to a solution of mononitrone 22 100 mg 0.17 mmol in 0.5 ml THF. The mixture was stirred at room temperature for 15 hours. After washing with saturated ammonium chloride and extracting with dichloromethane a new less polar compound was visible by TLC in addition to the starting material. The product was purified by silica gel column chromatography using 100 1 CHCl EtOAc yielding 42 mg of I as a mixture of cis trans isomers 39 . Mp 235 C.decomp. R0.63 dichloromethane ethyl acetate 20 1 .IR CHCl 2958 1542 1436. Because it was not possible to separate the cis and trans isomers the resulting H NMR spectrum is not sufficient for definitive characterization. Nevertheless the spectrum has been interpreted as follows H NMR 400 MHz CDCl 1.36 1.41 m 24H 1.75 s 18H 3.07 3.13 m 3H 3.82 s 3H 3.86 s 3H 5.84 d J 6.8 Hz 1H 6.30 d J 6.8 Hz 1H 6.35 d J 12 Hz 1H 6.90 8.31 m H 8.55 s 1H 9.7 s 1H LRMS LC MS APCI MeOH m e 548 MH .

Lithium diisopropylamide 0.2 ml of 2 M solution was added to 2 5 5 trimethylpyrroline N oxide cooled to 25 C. A reddish orange color was observed. Bisaldehyde 20 100 mg 0.22 mmol in 10 ml THF was added with stiffing and warmed to room temperature. The reaction mixture was washed with ammonium chloride and the product isolated by flash chromatography using chloroform with increasing concentrations of 2 propanol. The resulting green product was stirred in toluene with excess magnesium sulfate for four hours at 100 C. RChloroform. IR CHCl 2959 1538 1440 1370. H NMR 400 MHz CDCl 1.35 d J 6.9 Hz 12H 1.49 s 12H 2.13 t J 7.3 Hz 4H 2.98 t J 7.3 Hz 4H 3.04 m 2H 3.11 s 6H 7.01 d J 7.3 Hz 2H 7.32 dd J 10.8 7 1.6 Hz 2H 7.40 d J 18.0 Hz 2H 7.525 d J 18.0 Hz 2H 7.73 s 2H 8.22 d J 1.6 Hz 2H 8.54 s 2H C NMR 100 MHz DO 24.7 26.0 29.1 29.9 33.0 38.4 73.9 114.0 125.7 126.4 127.8 130.7 131.0 132.9 133.5 137.0 137.1 139.7 142.6 143.3 148.6 LRMS LC MS APCI MeOH m e 667 MH .

STAZN 21 was prepared in accordance with procedures illustrated in the Journal of the American Chemical Society Becker et al. Stilbazulenyl Nitrone STAZN A Nitronyl Substituted Hydrocarbon with the Potency of Classical Phenolic Chain Breaking Antioxidants 2002 124 4678 84.

Mononitrone monoaldehyde 22 is prepared in accordance with the procedures illustrated in Examples 1 and 3 and reacted with trimethylacethydrazide ammonium chloride Girard s Reagent T to form derivative L .

Dialdehyde 20 is reacted with sodium 4 hydroxyamino 4 methylpentanoate in ethanol to form derivative M.

Mononitrone A is prepared in accordance with the procedure of Example 1 and reacted with oxalyl bromide in a solvent mixture comprising ethanol and diethylether to form derivative N.

Dialdehyde 20 is reacted with sodium N 3 sulfonatophenyl hydroxyl amine in ethanol solvent to form derivative P.

Mononitrone monoaldehyde 22 was reacted with carboxy methyl pyridinum chloride hydrazide Girard s Reagent P in ethanol solvent to form derivative R.

Lithium diisopropylamide 0.2 ml of 2 M solution is added to 2 5 5 trimethylpyrroline N oxide cooled to 25 C. The monoaldehyde 34 0.22 mmol in 10 ml THF is added with stiffing and warmed to room temperature. The reaction mixture washed with ammonium chloride and the product isolated by flash chromatography to yield the title pyrroline N oxide derivative T .

In the following example comparative testing of the antioxidant activity of azulenyl nitrone compounds of the invention against a control was performed. The assay was based on the well established oxidation of cumene to cumene hydroperoxide by atmospheric oxygen at 37 C. in the presence of the free radical initiator AIBN Blanchard H. S. . 1959 81 4548 Characterization of products formed during the autoxidation of beta carotene. Handelman G. J. van Kujik F. J. G. M. Chatterjee A. Krinsky N. I. . 1991 10 427 37 . The progress of the peroxidation reaction is conveniently followed and quantified by 1H NMR spectroscopy by monitoring the appearance and increasing integration of the singlet arising from the methyl groups of cumene hydroperoxide. The use of a long low power selective pulse Shaped radiofrequency pulses in high resolution NMR. Freeman R. J. Prog. Nuc. Mag. Spec. 1998 32 59 allowed the growth of the cumene hydroperoxide methyl group singlet to be accurately measured in the presence of a huge excess of cumene. This was shown by using known concentrations of commercially available cumene hydroperoxide to calibrate the peak areas. The concentration of internal standard bis 1 4 trichloromethyl benzene was shown to be invariant under the reaction conditions. The results of the assay are presented in .

Non limiting examples of pain conditions that arise from or are characterized by oxidative damage or oxidative stress are migraine See e.g. Ciancarelli I. et al 2003 Urinary Nitric Oxide Metabolites and Lipid Peroxidation By Products in Migraine 23 1 39 42 acute chronic and neuropathic pain syndromes and neuralgias See e.g. De las Heras Castano G. et al. 2000 Use of Antioxidants to Treat Pain in Chronic Pancreatitis 92 6 375 85 irritable bowel syndrome and nerve injury and neuropathies including diabetic neuropathy See e.g. Gray C. et al. 2003 Neuroprotective Effects of Nitrone Radical Scavenger S PBN on Reperfusion Nerve Injury in Rats Brain Res. 982 2 179 85 and Strokov I. A. et al. 2000 The Function of Endogenous Protective Systems in Patients with Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus and Polyneuropathy Effect of Antioxidant Therapy 130 10 986 90 . Non limiting examples of autoimmune diseases or conditions that arise from or are characterized by oxidative damage or oxidative stress are multiple sclerosis See e.g. Liu Y. et al. 2003 Bilirubin as a Potent Antioxidant Suppresses Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis Implications for the Role of Oxidative Stress in the Development of Multiple Sclerosis 139 1 2 27 35 arthritis diabetes and related complications See e.g. Tabatabaie T. et al. 1997 Spin Trapping Agent Phenyl N tert butylnitrone Protects against the Onset of Drug Induced Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus 407 2 148 52 and Graves disease and other thyroid disorders See e.g. Vrca V. B. et al. 2004 Supplementation with Antioxidants in the Treatment of Graves Disease the Effect on Glutathione Peroxidase Activity and Concentration of Selenium 341 1 2 55 63 .

Non limiting examples of inflammatory diseases or conditions that arise from or are characterized by oxidative damage or oxidative stress are myocardial infarction and dysfunction See e.g. Vergely C. et al. 2003 Effect of Two New PBN Derived Phosphorylated Nitrones against Postischaemic Ventricular Dysrhythmias 17 4 433 42 arteriosclerosis and other vascular diseases See e.g. Micheletta F. et al. 2004 Vitamin E Supplementation in Patients with Carotid Atherosclerosis Reversal of Altered Oxidative Stress Status in Plasma But Not in Plaque 24 1 136 40 asthma reactive airway diseases and allergies See e.g. Nadeem A. et al. 2003 Increased Oxidative Stress and Altered Levels of Antioxidants in Asthma 111 1 72 8 transplant and graft failure or rejection See e.g. Connor H. D. et al. 1992 Evidence that Free Radicals Are Involved in Graft Failure following Orthotopic Liver Transplantation in the Rat an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spin Trapping Study 54 2 199 204 lung injury and damage See e.g. Murphy P. G. et al. 1991 Direct Detection of Free Radical Generation in an in vivo Model of Acute Lung Injury 15 3 167 76 hepatitis and jaundice induced liver disorders See e.g. Yamashita T. et al. 1996 The Effects of Phenyl tert butylnitrone PBN on Copper Induced Rat Fulminant Hepatitis with Jaundice 21 6 755 61 pancreatitis and other pancreatic disorders See e.g. Koiwai T. et al. 1989 The Role of Oxygen Free Radicals in Experimental Acute Pancreatitis in the Rat 5 2 135 43 inflammatory bowel disease including Crohn s disease and other disorders of the digestive tract See e.g. Reimund J. M. et al. 1998 Antioxidants Inhibit the in vitro Production of Inflammatory Cytokines in Crohn s Disease and Ulcerative Colitis 28 2 145 50 retinal ischemia and damage including macular degeneration and other degenerative or inflammatory disorders of the retina and eye See e.g. F. Block and M. Schwarz 1997 Effects of Antioxidants on Ischemic Retinal Dysfunction 64 4 559 64 renal ischemia and kidney disorders See e.g. Kadkhodaee M. et al. 1996 Detection of Hydroxyl and Carbon Centered Radicals by EPR Spectroscopy after Ischaemia and Reperfusion of the Rat Kidney 25 1 31 42 and endotoxemia See e.g. Harkins J. D. et al. 1997 Effect of Phenyl tert butylnitrone on Endotoxin Toxemia in Horses 39 5 268 71 .

Non limiting examples of neurological or neurodegenerative diseases or conditions that arise from or are characterized by oxidative damage or oxidative stress are stroke See e.g. Marshall J. W. et al 2001 NXY 059 a Free Radical Trapping Agent Substantially Lessens the Functional Disability Resulting from Cerebral Ischemia in a Primate Species 32 1 190 98 and Ginsberg M. D. et al 2003 Stilbazulenyl Nitrone a Novel Antioxidant Is Highly Neuroprotective in Focal Ischemia 54 3 330 42 schizophrenia and other disorders of cognition See e.g. Dakhale G. et al 2004 Oxidative Damage and Schizophrenia the Potential Benefit by Atypical Antipsychotics 49 4 205 09 mood disorders and other disorders of affect See e.g. Ranjekar P. K. et al. 2003 Decreased Antioxidant Enzymes and Membrane Essential Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Schizophrenic and Bipolar Mood Disorder Patients 121 2 109 22 epilepsy See e.g. Gupta M. et al 2004 Add on Melatonin Improves Quality of Life in Epileptic Children on Valproate Monotherapy a Randomized Double Blind Placebo Controlled Trial 5 3 316 21 aging and senescence See e.g. Carney J. M. et al 1991 Reversal of Age Related Increase in Brain Protein Oxidation Decrease in Enzyme Activity and Loss in Temporal and Spatial Memory by Chronic Administration of the Spin Trapping Compound N tert Butyl phenylnitrone 88 9 3633 6 Parkinson s disease See e.g. Fredriksson A. et al 1997 MPTP Induced Deficits in Motor Activity Neuroprotective Effects of the Spin Trapping Agent Phenyl tert butylnitrone PBN J. Neural. Transm. 104 6 7 579 92 Alzheimer s disease See e.g. Butterfield D. A. et al 1996 A 25 35 Peptide Displays HO Like Reactivity towards Aqueous Fe Nitroxide Spin Probes and Synaptosomal Membrane Proteins 58 3 217 28 Huntington s disease See e.g. Nakao N. et al. 1996 Antioxidant Treatment Protects Striatal Neurons against Excitotoxic Insults 73 1 185 200 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis See e.g. Desnuelle C. et al 2001 A Double Blind Placebo Controlled Randomized Clinical Trial of Tocopherol Vitamin E in the Treatment of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 2 1 9 18 and head trauma and traumatic brain injury See e.g. Sen S. et al 1994 Phenyl tert butylnitrone Inhibits Free Radical Release in Brain Concussion 16 6 685 91 and Marklund N. et al 2001 Effects of the Nitrone Radical Scavengers PBN and S PBN on in vivo Trapping of Reactive Oxygen Species after Traumatic Brain Injury in Rats 21 11 1259 67 .

All publications patents and patent applications cited in this specification are herein incorporated by reference as if each individual publication or patent application were specifically and individually indicated to be incorporated by reference. Although the foregoing invention has been described in some detail by way of illustration and example for purposes of clarity of understanding it will be readily apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art in light of the teachings of this invention that certain changes and modifications may be made thereto without departing from the spirit or scope of the appended claims. All such changes and modifications included herein.

