---

title: Printable electric circuits, electronic components and method of forming the same
abstract: Improved methods and articles providing conformal coatings for a variety of devices including electronic, semiconductor, and liquid crystal display devices. Peptide formulations which bind to nanoparticles and substrates, including substrates with trenches and vias, to provide conformal coverage as a seed layer. The seed layer can be further enhanced with use of metallic films deposited on the seed layer. Seed layers can be characterized by AFM measurements and improved seed layers provide for better enhancement layers including lower resistivity in the enhancement layer. Peptides can be identified by phage display.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07902639&OS=07902639&RS=07902639
owner: Siluria Technologies, Inc.
number: 07902639
owner_city: San Francisco
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051116
---
This invention was made with government support under Contract No. 2004 H838109 000 awarded by the Central Intelligence Agency. The government has certain rights in this invention.

This invention relates to electronic circuits that are formed by printing on a substrate and more particularly to a method of fabricating electronic circuits having active and passive components on any substrate by adhering to a seed layer that has been printed on the substrate.

Substrates having electrically conductive lines thereon are used in a wide variety of electronic applications. Glass substrates used for LCD s touch screens for visual displays consumer electronic displays from cell phone to portable computers all require electrically conductive lines to be formed thereon to provide the desired functionality. Flexible substrates are also used in a wide variety of applications such as for the coupling of electronic components in a system or the transfer of data. Flexible substrates may be made of a polyimide film such as Kapton or from thin plastic or metal materials.

Epoxy resin is commonly used to laminate fiberglass layers to provide a substrate in various electronic components and computer systems. For example the motherboard of the computer to which the CPU is coupled and electrically connected to other components on the motherboard is typically made from an epoxy resin laminate that includes one or more fiberglass layers. Memory boards keypad support substrates the interior electronic support boards of calculators cell phones flash disk drives and numerous other electronic components are typically mounted on such fiberglass epoxy laminate substrates.

The processing of such circuits requires numerous high temperature steps. The high temperature may not be compatible with other circuit components to be formed on the substrate.

Forming electrically conductive lines on various substrates presents particular technical challenges for each substrate. The techniques for forming the conductive lines and electronic circuits must be adapted to each particular substrate which often requires an initial investment and technical changes or technology advancement. For example placing an conductive circuit on glass quartz and other rigid substrates requires very different equipment and handling techniques than can be used with fiberglass epoxy laminate which are not as rigid. Similarly forming electronic circuits on flexible substrates requires completely different machinery and equipment than can be used with glass or an epoxy laminate substrate.

An additional technical difficulty is the selection of different materials which can be formed on a particular substrate and the cost associated with using different materials for different substrates. For example on some substrates aluminum can easily be formed as an electrical interconnection circuit. However aluminum has a higher resistivity than other conductors such as copper and gold. In addition aluminum is not as suitable for forming certain electronic components such as capacitors and inductors as other metals and materials. It is therefore desired in some substrates to provide electronic circuits having different types of metal for different functions for example using copper and aluminum for certain electrical connection lines while using other materials such as metal oxides dielectrics or magnetic metals for such components as resistors capacitors and inductors respectively. Yet the high temperature steps and etch chemistry for one material is often not compatible with other materials.

For example many of these alternative elements are not compatible with the etch processes which are traditionally used for forming aluminum. Therefore considerable expense is added to a simple electronic circuit if different materials are used. This requires substantial masking and etching followed by the appropriate clean and preparation steps for each different type of material.

For many types of materials it is common to deposit the entire material in a uniform film across the entire substrate. After the film is deposited the layer is patterned by masking then developed and etched each of which require movement of the substrate to different machines and some of which require complex chemistry which may affect other circuits or components if they have been previously formed on the substrate. This requires that protective layers be provided to cover previously formed layers while the deposition and etching is carried out on later prepared layers even though such layers may be electrically connected to each other.

Adding to the difficulty and expense is the need to manufacture different masks for each of the patterns to be etched in many of the processes today. For many electrical circuits formed on substrates today once a pattern is determined a mask must be formed which corresponds to the desired pattern. After the mask is formed many circuits can be constructed with the same mask. If a change to the circuit is required even of a very minor nature a completely new mask is required with the attendant time and expense to obtain and implement such a mask before a layer in the new pattern can be formed on the substrate. Accordingly the forming of custom electrical circuits on any given substrate is extremely expensive in the technology of today. The expense is amplified if a low number of the circuits are built thus drastically increasing the cost per circuit.

According to principles of the present invention a method is provided for fabricating electronic components based on printing a seed layer on a substrate. The seed layer may be comprised of any combination of inorganic materials biological materials biomolecules or the like. After the printing of the seed layer the substrate is exposed to a fluid such as a liquid solution or a gas containing precursors to the material that is to form the electrically conductive layers. The seed layer has an affinity to the material in the fluid which causes the material to form on the seed layer and provides the growth of a desired conductive layer that corresponds to the location of the printed seed layer.

The present invention permits the printing of a pattern using any acceptable printing technologies in order to define an electronic circuit on any available substrate. Printing technologies permit a wide variety of different patterns to be easily and quickly created at a low cost. Ink jet printers laser printers and numerous other printers are software controlled and can provide a variety of different patterns for printing. Further such printers are capable of easily printing on practically any available substrate. Therefore a seed layer can be printed at relatively low cost in any desired pattern on any desired substrate after which an electronic circuit is formed that conforms to the printed pattern. Many acceptable printing techniques may be used. In addition lithography flexo printing gravure printing screen printing or other types of direct write printing are also acceptable.

The present invention is able to form the printed circuit without the need for etching electroplating masking high temperature steps and various protective layers which are necessary for the forming of electronic circuits on substrates according to the current state of the art. In addition the expensive equipment and capital investment required in order to form an electronic circuit on the given substrate is not necessary. The present invention provides for a very low cost formation of an electronic circuit using any standard printing technology and a liquid phase solution at room temperature.

A wide variety of substrates may be used for supporting the electronic circuit formed according to the present invention. Acceptable substrates include glass quartz an oxide a plastic whether thick and rigid or thin and flexible. In addition the substrate may be a ceramic a polymer a polyimide a semiconductor or the like. In some embodiments the substrate may be a conductor such as aluminum stainless steel copper or a combination of semiconductors and conductors as may be present on a standard integrated circuit.

In a first embodiment a substrate is used in which the seed layer will directly bond to the substrate without the need for additional coating or preparation. In such cases the substrate would be cleaned prepared and washed to provide an acceptable surface for the printing of the seed layer. For some seed layers a coating of a preparation material on the substrate may be desired in order to provide solid bonding of the seed layer to the substrate. For example the substrate may be coated with an ink having a selected chemistry which will bond to the seed layer. In other embodiments the substrate may be coated with streptavidin which provides an affinity between a peptide and the substrate in the event a peptide is used as the seed layer. Other substrate coatings which provide bonding with a biomolecule may also be used such as a poly lysine or a silane.

The seed layer is preferably composed of a biomolecule having desired properties. The biomolecule may be a simple protein or phage which has an affinity for the substrate at one site or end thereof and an affinity for the material to be formed on the substrate at another site or end thereof. The biomolecule may also include a variety of biological agents having desired properties. For example peptides whether natural or synthetic amino acids and other more complex biomolecules may be used for the biological agent.

A biological agent may be selected which has an affinity for the substrate to which the seed layer is to be attached. Preferably the biological agent also has an affinity for the material which is to be used in the electronic circuit being deposited on the substrate. Thus a single biomolecule will bond with both substrate and the conductive material. In most cases simple printing of the seed layer on the substrate is sufficient to bond the seed layer to the substrate without the need for the seed layer to have a biological affinity to the substrate. Many biomolecules adhere well to any surface based solely on the natural stickiness and low viscosity. When printed the seed layer such as a biomolecule will adhere to the substrate based on the printing technique used and not based on a biological affinity. Thus seed layers may also be used which do not have an affinity for the substrate but only have an affinity for the conductive material to be applied in a later step.

The biomolecule that is used will provide selective deposition on a layer that is specific to a layer of that material. The affinity of the biomolecule may be of the type that it provides selective deposition on only that material that forms the layer of interest. It is thus specific to that layer and does not form on other layers or materials.

For those cases in which a biomolecule does not have an affinity for the material to be formed in the electrical circuit a sensitizer can be provided to the biomolecule. In such a circumstance a solution is formed which includes a precursor material the biomolecule that is to form the seed layer. A sensitizer is added to the solution containing the precursor to the seed material. The sensitizer will combine with the seed layer material in order to form nanoparticles having the composition desirable to act as nucleation seeds for another material of choice.

Repeated printing of different patterns on the same substrate may also easily be carried out according to the present invention. A first pattern may be printed on the substrate after which a conductive material is attached by exposing the substrate to a solution containing a precursor to the conductive material. In a subsequent step another pattern may be printed on the same substrate either to overlap abut against or be spaced from the first pattern. The second pattern contains a seed layer with an affinity for a different material for forming different components of the electronic circuit. The substrate is then exposed to a solution containing precursors to the additional material thus providing an electronic circuit composed of two materials which may be electrically connected to each other. Alternatively the two seed layers can be formed on the substrate successively followed by exposure of the substrate to a solution containing both of the precursors. Because of the controlled affinity of seed A to precursor A and seed B to precursor B the material deposition can be locally controlled by the seed deposition for different materials. The selective printing and depositing of other layers may continue for several different electronic components and to create electrical contact between various portions of the circuit.

According to one embodiment of the invention a substrate is provided to receive a seed layer. A seed layer is printed on the non conductive substrate in a selected pattern. The seed layer is selected to have an affinity to a material that will form a selected conductor that will be part of the electrical circuit. The substrate is then exposed to a solution containing a precursor to the selected conductor. The selected conductor becomes coupled to the substrate at locations containing the printed seed layer thus forming electrical circuit components on the substrate. According to one embodiment the seed layer is comprised of a plurality of biomolecules. The biomolecules may be selected from the group of amino acids peptides proteins and the like. In one embodiment the seed layer is comprised of a combination of a biomolecule and an inorganic member. The seed layer may include two or more layers. For example it may include a base layer of an ink which has been positioned on the substrate. The seed layer has an affinity to the ink at one end thereof. The seed layer is applied to the substrate and links to the ink without a separate printing step.

According to a further embodiment of the present invention a substrate is provided on which a plurality of passive components are formed. A first layer is positioned on the non conductive substrate. The seed layer is formed in a selected pattern on the substrate and is placed on the substrate using standard printing techniques. The seed layer has an affinity for a preselected conductive material which is used to form one of the components of the electrical circuit. A first conductor which is composed of the preselected conductive material is coupled to the substrate at the locations containing the seed layer by being associated to the seed layer. This forms a first portion of the electrical circuit. A second seed layer is positioned at different locations on the non conductive substrate the second seed layer having an affinity for a second type of electrical material. The second electrical material may be adjacent to and electrically connected to the first conductive material in the final electronic circuit by placing the two seed layers adjacent to or overlapping with each other.

In some embodiments the first conductive material is a conductor which has a low resistivity to act as a conductive trace in electrical circuit. Such conductors include copper and gold for example. The second electrical material may have a relatively high resistivity so as to act as a resistor in the electrical circuit. The material acting as the resistor may be a metal oxide ceramic or any other acceptable materials. The patterns of the first and second seed layer are selected to form an electrical circuit having the desired electrical properties for conductors resistors capacitors inductors and the like.

According to one embodiment the seed layer is printed in a pattern so as to form a comb capacitor on the substrate. The comb capacitor includes inter digitized fingers of conductor adjacent to each other arranged in a manner well known in the art. Alternatively a stacked capacitor may be formed by subsequently forming seed layers on top of previously provided conductive layers and then exposing the substrate to an additional electrical material so as to form a second layer on top of the first conductive layer. For example a stacked capacitor may be formed composed of a conductor a dielectric and then another conductive layer by performing subsequent forming of seed layers on top of a previously formed conductive or electrical circuit component layer.

In one preferred embodiment the additional seed layers are formed without the need for printing onto the previously formed conductor. In this preferred embodiment a seed layer is selected which has bi functional affinity. A seed layer is selected having different components that have an affinity to the conductive layer which has previously been formed on the substrate following the first printing. Another portion of the seed layer has an affinity for the second material which is subsequently to be provided on the substrate. According to this embodiment the substrate is merely exposed to a fluid containing the bi functional seed layer which will attach itself to those portions of the previously formed electronic circuit for which it has an affinity and will not attach to the other portions of the substrate or electronic circuit. The substrate is then removed from the fluid and washed leaving a new seed layer which has been self formed only on those particular portions of the previously existing electronic circuit for which it has an affinity. Subsequently the substrate is then exposed to a fluid containing an additional electrical material such as a dielectric or another conductor which has an affinity for the seed layer which has just been formed. The conductor will then self attach to and deposit on the existing seed layer. This results in a stack of seed layers and electrical components in a known pattern in which only a single printing has been carried out.

Thus according to the present invention a single printing step may be used to form a plurality of self aligning and self adhering layers based on a single pattern to form a stacked electrical component layer.

In one embodiment the bi functional seed layer may include a biomolecule such as a protein having an affinity at one site thereon for the existing conductive material and another site on the protein having an affinity for the future electrical material to be provided on the substrate.

Proteins having numerous affinity sites are known in the art today. Proteins can be engineered which have numerous affinity sites for selected electrical materials. Accordingly various proteins can be engineered in order to provide the desired bi functional seed layers according to principles of the present invention. Many different biomolecules may be used for the bi functional seed layer such as phages peptides amino acids and the like.

According to one embodiment of the present invention a seed layer comprises a peptide and nanoparticles. The peptide is a biomolecule while the nanoparticles may be an inorganic material such as copper silicon and the like. The peptide will include at least one binding moiety for binding to the nanoparticles and also a binding moiety for the substrate. Accordingly the present invention will include a seed layer deposed on the substrate the seed layer comprising a peptide and a nanoparticle and an electrical material film disposed on the seed layer so as to be coupled to the substrate.

In some embodiments it will be desired to remove the peptide following the formation of the seed layer before forming the first conductive material. The peptide may be removed by annealing ashing denaturing or other techniques in order to substantially remove the biomolecule and leaving the linking portion of the seed layer on the substrate. The conductive material is then formed directly coupled to the remaining portions of the seed layer and being firmly coupled to the substrate. Accordingly once the seed layer has been successfully completed the biomolecule can be volatized and removed so that it cannot be detected in the final conductive material. Thus according to one embodiment of the present invention there is a substantial removal of the biological material prior to the completion of the electrical circuit so that an electrical circuit is provided having high quality metal films and electrical components without the presence of a biomolecule.

The present invention provides the advantage of permitting low cost electrical circuits to be formed on any available substrate. In addition relatively low investment capital is required in order to form the electrical circuit. The electrical circuit can be formed in any desired pattern and then changed very easily at little to no additional cost. This permits the formation of low cost electrical circuits for a wide variety of applications where such circuits are either not available or if available have a high cost for forming. Such uses include touch screens flat panel displays LCDs organic LEDs plasma displays and the like. The uses may also include photovoltaic cells an area heated glass and other hard substrates. Additional uses include aircraft surfaces whether for the heads up display or for providing specific electrical properties on aircraft structures such as titanium or aluminum. The present invention is also useful for forming electronic circuits for ESD and EMI protection as may be necessary for the packaging for shipping chips circuit boards and other electronic components. Thus numerous types of packaging material may be printed with circuits according to the present invention. Other uses include electro luminescent circuits which may be printed on a variety of different substrates.

The circuit presented in is provided for illustration purposes to demonstrate the variety of electrical components which can be electrically coupled to each other according to principles of the present invention and is not intended to illustrate the actual electrical connections of an operational circuit. illustrate various useful circuits made according to principles of the present invention that can have any desired layout and any combination of various resistors fuses diodes or capacitors. Further RC filters CL tank circuits or any combination of components may be connected together to form an electronic circuit.

In one embodiment of the invention the electronic circuit provides an interface to a plurality of semiconductor chips mounted on the substrate . For example permitting one or more of the integrated circuits to be electrically connected to each other on the substrate.

The pattern is not printed at other locations on the substrate where a conductive trace is not desired. Accordingly when the substrate is placed within a carrier fluid such as by being dipped into a solution or exposed to a gas containing the precursor to the material the conductive layer is only formed on a top of the patterned seed layer . At other locations on the substrate the conductive material does not adhere to the substrate. Therefore when the substrate is removed from the solution the conductive material is not present at such locations. The substrate can then be washed and rinsed to ensure that the top surface is completely clean of all material where the seed layer is not present and that the conductive material forming the conductive trace is present at those locations. In this example the material will be selectively deposited onto the seed layer . Even though the entire substrate is exposed to the fluid containing the precursor to material the seed layer is selective so that the material will be specific to that type of seed layer to be selectively deposited only on the layer and will not be deposited on the substrate or on other seed layers is some happen to be present. A simple washing in the appropriate solvent which may be water an alcohol etc. will remove the carrier fluid which includes material from all locations on the substrate expect those to which has been selectively deposited.

The construction of the diode may be carried out as follows. The seed layer may be a phage or peptide having an affinity for silicon. After the seed layer has been printed on the substrate at the appropriate location the substrate is exposed to a fluid containing a precursor to silicon. In addition the silicon might be of the type which includes boron already in the lattice structure or some boron may be in the fluid as well so that as the silicon adheres to and attaches to the seed layer a small amount of boron is introduced into the lattice structure of the silicon forming a P type region of semiconductor material. Other semiconductor materials besides silicon may be used such as gallium arsenide germanium and the like each of which may be appropriately doped P type as is known in the art. Subsequently a seed layer is printed on the substrate at the appropriate location as shown in . The substrate is then exposed to a fluid which contains silicon or other semiconductor material which has an affinity for the seed layer . The silicon in this fluid may itself previously be doped N type or in the alternative the solution may include small molecules which have N type doping such as for example arsenic or phosphorus. The semiconductor material having an affinity for the substrate layer will attach itself to the seed layer while also having a small amount of N type doping within the lattice structure thus forming an N type semiconductor region as shown in . In some embodiments the very same seed layer may be used for and the difference being the solutions in which they dipped having a precursor either for P type silicon or N type silicon. In alternative embodiments the seed layers might be customized so as to have a greater affinity for a P or N type doped semiconductor material.

After the substrate has been removed from the various solutions a diode has been formed by the junction between the N and P type semiconductor materials. Thus a PN junction has been formed on the substrate by the simple dipping of the substrate into respective solutions containing the appropriate precursors at room temperature. Room temperature is generally in the range of 20 to 30 degrees centigrade and is considered a low temperature. Generally any temperatures at or below 100 degrees centigrade and above 0 degrees centigrade would be consider low temperatures since this temperature range can easily be achieved and maintained by standard equipment It desirable to have the temperature above the freezing temperature of the liquid being used since this will make handling and use easy. Of course the liquid might be stored at 3 to 5 degrees centigrade for long term storage. It can be warmed to room temperature for use if desired. This permits the formation of diode in the conductive trace which may be used in such circuits in the circuits as shown in B and D. The diode will have the electrical properties based on the doping concentration of the respective P and N layers as well as their thickness and printed location as defined by the pattern which has been printed of seed layers and . Accordingly a voltage applied to one of the conductive traces may be either blocked or passed by the diode depending on its respective threshold voltage and its breakdown voltage and the forward bias and reverse bias of the diode.

Diodes formed according to principles of the present invention may be useful on a wide variety of substrates which previously required the use of integrated circuits to provide such an active component. Glass plastic polyamide and other substrates may have such diodes formed thereon which provide interactions with the conductive traces such as ESD protection for other purposes as previously described.

Other electronic components and structures can be made using the techniques cited herein. For example varistors various types of diodes switches and other electronic components can be made following the teaching of the present disclosure.

A comb capacitor of the type shown in will be made from the conductive material having the appropriate seed layer therebelow. In most embodiments the same conductive material used for the conductive trace will also be used for the comb capacitors . This provides ease of manufacture. The pattern of the seed layer to be printed is provided in the form of a comb capacitor so that the conductor adheres to the layer of the seed material in the desired pattern and is formed at the same time as the conductive trace . Alternatively a different seed layer may be used for the comb capacitor than is used for the conductive trace thus permitting the capacitor to be formed in a different sequence.

One advantage of using the same seed layer for the conductive layer and the comb capacitor is the ease of manufacture during the printing and formation steps. The comb capacitor can be made in the same steps and simultaneously with the forming of the conductive traces. Similarly a flat coil inductor may also be formed simultaneously using the same seed layer and conductive layer as explained herein. According to this embodiment a fewer number of seed layers can be used for the manufacture of the completed circuit. The same seed layer can be used for all conductors and capacitors in the circuit and a different seed layer for all resistors thus permitting the formation of a completed circuit with resistors and capacitors using only two seed layers of two different materials.

A seed layer comprised of the materials from which a first portion of the electrical circuit will be formed is printed on the substrate . The seed layer may comprise a biological material referred to herein as a biomolecule. The biomolecule may include any of many acceptable biological materials such as a peptide amino acids phage protein bacteria or a plurality of different biological components. The biomolecule may also be a combination of a biological formation and an inorganic material.

The seed layer can take three different forms which will now be explained. In a first configuration the seed layer is a biomolecule which itself is capable of being printed directly on a substrate and also has an affinity for the material to be used to form the electrical circuit. In this configuration the seed layer itself is of the type that will adhere to the substrate either by some natural adhesion or some biological affinity. Many proteins peptides and other biomolecules are naturally quite sticky and have good adhesion properties therefore a biological affinity to the substrate is usually not an additional required property.

For those seed layers where a bi functional biomolecule is used the biomolecule forming the seed layer will have an affinity of the substrate material to which it is attached. This may be for example the substrate itself an exposed surface of an electrical component as explained herein or some other material so as to provide selective attachment of a further seed layer to a previously existing layer on top of the substrate. Such bi functional biomolecules also provide selective deposition at another site thereon for an additional material to be selectively connected thereto as part of the electrical circuit. This additional material may be a dielectric a conductive layer or some other additional material which is to be attached to the substrate or another layer present on the electrical circuit.

Another configuration of the seed layer is a combination of a biomolecule and an inorganic material such as a nanoparticle. The nanoparticle is selected to be of the type that the desired electrical component will have an affinity to the nanoparticle thus linking the electrical material to the biological molecule. The seed layer is thus composed of the combination of the biomolecule and the nanoparticle.

The seed layer which is a combination of the biomolecule and the nanoparticle can be formed by two different techniques. According to a first technique the biomolecule is in a fluid such as a solution or gas. The nanoparticle is introduced to this fluid so that the fluid contains both the biomolecule and the nanoparticle. The biomolecule and the nanoparticle bond to each other while in the fluid state. The fluid is then printed as a complete seed layer onto the substrate. According to a different configuration the combined biomolecule and nanoparticle seed layer is formed by first printing the biomolecule onto the substrate in the desired pattern. After the pattern is printed of the biomolecule the fluid containing a further component of the seed layer is positioned adjacent to the biomolecule so that it couples to the biomolecule to form the complete seed layer. In this embodiment the seed layer is made in two steps a first printing of a biomolecule and then the attachment of the nanoparticle so as to form the completed seed layer. An example such a seed layer may include a biomolecule with a gold particle coupled thereto the gold particle having an affinity to copper or gold which naturally couples to a seed layer made of the combined biomolecule and gold nanoparticle.

The biomaterial is preferably formulated in a fluid having a desired viscosity so as to permit printing using standard printing techniques.

A variety of materials can be used for the substrate presenting a surface for disposition of the seed layer including electrically conductive semiconductive or insulative materials. The substrates may include metals such as thin stainless steel sheets. They may also include prefabricated epoxy resin circuit boards. The substrate may be a semiconductor of any selected desired choice such as silicon gallium arsenide germanium or other material. Other acceptable substrates include plastics polyimide layers a flexible polymer sheet an insulator ceramic laminate substrates or multilayer substrates composed of any of the other variety of other materials. One advantage of the present invention is the ability to form an electrical circuit on a wide variety of acceptable substrates. One shortcoming of the prior art is the difficulty of forming electrical circuits on certain types of substrates. While epoxy resins are well developed for use as substrates there is considerably more difficulty in the art using certain types of plastics glasses ceramics or insulators as substrates. The substrate may be a flexible organic layer. For example it may be a fiber fabric cloth or plant including a living plant such as the leaf of a tree. Current technology does not permit the formation of electrical circuits on living plants based on the need to expose to harsh chemicals and high temperature steps. The present invention permits the formation of electrical circuits at room temperature thus permitting the formation the electrical circuit on a much wider range of substrates than is possible in the prior art. Any substrate on which a pattern may be printed is usable as a substrate in the present invention thus including practically all possible materials.

The substrates can include multilayer substrates. The substrate can be for example glass quartz oxide or nitride material plastic ceramic semiconductor such as silicon germanium and the like conductor such as aluminum composites of materials including metals and semiconductors and multilayer coating of any of these materials.

The substrates are typically those where a metal film would be grown including for example Ta TaN Ti TiN TiW Mo Cr silicon oxide including silicon dioxide silicon nitride silicon oxynitride. These substrates can be for example barrier materials which prevent copper diffusion. The substrates may be cleaned prepared or coated with a oxide or other substance. In a preferred embodiment the system is used where the peptide is directly bound without any coating on the substrate in order to direct the metal film directly on the desired layer.

Substrates also can be selected for usefulness in displays including liquid crystal displays. Deposition of seed layers on glass substrates is described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 887 776 which is hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety. Glasses include undoped silica glass USG phosphorous doped glass PSG boron phosphorous doped glass BPSG soda lime glass borosilicate glass sodium borosilicate glass alkali metal borosilicate aluminosilicate glass aluminoborosilicate glass alkaline earth aluminoborosilicate glass alkaline earth metal aluminoborosilicate glass and combinations thereof.

The present invention permits the printing to be carried out by any currently known printing technique. The printing technique which may be used includes inkjet printing. Inkjet printing is well developed in the art and numerous solutions having different viscosities have been adapted to inkjet printing. lnkjet printing is also very versatile in providing a wide range of patterns to be printed having various widths and dimensions easily controllable by software. Use of inkjet printing provides a substantial advantage over current techniques for printing circuit boards. With the use of an inkjet printer the printer can be driven by appropriate software electronics to form the desired pattern. Thus a mask layer followed lithography processing is not necessary with the present invention. The substrate on which the pattern is to be formed can be simply printed using inkjet printing in a desired pattern at substantially lower costs than is currently permitted using the expensive masks exposed etch and treat techniques common in the art today. Other types of printing may also be used. For example gravure printing which has advantages for certain substrates and for forming selected patterns. Laser printing thermal transfer laser induced thermal transfer flexo printing and offset printing may also be used. The present invention is also useful for all methods of lithography.

Inkjet printing also permits different seed layers to be printed at the same time using standard inkjet printing techniques. This will assure self alignment of the various seed layers. This is accomplished as follows. It is known to print three or four colors in a single printing with an inkjet printer such as red blue yellow and sometimes also black. This is carried out today with a single ink cartridge having the three or four inkwells therein.

According to the invention different seed layers are placed into the different ink cartridge wells just as would be carried out for different colors. One seed layer may be material having an affinity for a conductor while another seed layer may be material having an affinity for a resistive material while the third seed layer may be material having an affinity for semiconductor material. These can all be printed from the same ink cartridge in a single printing as is done today for color printing thus the relative location of each of the seed layers relative to each other is exactly known and precisely controlled.

In this embodiment it is not necessary to perform sequential printings on the same substrate after each respective electric material is formed which step requires some alignment of the substrate for each sequential printing to be correctly positioned relative to the previously printed layer.

This also permits a single printing to be carried out to provide all seed layers needed to form a complete electrical circuit.

One embodiment of the invention provides a method comprising the combination of steps i providing a substrate ii providing a composition wherein the composition comprises a biological agent such as for example a peptide and or nanoparticles and iii contacting the substrate with the composition so that a seed layer is formed on the substrate. The method can further comprise the deposition step of an additional enhancement metallic layer over the seed layer. The method can further comprise the step of removing the biological agent e.g. peptide from the seed layer either before or after the enhancement step

The preferred biological agent is peptide and a wide variety of peptide structures comprising linked amino acids can be used. The composition comprising the peptide also comprises a liquid dispersion medium for the peptide and the seed layer nanoparticle. The components for the liquid dispersion medium are not particularly limited and mixtures of components can be used. Water based or organic based solutions can be used. Examples include water fluorocarbons n alkanes alcohols acetonitrile methanol ethanol propanol isopropanol hexanes dodecane toluene cyclohexanone diethyl ether tetrahydrofuran dichloromethane and acetone. Mixtures can be used including mixing in small amounts of organic solvent in water. The liquids should be able to volatilize as needed for the particular application. Factors to consider in solvent selection further include hydrophilicity of the substrate surface solubility of the nanoparticles vapor pressure toxicity purity and the like. Surfactants binders dispersion agents and other coating additives can be used as needed. Buffers can be used to control the pH as needed. Stable colloid solutions can be formed and purified further as needed. For example purification by gel filtration or ultrafiltration can be carried out. Other purification methods include filtration using a Nanosep 10K centrifugal filter.

A wide variety of peptides of various molecular weights can be used as the biological agent. The peptides can be natural peptides engineered peptides unnatural peptides synthetic peptides or peptide analogs. Peptides may also be found in nature or modified from those found in nature and the study of nature can be used to determine useful peptide sequences. Phage display and other combinatorial or library methods can be used to determine suitable peptides. The peptides can be oligopeptides or polypeptides. A wide variety of amino acids can be used including those found in nature. The peptide can comprise a first peptide binding domain for binding to the nanoparticle. The peptide can further comprise a second binding domain for binding to the substrate. The second binding domain can be a peptide or can be one of two specific binding pair binding domains designed to bind with the surface the surface comprising the other member of the specifically binding pair.

The peptides can be also used in the synthesis of nanoparticles where they can act as capping ligands to control nanoparticle shape size and crystal morphology. Peptides can also passivate the nanoparticle improving long term stability.

Peptides can be localized onto the substrate surface via affinity streptavidin biotin interaction or through direct adsorption placement.

Additionally commercially available nanoparticles can be used as seed layer. These commercial nanoparticles come with ligands encapsulating them. At times these nanoparticles can be used with the ligands as supplied for example with linkages such as streptavidin or biotin or with counter ions. Primarily commercial nanoparticles can be used where the nanocrystals are stabilized by counter ions such as acetate. Because these counter ion stabilized nanoparticles are typically not stable when salt is added to a solution containing them ligand exchange can be performed where a peptide of interest is exchanged with the original counter ion to functionalize the nanoparticles with molecules that make them stable in salt solutions change their solubility and or can act as a hook to cause directed placement for immobilization on the surface.

One skilled in the art if needed can refer to the following patent literature for selection of binding peptides using virus genetic engineering methods and for materials to be used with genetically engineered viruses. Either phage display or yeast display systems can be used for screening peptides. The materials for specific seed layers and techniques to select or refine such materials are well published in the literature and thus need not be repeated here in text rather the following references are cited to provide some of these publications. Phage display libraries and experimental methods for using them in biopanning are further described for example in the following U.S. patent publications to Belcher et al. 1 Biological Control of Nanoparticle Nucleation Shape and Crystal Phase 2003 0068900 published Apr. 10 2003 2 Nanoscale Ordering of Hybrid Materials Using Genetically Engineered Mesoscale Virus 2003 0073104 published Apr. 17 2003 3 Biological Control of Nanoparticles 2003 0113714 published Jun. 19 2003 and 4 Molecular Recognition of Materials 2003 0148380 published Aug. 7 2003. Additional patent applications useful for one skilled in the art describe viral and peptide recognition studies with use of genetically engineered viruses for materials synthesis and applications including for example 1 U.S. Ser. No. 10 654 623 filed Sep. 4 2003 to Belcher et al. Compositions Methods and Use of Bi Functional BioMaterials published 2004 0127640 2 U.S. Ser. No. 10 665 721 filed Sep. 22 2003 to Belcher et al. Peptide Mediated Synthesis of Metallic and Magnetic Materials published 200510064508 and 3 U.S. Ser. No. 10 668 600 filed Sep. 24 2003 to Belcher et al. Fabricated BioFilm Storage Device published 2004 0171139 4 U.S. application Ser. No. 10 965 665 filed Oct. 15 2004 to Belcher et al. Viral Fibers and 5 U.S. Ser. No. 101 965 227 filed Oct. 15 2004 to Belcher et al. Multifunctional Biomaterials . . . and 6 U.S. application Ser. No. 101 976 179 filed Oct. 29 2004 to Belcher et al. Inorganic Nanowires . These references describe a variety of specific binding modifications which can be carried out for binding to conjugate structures as well as forming the conjugate structures in the presence of the material modified for specific binding. Semiconductor applications of bifunctional peptides are described in for example U.S. provisional application 60 571 532 filed May 17 2004. Yeast display peptide systems are described in for example U.S. regular application Ser. No. 11 051 481 filed Feb. 7 2005. Each of the above references are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety.

Reiss et al. Biological Routes to Metal Alloy Ferromagnetic Nanostructures Nanoletters 2004 Vol. 4 No. 6 1127 1132 describes peptides for binding to metals including mediating nanoparticle synthesis. Flynn Mao et al. Synthesis and Organization of Nanoscale II VI semiconductor materials using evolved peptide specificity and viral capsid assembly J Mater. Sca. 2003 13 2414 242 1 describes peptides for binding to and nucleation of semiconductor nanoparticles. Mao Flynn et al. Viral Assembly of Oriented Quantum Dot Nanowires PNAS Jun. 10 2003 vol. 100 no. 12 6946 6951 further describes peptides for binding to and nucleation of semiconductor nanoparticles. Each of the above references are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety.

Specific biological complexes or binding pairs known in the art such as for example biotin and streptavidin can be used to promote bonding between the peptide and the surface. Other examples include glutathione S transferase glutathione 6 Histidine Tag Ni NTA S protein S peptide or biotin avidin. Peptides can be for example biotinylated and can be synthesized through commercial peptide synthesis vendors. One example of an acceptable peptide is peptide 3222 with a sequence of CALNN a known covalent Au binder found in the literature Levy et al. J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 126 No. 32 pp. 10076 10084 2004 which is herein incorporated by reference in its entirety. was made synthetically Peptide 3222A as well as synthesized with a biotin added on the N terminus Peptide 3222B . This peptide can be designed to stabilize Au nanoparticles by forming a dense self assembled monolayer. Stabilized nanoparticles produced using this peptide can be purified and handled like stable proteins e.g. by size exclusion chromatography ultrafiltration electrophoresis lyophilization and the like .

Au nanoparticles can be coupled to this peptide either by reduction of a precursor or by ligand exchange to provide the seed layer. A biotinylated version of that peptide was prepared and found to also give stable Au colloids.

The peptide itself or the peptide s other binding site such as for example the peptide s biotin functionality can be exploited for specific localization onto a surface or a substrate. Alternatively the peptide can be directly adsorbed to a surface or substrate or can be interacted with the substrate in a patterned way so that the subsequent films grown follow the shape of the peptide pattern. Also bifunctional peptides can be used where one end of the peptide or virus is engineered to bind to a seed material while the other end of the peptide has engineered specificity to bind to a substrate or surface.

Generally non covalent binding is desired between the peptide and the nanoparticle and between the peptide and the substrate surface.

Other peptides used include phage display discovered peptides screened against Au Peptide 1 VSGSSPDS Peptide 2 LKAHLPPSRLP as well as peptides obtained from the literature that are known to interact with Au Peptide 3 MHGKTQATSGTIQS see for example Brown S. Metal Recognition by Repeating Polypeptides Nature Biotechnol 15 269 272 1997 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety . Peptides used in this application have been synthesized with biotin on their N termini and have been HPLC purified to 90 purity. These Au peptides can also be used to grow other nanocrystals including Pd nanocrystals in addition to Au nanocrystals. Some peptides can have a high affinity for multiple materials. For example peptide 2 in addition to being able to bind to or grow gold also has a high affinity for glass.

In one embodiment the biological materials and in particular peptide once placement of a seed layer is successfully completed can be generally volatilized and removed so that they cannot be detected in the final film or electrical circuit if desired. However some residue may remain in a final product reflecting the source of the intermediate product comprising peptide. This substantial removal can be described in terms of weight percentage remaining. For example the amount of remaining biological materials with respect to the total amount of film including biologicals can be so low as to be negligible.

One embodiment of the invention is the substantial removal of the biologicals in the production of high quality metal films. Embodiments include both products which comprise peptide and final products which comprise only peptide residue or substantially no peptide or peptide residue. Residues can be analyzed by for example carbon content including surface analysis such as XPS. In other patent applications which are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety U.S. Ser. No. 101 665 721 filed Sep. 22 2003 to Belcher et al. Peptide Mediated Synthesis of Metallic and Magnetic Materials published 2005 0064508 and U.S. application Ser. No. 10 976 179 filed Oct. 29 2004 to Belcher et al. Inorganic Nanowires see also Mao et al. Science vol. 303 Jan. 9 2004 pages 213 217 additional description is provided for burning off and elimination of a biologicals from materials to which the biologicals can selectively bind.

Heating to remove the peptide can also result in effects on the nanoparticle seed layer or the enhancement layer. For example nanoparticles can coalesce with heating and form a more continuous film. Heating can also enhance the metal film s adherence to the substrate. In other embodiments the seed layer is not removed but remains in place on the substrate coupled to the electrical circuit.

The deposition process of the seed layer material has to be optimized for different applications and functions. For example one goal is to provide a catalytic effect when later a metal such as copper is further disposed on the seed layer. Another goal can be to influence the texture of a metal such as copper which is further disposed on the seed layer. For example copper texture can be enhanced to provide better electromigration performance. The seed layer step coverage conformality and texture can be adapted for particular applications.

The seed layer material is selected to be compatible with the enhancement step to form a continuous film. In the case of Cu enhancement both Au Pd Ru and Ni seed layers have been shown in the literature to form Cu films after electroless Cu plating. Many metals can be used as a seed layer that catalyze copper plating examples include aluminum silver cobalt tungsten alloys manganese molybdenum nickel palladium platinum tin zinc tantalum titanium metal oxides oxides nitrides phosphides and any alloys of each of these listed.

The seed layer can comprise material such as metal which is the same material as the enhancement layer or different material from the enhancement layer. For example gold seed layers can be used for both gold and copper enhancement layers.

The nanoparticles do not generally require the presence of a surface coating to allow binding to the biological agent such as a peptide. Nanoparticles can be inorganic nanoparticles or metallic nanoparticles including alloys. In some embodiments they can be semiconductor nanoparticles. Nanoparticles can be quantum dots. Examples of semiconductor nanoparticles include cadmium sulfide cadmium selenide silver sulfide cadmium sulfide zinc sulfide zinc selenide lead sulfide gallium arsenide silicon tin oxide iron oxide and indium phosphide. Nanoparticles can be crystalline or amorphous.

The nanoparticles can be characterized by particle sizes which can be for example about 200 nm or less about 50 nm or less about 25 nm or less or about 10 nm or less. The particle size can be for example about 1 nm or more or about 3 nm or more or about 5 nm or more. The particle size can be for example about 1 nm to about 10 nm. The particle size can be determined by a linear dimension in any direction on the order of nanometers e.g. 1 nm to 100 nm.

The size of the nanoparticle can affect the melting temperature of these particles and the skilled artisan can adjust this parameter to achieve a desired melting performance for a specific application.

If desired the nanoparticles can be polydisperse or substantially monodisperse in size. For example the particle size can have a standard deviation of 5 or less.

The nanoparticles can be amorphous crystalline and if crystalline can show different crystalline phases. Nanoparticles are not limited by a particular aspect ratio but generally will not be nanowires and generally can have aspect ratios of about 10 1 or less. Dimensions can be sufficiently small to provide for quantum confinement effects. Core shell structures can be used.

Solution phase reduction from a metal salt can be used to prepare the nanoparticles. Alternatively nanoparticles can be prefabricated by other methods without use of the biological agent such as peptide and then bound to the biological agent such as peptide.

Growth of nanoparticles in the presence of biological agents and peptides is described in the aforementioned Belcher patent publications and technical literature including for example 

The following patents are incorporated by reference in their entirety U.S. Pat. No. 6 207 392 to Weiss et al. describes semi conductor nanocrystals and linking agents U.S. Pat. No. 6 235 540 describes semiconductor nanoparticles linked to ligands U.S. Pat. No. 6 417 340 describes nanoparticles.

An example of copper nanocrystal growth on peptides can be found in Banerjee et al PNAS Dec. 9 2003 14678 14682 vol. 100 no. 25 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Copper nanocrystals and seed layers are further described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 887 297 and US Patent Publication 2004 0091625 Winter as well as U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 780 765 6 774 036 and 6 277 740 Goldstein which are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety.

The seed layer can be characterized by a film thickness. Film thickness can be for example 500 nm or less or 250 nm or less or 100 nm or less with a preferably range being 50 nm to 500 nm or 50 nm to 250 nm or 100 nm to 250 nm.

Technical literature related to seed layers include Biberger et al. http www.novellus.com damascus tec tee0.5.asp Low Pressure Sputtering of Copper and Related Barriers for Seed Layers and Complete Planarization Healey Current Technical Trends Dual Damascene Low k Dielectrics Ryu et al Electromigration of Submicron Damascene Copper Interconnects 1988 Symposium on VLSI Technology Jun. 8 11 1998 Wong et al. Barrier Seed Layer Requirements for Copper Interconnects 1998 International Interconnect Technology Conference San Francisco Calif. Jun. 3 1998 Marasimhan et al. In Line Process Control of Advanced Thin Films at 65 nm and Beyond Yield Management Solutions Vol 6 2 Summer 2004 pages 1 16.

The seed layer can be uniformly applied or a selective patterning can be carried out wherein only certain areas are printed with seed layer and other areas are not printed. Masks on the substrates can be used which prevent deposition of the seed layer on top of the mask and favor deposition on the unmasked regions. Possible deposition or patterning techniques for the seed layer include spin coating printing inkjet offset contact and the like dip coating electrophoretic deposition spray coating slot coating drum coating various ways of patterning molecules to capture the nanoparticle seed and the like.

If desired the seed layer can be annealed with heat to increase density and improve subsequent enhancement steps. For example annealing can be carried out for at least 5 minutes at least 10 minutes or at least 20 minutes. Annealing temperature can be for example at least 100 C. at least 150 C. or at least 200 C. AFM can be carried out before and after annealing and surface area roughness measured. Surface area roughness before and after annealing can be for example 10 nm or less or 5 nm or less or 3 nm or less Annealing can result in a reduction of surface area roughness of 5 to 30 or 10 to 20 .

In many cases conformal coatings of the seed layer are desired and peptide binding and conditions are selected to achieve conformal coating. In many other cases a selective deposition is desired wherein seed layer is formed in some areas but not others.

In addition to patterning during deposition of the seed layer on an unpatterned substrate noted above the substrate can be patterned before deposition of the seed layer so that the seed layer does not form on all of the surface of the substrate. Masks on the substrate can be used to prevent deposition.

Whether for patterning the seed layer deposition on unpatterned substrates or for patterning the substrate before seed layer deposition methods for patterning lithography and direct write are known in the art as described in for example i Pique Ed. Direct Write Technologies for Rapid Prototyping Applications 2002 Academic Press including Chapter 18 and ii Madou Fundamentals of Microfabrication The Science of Miniaturization 2nd Ed. CRC Press 2002 pages 344 357 which are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety. Screen printing flexoprinting gravure printing and ink jet printing or patterning can be used.

Microcontact printing can be used if desired for patterning. Optical microscopy or scanning probe methods can be used to characterize the pattern. For example lines can be patterned having line width of 250 m or less 100 m or less 10 m or less one micron or less 500 nm or less or 100 nm or less. The distances between patterned features can be for example 10 m or less one micron or less or 500 nm or less. High resolution patterning is generally preferred.

To form a continuous metal film free of voids and good uniformity enhancement steps can be performed on the seed layers so that a metallic film is formed over the seed layer. These enhancement techniques include electro plating and electroless plating. Additional enhancement steps can be for example CVD or PVD. The films can be characterized by scanning probe methods including AFM and optical microscopy. The particle nature of the enhancement can be measured with use of average grain size and grain size standard deviations.

Metal deposition processes including electroless metal deposition electrodeposition and seed layers are described in Madou Fundamentals of Microfabrication The Science of Miniaturization 2nd Ed. CRC Press 2002 pages 344 357 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. In Particular copper deposition is described. Electroless deposition is described in for example U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 891 513 and 5 830 805 which are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety.

If desired the metal of the seed layer can be the same as the metal of the enhancement step or a different metal can be chosen. For example the seed layer can be copper but is not necessarily copper when copper is used in the enhancement step.

Film thickness of the enhanced film can be for example one micron or less 500 nm or less 400 nm or less 300 nm or less 200 nm or less or 100 nm or less. Exemplary ranges include 50 nm to 500 nm or 100 nm to 200 nm.

The process temperature of the enhancement step can be for example 100 C. or less 80 C. or less 60 C. or less or 40 C. or less. Enhancement growth can be carried out with each step of for example one minute to 300 minutes or two minutes to 100 minutes. Temperature and time can be adjusted as needed for a particular application.

Electroless plating ELP including copper ELP bath chemistries and methods are known. For example formaldehyde based ELP copper bath can be used. Another example is amine borane reducing agents and ligands based on neutral tetradentate nitrogen donors. See for example R. Jagannathan et al. IBM J. Res. Develop. Vol. 37 No. 2 March 1993 pages 117 123. An example of electroless gold deposition is Kato et al. J. Electrochem. Soc. 149 C 164 2002 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Another example of electroless deposition of thin metallic films is Pinto et al. Polymer Preprints 2003 44 2 138 139. Electroless plating of gold and gold alloys is described in Okinaka Chapter 15 Electroless Plating of Gold and Gold Alloys pages 401 420 from Electroless Plating Fundamentals and Applications Ed. Mallory Glenn 0. Hajdu Jun. B 1990 William Andrew each of the above are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety.

The final film including final copper films can be tested for resistivity. Resistivity can be for example 100 cm or less 50 cm or less 10 cm or less or 1 cm or less. Resistivity can be for example about 0.01 cm or more. In general resistivity should be similar to bulk copper which is 1.7 cm. Resistivity range can be for example about 1.5 to about 4 or about 1.7 to about 2.6 cm.

For all of the approaches the biological peptide may be removed by annealing after the seed layer step but before the electroless plating and or after the electroless plating step or not at all depending on application and functional need. Annealing can improve conductivity or adhesion. The temperature of annealing can be for example about 400 C. or less or about 300 C. or less or about 200 C. or less. The annealing time can be for example at least about 15 minutes or at least about 30 minutes or at least about 60 minutes.

Devices and apparatuses known in the art can be used. The compositions and methods described herein can be used in damascene processes. Additional applications in the electronics industry include optically active films CMOS transistors TFT OLED field effect transistors high power semiconductors DRAM LEDs including III V LEDs flat panel displays and photovoltaics. Conductive interconnects can be used in and to produce articles such as semiconductor chips memory devices semiconductor dies circuit modules and electronic systems.

The seed layer technology can be used in active matrix liquid crystal display AMLCD applications as described in for example U.S. Pat. No. 6 887 776.

Also incorporated by reference is a provisional application titled Biologically directed seed layers and thin films by Michael Spaid et al. provisional application 60 680 491 filed on date May 13 2005.

A method of forming the printed circuit according to principles of the present invention will now be described.

If a further electrical component having different properties is desired to be formed in the electrical circuit then the above steps are repeated. Namely an appropriate seed layer is formed which has an affinity to the material to be provided for the subsequent passive material.

As shown in a new seed layer for the resistor material will be printed at the selected locations on the substrate where it is desired to form resistors.

If the inductors are of the type being formed from the same conductive material the same printing layer used in the first seed material may be used to form the capacitors inductors and other components having a common conductive layer.

Selectively depositing other layers on top of preexisting layers can also be carried to form the stacked capacitors as shown and described with respect to . In addition to forming stacked capacitors the technique may also be used to form various passivation layers protective layers or other materials. For example a thin protective layer of nickel may be desired to be formed on top of a conductor in order to prevent the oxidation of the conductor. It is well known that aluminum and copper easily oxidize and in some instances such oxidation has to be prevented. Accordingly a seed layer having an affinity for the underlying conductor layer may be exposed to the surface of the substrate.

One benefit of the present invention is that the second seed layer may be directly formed in a self aligned manner on top of the previously patterned material without requirement of printing a new seed layer. The second layer seed is selected to be a bi functional material having sensitizers to the appropriate underlying material onto which it is to be deposited. A seed layer having an affinity to a conductor but not having an affinity to the substrate will be provided in a solution. The entire substrate is exposed to a fluid having the new seed layer such as by being dipped in the solution causing a newly deposited seed layer to be formed from the solution onto the previously deposited material. Since the precursor in the solution does not have an affinity for the substrate it may not attach at all or it can be easily washed off but it will adhere strongly to the target layer. This permits the seed layer to be self aligned directly on top of any previously patterned material without the requirement of printing or a mask.

A simple exposure of the substrate surface to the solution of the seed material followed by a wash step will cause the selective deposition of the bi functional second layer seed on the desired preexisting patterned layer due to the affinity of the seed with such patterned layer. The second layer is therefore automatically self aligned to the first layer without the need for additional printing or alignment. Such selective depositing may be continued as many times as desired in order to provide stacked or linear materials on the substrate that are self aligned.

The different seed layer is selected to also have an affinity to the next electrical component to be printed on the printed circuit board making it bifunctional. Thereafter the printed circuit board is placed in a solution having the precursor to the desired electrical component which will form a new layer on the circuit . illustrate the formation of the upper layers of the capacitor of the lower layer of the capacitors thus illustrating the use of the selective deposition of additional seed layers to form stacked capacitors according to the present invention.

Thus shown in the respective seed layers are selectively printed at the desired locations to form the electrical components which become the electrical circuit.

According to an alternative embodiment of the present invention the printing of the seed layers are carried out simultaneously for each of the circuits formed in . Namely each of the seed layers having a different affinity for a different electrical component are provided to the printer. Printers which are capable of simultaneously printing multiple inks at the same time are well known in the art. A fluid containing the seed layers is provided using the same type of system which would be used to print a multi ink pattern. The seed layers are therefore printed in a single pass each of exactly aligned with respect to each other. Since they are all printed in a single pass there is no need reposition and align the substrate for each of the different printing steps of the different seed layers. The printed substrate is then exposed to a fluid containing each of the respective electrical component materials which are to be adhered to the electrical circuit. The different electrical components may be in separate fluids and the substrate exposed to each of the fluids sequentially. Alternatively one or more of the electrical components may be combined into a single fluid. Since the electrical components have an affinity only to the seed layer they match with the substrate having the multiple seed layers thereon may be placed into a solution or exposed to a fluid having multiple precursors therein for each of the respective electrical components. The respective electrical material will have an affinity for and thus associate with the respective seed layers while not coupling to the substrate or the other seed layers for which it does not have an affinity. Namely in this embodiment the particular material will be selectively deposited only to the specific seed layer for which it has an affinity and will not be deposited to the other layers. Each of the other layers will have selectively deposited on them the material which has an affinity for them and the other material.

According to the embodiment of the ink is first printed in the desired pattern on the substrate . The substrate is then exposed to a solution or other fluid containing the biomolecule which has an affinity to the printed ink dot . The biomolecule is also selected to have an affinity at the top or other region thereof to the desired electrical component or the seed layer. After the biomolecule adheres to the printed ink such as by being dipped in a solution containing bi functional biomolecules as shown in step the substrate is dipped into a solution with the appropriate material to be coupled to the bi functional biomolecules as explained herein. The solution may contain a precursor to the electrical component to be formed such as a copper layer. Alternatively it may include a seed layer which has an affinity for the electrical component to be formed. The dipping in the various solutions continues until the desired electrical component is formed in the pattern that has been printed with ink.

Peptides were diluted 1 50 into Au nanoparticle solution to form a 100 M final concentration of peptide. The mixture was allowed to incubate at room temperature for 30 minutes. The solution was then concentrated by centrifugation at 14 000 r.p.m. and the supernatant was removed. The excess free peptide was then removed and buffers or water exchanged using NAP 5 size exclusion purification exchange columns as supplied.

On a Corning 1737 glass substrate 6 6 nm was adsorbed 5 mM Streptavidin in 100 mM Hepes pH 7.5 . The streptavidin was soaked with the glass chips in an Eppendorf tube for 1 hour with gentle rocking. Each glass substrate was washed twice with deionized water. A seed layer of nanoparticles was then added to the substrate through a streptavidin surface biotin peptide interaction. A 1 5 dilution of size exclusion gel filtered nanoparticles in water originally formed from 2 mM HAuCl gold nanoparticles formed using biotinylated peptide 2 peptide 3 was incubated for 30 minutes on the glass substrate to bind the Au nanoparticles forming the seed layer. The layer was rinsed with DI water. The seed layer on glass was then incubated for 5 minutes with an electroless plating ELP solution GoldEnhance forming a metal film. The film was washed with DI water then an optional second ELP step was performed by pipetting 50 gel of solution onto the 1737 glass chips. The film was again rinsed with DI water then imaged by AFM and optical microscopy.

Grain size analysis of these images reveal an increase in grain size after the second ELP step. These images combined show a biologically directed Au thin film.

As shown in a biological seed layer is printed having a biomolecule combined with an inorganic biomolecule. Placement of the peptide coated nanocrystals directly on the glass substrate was performed using a microcontact printing approach. A polydimethylsiloxane PDMS stamp was prepared by incubation with gold nanoparticles synthesized with biotinylated Peptide 2 1 5 dilution for 1 hour peptide 2 exhibits a high affinity toward glass . The stamp was then rinsed with water and dried with nitrogen. The Au nanoparticle laden stamp was then printed onto a glass microscope slide and imaged via optical microscopy. When the glass substrate was imaged with the printed seed layer the pattern conveyed by the stamp was immediately apparent as shown in .

The glass substrate with the printed substrate was further processed by one application 15 minutes of the electroless plating solution GoldEnhance . The gold film was clearly present and visible as shown on the far right image in . Optical microscopy images of the electroplated pattern images left show clear resolution of the printed pattern. One interesting point is that the resolution of the seed was preserved in the subsequent plating experiments at least to the degree to which the line widths could be measured. Further analysis of the patterned film by AFM revealed a gold film thickness of 130.5 nm.

A wide variety of seed layers may be used to form a copper film. For example in one embodiment palladium nanoparticles were synthesized in the presence of a biomolecule peptide. The peptide was thus coated with Pd nanoparticles that were printed on glass substrates which were coated with a Polylycine or with a Streptavidin. Two different copper containing solutions were available in which the substrate was placed. Various parameters were modified including the pH of the solution ranging from a pH of 13 to a pH of 9. Other parameters also varied during the formation of the copper material on the seed layer including the time the temperature the agitation the post deposition glass substrate cleaning and the selection of various peptides to bond with the Pd nanoparticle as part of the seed layer. Where no seed layer was present the copper film was not formed. In all those positions where a seed layer had been printed a copper layer was formed and grew on the Pd seed layer. It was found that time and temperature did play a role in the thickness adhesive properties and the grain structure of the copper film as formed.

A Cu film was then grown on the annealed seed layer using a copper electroless plating solution Transene for 2.5 4 minutes.

Film thickness and resistivity measurements were then measured by atomic force microscopy and a four point probe station. Thicknesses measured were 70 nm and 100 nm. Resistivity measurements taken were 14 cm and 10 cm. Since a four point probe station was used the resultant measurements may differ slightly due to edge effects.

During these experiments differing purification processes of the Au nanoparticles used were performed to see if the seed layer influenced the resultant Cu film that was ultimately grown. Copper films were still formed when using Au nanoparticles that had been purified by ultra filtration prior to introduction to the glass substrate.

Additionally this Cu film growth on a Au seed layer was tried on a TaN substrate as opposed to the Coming glass substrate as has been demonstrated so far. The TaN was 100 nm thick and was deposited as a film on SiOby sputtering at 50 C. Sputtering of TaN was done by reactive sputtering of Ta in nitrogen gas. The composition of the TaN film was approximately 75 Ta 25 N. The TaN was used as supplied and was incubated for 20 minutes with Au Peptide 2 nanoparticle solution in 0.1 PBS. The resultant seed layer was then annealed at 200 C. for 20 minutes. A Cu film was then grown on the seed layer using an electroless plating solution Transene for 3.5 minutes.

AFM analysis of the Cu film grown on TaN was performed. Section analysis of the film showed a thickness of 85 nm. Surface roughness analysis showed a roughness of 4 nm similar to films grown on glass.

All of the above U.S. patents U.S. patent application publications U.S. patent applications foreign patents foreign patent applications and non patent publications referred to in this specification and or listed in the Application Data Sheet are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

From the foregoing it will be appreciated that although specific embodiments of the invention have been described herein for purposes of illustration various modifications may be made without deviating from the spirit and scope of the invention. Accordingly the invention is not limited except as by the appended claims.

