---

title: Diagnosis of conditions associated with decreased arginine bioavailability
abstract: The invention features methods and compositions for diagnosis, including prognosis, of conditions associated with decreased arginine bioavailability (which can result from dysregulated arginine metabolism, e.g., due to increased arginase activity) by assessing in a sample from a subject the ratio of arginine to one or more, usually two or more, modulators of arginine bioavailability. In one embodiment, the ratio of arginine to (ornithine+citrulline) is assessed to aid in diagnosis.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07648840&OS=07648840&RS=07648840
owner: The Cleveland Clinic Foundation
number: 07648840
owner_city: Cleveland
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051201
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 632 572 filed Dec. 1 2004 which application is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

This invention was made with government support under federal grant nos. RR0127119 and HL 04386 01 awarded by the National Institutes of Health. The United States Government has certain rights in this invention.

The present invention is in the field of therapy and diagnosis of conditions associated with elevated arginase as described herein including cardiovascular disease asthma sickle cell disease and pulmonary hypertension.

L Arginine Arg is a conditionally essential amino acid naturally found in dietary protein. It is converted to nitric oxide NO Palmer et al. Nat Med 1987 327 524 526 Moncada et al. N Engl J Med 1993 329 2002 2012 Kam et al. Anaesthesia 1994 49 515 521 and bronchodilator Zoritch et al. Arch Dis Child 1995 72 259 262 Gaston et al. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994 149 538 551 a potent vasodilator by a family of enzymes known as nitric oxide synthase NOS . NO is an essential molecule that plays a role in a broad range of functions from vascular regulation neurotransmission Moncada et al. 1993 supra host defense and cytotoxicity Nathan et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2000 97 8841 8848 to physiologic control of airways Gaston et al. 1994 supra . Under conditions of low L arginine concentration nitric oxide synthase is uncoupled and reduces oxygen O to superoxide O instead of generating nitric oxide Xia et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1996 93 6770 6774 Dias Da Motta et al. Brit J Haematol 1996 93 333 340 . Nitric oxide reacts rapidly with superoxide to form reactive nitric oxide species RNOS that could lead to worsening inflammation oxidative stress and cellular damage Demiryurek et al. Pharm Toxicology 1998 82 113 117 .

Recently expression of inducible NO synthase the enzyme that catalyzes the production of NO from L Arg has been found in the epithelium of asthmatic patients but not in healthy non asthmatic patients Hamid et al. Lancet 1993 342 1510 1513 Nijkamp et al. Arch Int Pharmoocodyn 1995 329 81 96 . Asthmatics have exhaled air NO levels that are 3.5 times higher than non asthmatics which are correlated with decrease in FEVand are affected by therapy Kharitonov et al. Eur Respir J 1995 8 295 7 . Blocking of NO production by L Arg analogues results in an increase in allergen induced bronchoconstriction Ricciardolo et al. Lancet 1996 348 374 377 . A deficiency of NO is involved in airway hyperreactivity Meurs et al. Br J Pharmacol 1999 126 559 562 . Although asthma is clearly a multifactorial disease there is some evidence that NO may play an important role in disease pathogenesis Sanders et al. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 1999 21 147 149 . For reviews see e.g. Dweik Cleve Clin J Med. 2001 June 68 6 486 488 490 493 Gianetti et al. Eur J Clin Invest. 2002 August 32 8 628 35.

Arginase is an enzyme that hydrolyzes Arg to produce ornithine Orn and urea Boucher et al. Cell Mol Life Sci 1999 55 1015 1028 however in the presence of nitric oxide synthase NOS arginine is converted to nitric oxide NO and citrulline Cit Moncada et al. 1993 supra . The expression of arginase can be induced by a variety of cytokines involved in the inflammatory process Solomons et al. Pediatr 1972 49 933 particularly the Th2 cytokines. Mori et al. 2000. Relationship between arginase activity and nitric oxide production. In L. Ignarro editor. Academic Press San Diego. 199 208. .

Increased serum arginase activities have been reported in patients with sickle cell disease SCD at steady state Waugh et al. Nutritional Research 1999 19 501 518. as well as in an asthma animal model Meurs et al. Br J Pharmacol 2002 136 391 398 . Arginase activity is elevated in SCD patients with pulmonary disease Morris et al. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 168 63 69 Morris et al. 2002. Elevated serum arginase activity in patients with sickle cell disease and pulmonary hypertension. The 30th Anniversary of the National Sickle Cell Program Washington D.C. . Plasma arginase activity appears to be related to hemolysis associated with several markers of hemolytic severity including plasma cell free hemoglobin 0.56 p

Arginase controls the metabolism of arginine into ornithine which in turn gives rise to proline and polyamines Mori et al. 2000 supra Morris Annu Rev Nutr 2002 22 87 105 Morris 2000. Regulation of arginine availability and its impact on NO synthesis. Nitric Oxide. Biology and Pathobiology. Academic Press San Diego. 187 197 Mori et al. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000 275 715 719 . These downstream products of arginase activity may play a significant role in the pathogenesis of asthma pulmonary hypertension and other inflammatory conditions since proline is involved in collagen formation Kershenobich et al. J Clin Invest 1970 49 2246 2249 Albina et al. J Surg Res 1993 55 97 102 and lung fibrosis Endo et al. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2003 285 L313 L321 processes that occur in airway wall thickening and airway remodeling and vascular remodeling Tanaka et al. Inflamm Res 2001 50 616 624 Elias et al. J Clin Invest 1999 104 1001 1006 Elias et al. J Clin Invest 2003 111 291 297 Busse et al. N Engl J Med 2001 344 350 362 .

Both asthmatic patients Lopez da Mata et al. 1998. How does nitrates in blood correlated to exhaled levels in asthma European Respiratory Conference Geneva Switzerland. and SCD patients also have elevated NOlevels at baseline Rees et al. Br J Haematol 1995 91 834 7 . Serum L Arg and NOlevels fall during the vaso occlusive complications of SCD Morris et al. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 2000 22 515 520 with lowest levels found during acute chest syndrome pneumonia . Most SCD patients with pulmonary disease have a component of reactive airways that respond to bronchodilators even though they often do not demonstrate the classical wheezing on physical exam that is usually associated with asthma. Asthma in SCD is often unrecognized and undertreated and occurs in 30 60 of patients Minter et al. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001 164 2016 2019 .

Diagnosis and therapies based upon a more insightful understanding of the underlying mechanisms of these diseases are needed so as to provide a more rational approach to therapy. The present invention addresses these needs.

WO 2004 073623 Morris et al. Ambulatory Pediatrics Association Program and Abstracts May 1999 A197 Morris et al. Journal of Pediatric Hematology Oncology. 2000. 22 515 520 Morris et al. Elevated Serum Arginase Activity in Patients with Sickle Cell Disease and Pulmonary Hypertension . The 30th Anniversary of the National Sickle Cell Program Washington D.C. September 2002 Morris et al. Blood 2002. 100 452a abstr 1755 suppl 1 .

Morris et al. Elevated arginase activity and limited arginine bioavailability may play a role in the pathogenesis of asthma. Society of Pediatric Research May 2003 Morris et al. Blood 2003 102 763a abstr2818 Zhang et al. Annual Proteomic Society Meeting San Francisco October 2003.

Morris et al. Elevated arginase activity and limited arginine bioavailability A common feature of asthma and sickle cell disease. The 27th Annual Meeting of the National Sickle Cell Program Los Angeles April 2004 Morris et al. Erythrocyte arginase release during hemolysis contributes to endothelial dysfunction and pulmonary hypertension. The 27th Annual Meeting of the National Sickle Cell Program Los Angeles April 2004 Morris et al. Elevated arginase activity limits arginine and nitric oxide bioavailability A common feature of asthma and sickle cell disease. The 3rd International Conference on the Biology Chemistry and Therapeutic Applications of Nitric Oxide. Nara Japan May 2004 Morris et al. Decreased L Arginine bioavailability and elevated arginase activity in sickle cell disease A novel pathway towards pulmonary hypertension The 3rd International Conference on the Biology Chemistry and Therapeutic Applications of Nitric Oxide. Nara Japan May 2004 Morris et al. Elevated arginase activity limits arginine and nitric oxide bioavailability A common feature of asthma and sickle cell disease. Bronchitis VII On the crossroads of asthma and COPD. Gronigen The Netherlands August 2004 Morris et al. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Jul. 15 170 2 148 53. Epub 2004 Apr. 07.

Inselman et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 1986 May June 2 3 163 9 Jorens et al. Eur Respir J. 1993 February 6 2 258 66 Vercelli J Clin Invest. 2003 June 111 12 1815 7 and Zimmermann et al. J Clin Invest. 2003 June 111 12 1863 74 relate to microarray analysis of the expression profiles of lung tissue in two murine models of asthma revealed high levels of arginase I and arginase II activity in association with IL 4 and IL 13 overexpression Schnog et al. Ann Hematol. 2004 June 83 6 371 5. Epub 2004 Mar. 31. Haas et al Pediatr Int 2002 44 670 4.

Zhang et al. Hypertension. 2004 Oct. 18 Epub ahead of print Xu et al. FASEB J. 2004 November 18 14 1746 8. Epub 2004 Sep. 13 Rodriguez et al. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2004 January 26 1 1 12.

Morris et al. British Journal of Haematology. 2000. 111 498 500 .Lopez et al. British Journal of Haematology. 2003. 120 532 534 Morris et al. Blood 1998. 92 160a abstr 644 suppl 1 Morris et al. Blood 1998. 92 695a Morris et al. Society for Pediatric Research 1999. 45 A876 Morris et al. Blood 1999. 94 200a abstr 878 suppl 1 .

Morris et al. The 24Annual Meeting of the National Sickle Cell Disease Program Philadelphia Pa. 2000 Morris et al. Nitric Oxide as a Therapeutic Agent in Sickle Cell Disease and Other Vascular Diseases. NIH Bethesda Md. September 2000 Morris et al. Blood 2000. 96 485a abstr 2088 suppl 1 Morris et al. Arginine Therapy A New Treatment for Pulmonary Hypertension in Sickle Cell Disease Society of Pediatric Research Annual Meeting Baltimore Md. Apr. 26 30 2001 Morris et al. Blood 2001 98 785a abstr 3262 suppl 1 Morris et al. Blood 2001 98 487a abstr 2033 suppl 1 Morris et al. Nitric Oxide 2002 6 435 Morris et al. Nitric Oxide 2002 6 435 Lopez et al. Academic Emergency Medicine. 2002 9 5 409 Morris et al. Arginine Therapy in Sickle Cell Disease A New Treatment for Pulmonary Hypertension The 30Anniversary of the National Sickle Cell Program Washington D.C. September 2002 Lopez et al. Is 1 arginine the substrate for nitric oxide altered in adult vasoocclusive sickle cell crisis The 30Anniversary of the National Sickle Cell Program Washington D.C. September 2002 Styles et al. Low Dose Oral Arginine Upregulates Nitric Oxide Production in Patients with Acute Chest Syndrome. The 30Anniversary of the National Sickle Cell Program Washington D.C. September 2002 Morris et al. Blood 2002. 100 452a abstr 1754 suppl 1 Lopez et al. Blood 2002 100 452a abstr 1752 suppl 1 Styles et al. Blood 2002 100 452a abstr 1750 suppl 1 Morris et al. J Invest Med 2003 51 S386 abstr 169 suppl 2 Morris et al. Arginine Therapy in Sickle Cell Disease A New Treatment for Pulmonary Hypertension Society for Pediatric Research May 2003.

Morris et al. Arginine therapy a new treatment for pulmonary hypertension in sickle cell disease Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003 Jul 1 168 1 63 9. Epub 2003 Mar. 05 Morris et al. Hydroxyurea and Arginine Therapy Impact on Nitric Oxide Production in Sickle Cell Disease J. Pediatric Hematology Oncology 2003 Aug. 25 629 34.

Closs et al. Membrane transport of L arginine and cationic amino acid analogs. In Ignarro L J ed. San Diego Academic Press 2000 225 241 Vallance et al. 2001 100 159 60 Cooke et al. Nitric oxide and vascular disease. In Ignarro L J ed. New York Academic Press 2000 759 783. Stuhlinger et al. 2003 108 933 38 Boger et al. 2000 26 539 45 Ogawa et al. 1989 264 10205 9 Stuhlinger et al. 2001 104 2569 75 Graham et al. 1997 277 1775 81 Stuhlinger et al. 2001 104 2569 75 de Jonge et al. 2001 131 2732 40 Graham et al. 1997 277 1775 81 Lowenthal et al. 2000 19 608 12 Morris 1998 336 1 17 Featherston et al. 1973 224 127 9.

The invention features methods and compositions for diagnosis including prognosis of conditions associated with decreased arginine bioavailability which can result from dysregulated arginine metabolism e.g. due to increased arginase activity by assessing in a sample from a subject the ratio of arginine to one or more usually two or more modulators of arginine bioavailability. In one embodiment the ratio of arginine to ornithine citrulline is assessed to aid in diagnosis.

As used herein modulators of arginine bioavailability are compounds that affect metabolism of arginine. Such modulators include substrates or products of an arginine metabolism pathway e.g. nitric oxide synthase NOS arginase and the like as well as compounds that promote or inhibit activity of an amino acid transporter or enzyme involved in an arginine metabolism pathway e.g. NOS arginase and the like see for review of arginine pathway involving NOS and arginase . Exemplary modulators include amino acids and metabolites of amino acids that are metabolites of arginine or are metabolized to arginine metabolites from enzymes that directly produce or utilize arginine including but not limited to NOS and arginase or metabolites that result from metabolism of citrulline to arginine in the kidney which is reduced under condition of renal insufficiency or dysfunction injury and amino acid metabolites that impact transport of arginine or represent arginine analogues methylated arginines thereby impacting arginine bioavailability. The calculation of the final ratio of arginine to such modulators are reflective of global arginine bioavailability or local arginine bioavailability particularly with respect to a certain organ system location or cell type.

The invention is advantageous in that patients can be more accurately diagnosed as to the nature of the disease whether the disease is amenable to treatment using arginine based or arginase inhibitor based therapy the severity of the disease and the responsiveness of the patient to therapy.

The invention also provides the advantage that a simple relatively inexpensive assay provides a sensitive method of diagnosis of disease as well as a measure of disease severity.

These and other advantages will be apparent to the ordinarily skilled artisan upon reviewing the present specification.

 Arginine or Arg or L Arg as used herein refers to naturally occurring or synthetically produced L arginine.

 Arginase as used herein refers to an enzyme that mediates conversion of L Arg into ornithine and urea and is meant to encompass any or all relevant arginase types including for example arginase type I arginase type II and the like.

 Arginine metabolite as used herein is generally meant to refer to a product of action of nitric oxide synthase NOS or arginase on arginine as well as metabolites from arginine glycine amidinotransferase and arginine decarboxylase activity on arginine. Arginine metabolite can include immediate metabolites of NOS arginase or other arginine catabolizing enzymes action upon arginine e.g. citrulline ornithine creatine and the like or downstream products of such metabolites e.g. proline polyamines and the like.

 Arginine bioavailability or bioavailable arginine refers to arginine that is available for normal physiologic metabolism catabolism. Bioavailability of arginine can be adversely impacted decreased by many factors including but not limited to low plasma concentration abnormal arginine transporter function competitive inhibition the presence of arginine analogues including but not limited to methlyated arginine and other NOS inhibitors poor nutrition function of de novo synthesis of arginine i.e. aberrations in the intestinal renal axis such as renal dysfunction poor nutrition intestinal malabsorption of glutamate small bowel dysfunction or catabolic states such as sepsis trauma burn injury post operative surgery and the like .

A condition of decreased arginine bioavailability refers generally to a condition or disease in which arginine bioavailability is decreased relative to an unaffected individual. In the context of the present invention patients having such conditions have an Arg modulator s ratio value that is less than 75 of a normal Arg modulator s ratio value.

A modulator of arginine bioavailability as used herein refers to a compound that facilitates a decrease in arginine bioavailability. Such modulators include substrates or products of an arginine metabolism or catabolism pathway e.g. nitric oxide synthase NOS arginase and the like as well as compounds that promote or inhibit activity of an amino acid transporter or enzyme involved in an arginine metabolism pathway e.g . NOS arginase and the like .

 Pulmonary hypertension or PH or PAH as used herein is generally meant to refer to a blood vessel disorder of the lung in which the pressure in the pulmonary artery rises above normal levels. Symptoms of pulmonary hypertension include shortness of breath with minimal exertion fatigue chest pain dizzy spells and fainting. When pulmonary hypertension occurs in the absence of a known cause it is referred to as primary pulmonary hypertension PPH . Secondary pulmonary hypertension indicates the cause is known. A common cause of secondary pulmonary hypertension are the breathing disorders emphysema and bronchitis. Other less frequent causes are the inflammatory or collagen vascular diseases such as scleroderma CREST syndrome or systemic lupus erythematosus SLE . Congenital heart diseases that cause shunting of extra blood through the lungs like ventricular and atrial septal defects chronic pulmonary thromboembolism old blood clots in the pulmonary artery HIV infection liver disease and diet drugs like fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine are also causes of pulmonary hypertension. Prior to the present invention pulmonary hypertension is frequently misdiagnosed and has often progressed to late stage by the time it is accurately diagnosed.

As used herein the term diagnosis can encompass determining the nature of disease in a subject as well as determining the severity and probable outcome of disease or episode of disease and or prospect of recovery prognosis . Diagnosis can also encompass diagnosis in the context of rational therapy in which the diagnosis guides therapy including initial selection of therapy modification of therapy e.g. adjustment of dose and or dosage regimen and the like.

As used herein the terms treatment treating and the like refer to obtaining a desired pharmacologic and or physiologic effect. The effect may be prophylactic in terms of completely or partially preventing a disease or symptom thereof and or may be therapeutic in terms of a partial or complete cure for a disease and or adverse effect attributable to the disease. Treatment as used herein covers any treatment of a disease in a mammal particularly in a human and can include a preventing the disease or a symptom of a disease from occurring in a subject which may be predisposed to the disease but has not yet been diagnosed as having it e.g. including diseases that may be associated with or caused by a primary disease b inhibiting the disease or condition i.e. arresting its development and c relieving the disease i.e. causing regression of the disease.

The terms individual host subject and patient are used interchangeably herein and generally refer to a mammal including but not limited to primates including simians and humans equines e.g. horses canines e.g. dogs felines various domesticated livestock e.g. ungulates such as swine pigs goats sheep and the like as well as domesticated pets and animals maintained in zoos. Treatment of humans is of particular interest.

Before the present invention is further described it is to be understood that this invention is not limited to particular embodiments described as such may of course vary. It is also to be understood that the terminology used herein is for the purpose of describing particular embodiments only and is not intended to be limiting since the scope of the present invention will be limited only by the appended claims.

Where a range of values is provided it is understood that each intervening value to the tenth of the unit of the lower limit unless the context clearly dictates otherwise between the upper and lower limit of that range and any other stated or intervening value in that stated range is encompassed within the invention. The upper and lower limits of these smaller ranges may independently be included in the smaller ranges and are also encompassed within the invention subject to any specifically excluded limit in the stated range. Where the stated range includes one or both of the limits ranges excluding either or both of those included limits are also included in the invention.

Unless defined otherwise all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which this invention belongs. Although any methods and materials similar or equivalent to those described herein can also be used in the practice or testing of the present invention the preferred methods and materials are now described. All publications mentioned herein are incorporated herein by reference to disclose and describe the methods and or materials in connection with which the publications are cited.

It must be noted that as used herein and in the appended claims the singular forms a and and the include plural referents unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. Thus for example reference to a sample includes a plurality of such samples and reference to the arginase includes reference to one or more arginase polypeptides and equivalents thereof known to those skilled in the art and so forth.

The publications discussed herein are provided solely for their disclosure prior to the filing date of the present application. Nothing herein is to be construed as an admission that the present invention is not entitled to antedate such publication by virtue of prior invention. Further the dates of publication provided may be different from the actual publication dates which may need to be independently confirmed.

The present invention is based on the discovery that arginine bioavailability which is impacted by for example arginase activity can be assessed by calculating the ratio of arginine to one or more usually two or more compounds that effect a decrease in arginine bioavailability such as amino acids and or amino acid metabolites produced as a result of arginine metabolism catabolism and or transport e.g. products of NOS activity arginase activity arginine glycine amidinotransferase and arginine decarboxylase as well as downstream by products of such enzymes e.g. citrulline ornithine creatine and the like .

This discovery led to the insight that low arginine bioavailability plays a role in a variety of different conditions and thus the presence of compounds that contribute or further contribute to decreased arginine bioavailability can exacerbate such conditions. Such compounds that serve to effect a decrease in arginine bioavailability are referred to herein as modulators of arginine bioavailability or modulators for convenience . Such modulators include substrates or products of an arginine metabolism pathway e.g. nitric oxide synthase NOS arginase and the like as well as compounds that promote or inhibit activity of an amino acid transporter or enzyme involved in an arginine metabolism pathway e.g . NOS arginase and the like .

Exemplary modulators include amino acids and metabolites of amino acids that are metabolites of arginine or are metabolized to arginine metabolites from enzymes that directly produce or utilize arginine including but not limited to NOS and arginase or metabolites that result from metabolism of citrulline to arginine in the kidney which is reduced under condition of renal insufficiency or dysfunction injury and amino acid metabolites that impact transport of arginine or represent arginine analogues methylated arginines thereby impacting arginine bioavailability.

Specific exemplary modulators include competitive inhibitors of arginine transport and or NOS isozymes e.g. methylarginines including symmetric and asymmetric dimethylarginine ADMA and N monomethyl L arginine NMMA metabolites of methylarginines inhibitors of enzymes that metabolize methylarginines e.g. inhibitors of the enzyme dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase DDAH such as homocysteine creatine downstream by products of arginase activity e.g. proline and polyamines and the like. The calculation of the final ratio of arginine to such a modulator s is reflective of global arginine bioavailability or local arginine bioavailability particularly with respect to a certain organ system location or cell type.

Although the underlying mechanisms that lead to a decrease in Arg bioavailability can differ the present invention can be used to assess diagnosis of the condition. The only requirement is that Arg bioavailability be adversely impacted.

For example arginase plays a role in modifying L Arg bioavailability in SCD asthma pulmonary hypertension and other pathologic conditions of upregulated arginase activity. Increased arginase activity limits arginine bioavailability through its conversion of L Arg to ornithine and urea thereby competing with NOS for available L Arg substrate and regulating nitric oxide NO production. Ornithine itself also decreases L Arg bioavailability since both L Arg and ornithine compete for the same transport system for cellular uptake. Downstream by products of arginase activity e.g. proline and polyamines have been implicated in lung and cardiovascular pathology by way of airway remodeling fibrosis and vascular smooth muscle proliferation. In addition to decreasing NO bioavailability elevated arginase activity also provides substrate for a pathway which produces metabolites that likely play a role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease lung fibrosis asthma pulmonary hypertension and other inflammatory conditions.

Without being held to theory the present invention is further based on the hypothesis that arginase plays a role in modifying L Arg bioavailability in pathologic conditions that involve upregulation of arginase levels activity. Increased arginase activity limits arginine bioavailability through its conversion of L Arg to ornithine and urea thereby competing with nitric oxide synthase NOS for available L Arg substrate and interfering with NO production . L Arg produces nitric oxide NO and citrulline cit in the presence of the nitric oxide synthase enzyme NOS . Nitric oxide release causes vasodilation through the activation of soluble guanylate cyclase GTP to the intracellular messenger cyclic GMP cGMP . Arginase converts L arginine to ornithine and urea. Both L arginine and ornithine use the same Cationic Amino Acid Transporter molecule CAT for cellular uptake. Ornithine can competitively inhibit L arginine transport into the endothelial cell thereby limiting substrate availability for nitric oxide synthase and regulating nitric oxide production. NG hydroxyl L arginine is the intermediate product of the L arginine nitric oxide pathway and is a potent inhibitor of arginase activity.

Accumulation of both intracellular and extracellular NG hydroxyl L arginine favors the continued conversion of L arginine to nitric oxide by maintaining adequate arginine availability. The downstream by products of arginase activity i.e. proline and polyamines thus can play a role in disease pathogenesis as they are involved in vascular smooth muscle proliferation as well as airway remodeling . These metabolites may accumulate in serum or plasma as seen in sickle cell patients with pulmonary hypertension. This is a novel model for the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension.

Similarly proline is involved in collagen formation and lung fibrosis processes that occur in airway wall thickening and airway remodeling. Proline plays an important function in tissue remodeling and normal wound healing however overproduction can lead to pathologic states. Elevated arginase activity can lead to such conditions.

Since both arginase and NOS use Arg as a common substrate arginase plays a role in regulating nitric oxide NO synthesis by modulating L Arg availability. For example in an environment of low L arginine concentration nitric oxide synthase is uncoupled and reduces oxygen O to superoxide O instead of generating nitric oxide. Nitric oxide reacts rapidly with superoxide to form reactive nitric oxide species RNOS that could lead to oxidative stress and cellular damage. Pathological conditions of increased arginase activity thus have a negative impact on nitric oxide bioavailability. Decreased arginine bioavailability leads to hyperreactive airways in both SCD and asthma since it plays a role in bronchodilation. Thus decreased arginine bioavailability and elevated arginase activity contributes to the disease process. Furthermore decreased arginine bioavailability leads to pulmonary hypertension in the susceptible patient.

In another setting hyperhomocysteinemia is a risk factor for vascular disease and thrombosis and leads to elevated plasma ADMA levels and decreased NO production in the cardiovascular system through competitive Arg inhibition.

Another major catabolic Arg pathway results in the synthesis of creatine a process that regulates methylation reactions such as the synthesis of methionine from homocysteine. Limited Arg bioavailability can therefore also affect creatine homeostasis in addition to its impact on NO production potentially contributing to hyperhomocysteinemia and an accumulation of circulating methylated arginines. The role of methylated arginines homocysteine creatine or other metabolites that impact global arginine bioavailability are thus also contemplated as modulators of arginine bioavailability.

The data presented herein indicate that assessment of the ratio of arginine to one or more modulators of arginine bioavailability correlates with arginine bioavailability which in turn is a marker for disease including disease severity. For example the ratio of arginine ornithine citrulline correlates with arginine bioavailability and is a marker of severity of disease. This observation indicates that assessment of the ratio of a level of arginine to a level of such a modulator e.g. an arginine metabolite e.g. ornithine citrulline etc. correlates with arginine bioavailability and thus serves as a diagnostic and marker of disease severity.

In general the invention involves diagnosis of a condition having decreased arginine bioavailability which can result from dysregulated arginine metabolism e.g. due to elevated arginase and or NOS activity . Diagnosis is accomplished by assessing the ratio of a level arginine in a sample from the patient to a level s of one or more modulators of arginine bioavailability modulator usually two or more or three or more such modulators. In most embodiments the modulator is generally an amino acid or amino acid metabolite that accumulates in a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. ornithine proline methylated arginines polyamines citrulline and the like . Conditions of elevated arginase activity are of particular interest for diagnosis according to the invention. In one embodiment the ratio is that of arginine ornithine in a sample. In another embodiment the ratio is that of arginine to citrulline in a sample. In one embodiment of particular interest the ratio is that of arginine ornithine citrulline in sample. In another embodiment of particular interest the ratio is that of arginine ornithine citrulline ADMA .

Any subject having a condition associated with decreased nitric oxide bioavailability such as that which results from decreased arginine bioavailability elevated arginase e.g. arginase activity and or arginase levels or decreased NO bioavailability is amenable to diagnosis according to the invention. Exemplary conditions associated with decreased nitric oxide bioavailability and or elevated arginase levels relative to non disease individuals include but are not necessarily limited to asthma sickle cell disease SCD pulmonary hypertension neonatal pulmonary hypertension and or persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn primary hypertension secondary hypertension hypertension associated with SCD pneumonia chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COPD systemic hypertension pregnancy related hypertension pre eclampsia eclampsia cardiovascular conditions arteriosclerosis hypercholesterolemia diabetes trauma injury sepsis cystic fibrosis erectile dysfunction post operative surgery bypass surgery and hemolytic disorders where the source of elevated arginase activity is via release from the red blood cell e.g. thalassemia .

Subjects having such an elevated arginase activity condition may have or be suspected of having the condition. In addition arginase activity in a subject can also be assessed according to the methods of the invention in order to follow therapy e.g. to provide information to guide the clinician regarding adjustment of therapy e.g. to change the drug administered the dose and or the dosage regimen . Subjects may be undergoing therapy have previously received therapy or may not have been previously treated treatment naive .

By elevated arginase activity levels is meant that the subject exhibits a level of arginase activity that is about 20 greater usually more than about 20 greater than arginase activity of an average normal subject. Arginase activity levels can be assessed by direct detection of arginase activity in a sample or by assessing a ratio of arginine to ornithine amino acids or arginine to ADMA or a combination or Arg Orn ADMA in a sample.

Assessment of Arginase Levels by Assessing Amino Acid Ratios in a Patient Sample and Diagnosis Based on Arginine to Arginine Metabolite Ratio

As noted above the present invention is based on the discovery that the ratio of a level of arginine to a level of one or more usually two or more in some embodiments three or more modulators of arginine bioavailability e.g. arginine metabolites and other downstream products such as those generated in the arginase NOS pathway e.g. ornithine citrulline and the like is diagnostic for a condition having decreased arginine bioavailability relative to an unaffected individual. Such ratios are generally referred to herein as the ratio of arginine bioavailability or the Arg modulator s ratio.

In one embodiment the invention involves calculating an Arg modulator s ratio represented by the formula Arg A B where Arg is a level of arginine in a sample A is a level of a first modulator of arginine bioavailability and B is a level of a second modulator of arginine bioavailability. A is a different modulator of arginine bioavailability from B.

As discussed above a modulator of arginine bioavailability or modulator for convenience is meant to refer to a substrate or product of an arginine metabolic or catabolic pathway e.g. a substrate or product of nitric oxide synthase NOS arginase and the like as well as compounds that promote or inhibit activity of an amino acid transporter or enzyme involved in an arginine metabolism or catabolism pathway e.g. NOS arginase and the like . In general accumulation of a modulator of arginine bioavailability is associated with a decrease in bioavailable arginine.

Exemplary modulators of arginine bioavailability include amino acids and metabolites of amino acids that are metabolites of arginine or are metabolized to arginine metabolites from enzymes that directly produce or utilize arginine including but not limited to NOS and arginase or metabolites that result from metabolism of citrulline to arginine in the kidney which is reduced under condition of renal insufficiency or dysfunction injury and amino acid metabolites that impact transport of arginine or represent arginine analogues methylated arginines thereby impacting arginine bioavailability.

Specific exemplary modulators include compounds that are competitive inhibitors with arginine for arginine transport e.g. by arginine glycine amidinotransferase and or NOS isozymes e.g. methylarginines including symmetric and asymmetric dimethylarginine ADMA and N monomethyl L arginine NMMA metabolites of methylarginines inhibitors of enzymes that metabolize methylarginines e.g. inhibitors of the enzyme dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase DDAH such as homocysteine creatine downstream by products of arginase activity e.g. proline and polyamines and the like.

Where the modulator of arginine bioavailability is an arginine metabolite the modulator is generally a product of action either directly or downstream of nitric oxide synthase NOS arginase and or arginine decarboxylase activity on arginine. Arginine metabolite can include immediate metabolites of NOS arginase and or arginine decarboxylase action upon arginine e.g. citrulline ornithine and the like or downstream products of such metabolites e.g. proline polyamines .

In one embodiment the modulator of arginine bioavailability is an arginine analogue e.g. methylated arginines ADMA and the like or an inhibitor of arginine cellular transport e.g. ornithine lysine and the like . In one embodiment the modulator of arginine bioavailability is a compound other than lysine.

In one embodiment of particular interest the first and second modulators of arginine bioavailability are arginine metabolites. In a related embodiment the first arginine metabolite is ornithine and the second arginine metabolite is citrulline. In another embodiment the ratio is arginine ornithine citrulline . In a further embodiment the ratio is Arg ADMA Citrulline . In yet another embodiment the ratio is Arg ADMA Ornithine .

In another embodiment the invention involves calculating a Arg modulator s ratio as represented by the formula Arg A B C where Arg is a level of arginine in a sample A is a level of a first modulator of arginine bioavailability B is a level of a second modulator of arginine bioavailability and C is a level of a third modulator of arginine bioavailability. A B and C are different compounds. In one embodiment each of the first second and third modulators of arginine bioavailability are arginine metabolites. In another embodiment the first and second modulators of arginine bioavailability are arginine metabolites and the third modulator of arginine bioavailability is a competitive inhibitor of arginine transport e.g. ADMA . In a related embodiment of particular interest A is ornithine B is ADMA and C is citrulline i.e. the ratio is Arg orn ADMA citrulline .

In another embodiment compounds that positively affect arginine bioavailability are taken into account. In this embodiment the ratio is calculated according to the formula Arg D A B C where Arg is a level of arginine in a sample D is a level of a compound that enhances arginine bioavailability such as creatine A is a level of a first modulator of arginine bioavailability B is a level of a second modulator of arginine bioavailability and optionally C is a level of a third modulator of arginine bioavailability. A B and C are different compounds. In one embodiment the ratio is Arg creatine orn ADMA citrulline .

Reference to level in the discussion of Arg modulator s ratio is meant to refer to a quantitative or qualitative measure usually a quantitative measure of an amount of the compound in a biological sample. Levels can be described in terms of any unit of measure so long as the values used for the level of each factor in the ratio is internally consistent e.g. each value is provided in the ratio in the same unit of measure .

The levels of arginine and arginine bioavailability modulator s is measured using any method including standard methods known in the art. Immunological assays will in some embodiments be used where suitable immunological assays include enzyme linked immunosorbent assay ELISA radioimmunoassay RIA and the like. Immunological assays include sandwich type assays competitive assays etc. Immunological assays generally involve use of an antibody specific for arginine or an arginine bioavailability modulator where the antibody is detectably labeled either directly or indirectly. Suitable direct labels include but are not limited to radioactive labels e.g. I etc. enzyme labels where the enzyme generates a product that is detectable by a colorimetric or fluorimetric assay e.g. galactosidase luciferase horse radish peroxidase alkaline phosphatase fluorescent proteins e.g. a green fluorescent protein and the like. Indirect labels include secondary antibodies that are detectably labeled a member of a specific binding pair e.g. biotin avidin etc. that is detectably labeled and the like. High performance liquid chromatography HPLC including reverse phase HPLC will in some embodiments be used to determine a level of arginine and or an arginine bioavailability modulator. Other suitable methods include the use of mass spectrometry spectrophotometric methods tandem mass spectrometry methods etc. Suitable methods for determining a level of arginine or an arginine bioavailability modulator have been reported in the literature. See e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 6 720 188 Teerlink et al. 2002 303 131 137 Dobashi et al. 2002 127 54 59 Pi et al. 2000 742 199 203 Chen et al. 1997 692 467 471 Anderstam et al. 1997 8 1487 1442 Pettersson et al. 1997 692 257 262 Sultana et al. 2001 755 321 Chace et al. 2003 49 1797 1817 and Trapp et al. 2004 27 1483 1490.

This aspect of the invention is based on the discovery that arginine levels in normal control patients were generally greater than levels of arginine metabolites e.g. citrulline ornithine and the like such that the Arg A B ratio as defined above often approached 1 1. However in subjects affected by a condition having elevated arginase activity e.g. asthma pulmonary hypertension sickle cell disease SCD or thalassemia the Arg A B ratio e.g. the arginine ornithine citrulline ratio was significantly decreased 

Without being held to theory as the concentration of modulators of arginine bioavailability increase such as amino acids in the arginine cycle and thus the Arg modulator s ratio e.g. the Arg A B ratio e.g. Arg ornithine citrulline ratio decreases arginine bioavailability becomes limited even under conditions of apparently normal arginine concentration.

For example pathologically elevated arginase activity reduces the Arg modulator s ratio of Arg ornithine citrulline by utilizing arginine and decreasing that which is available to nitric oxide synthase to make nitric oxide while hydrolyzing arginine to ornithine the substrate for proline and polyamine production metabolites likely involved in disease pathogenesis. In another example in the context of conditions of renal dysfunction the de novo Arg synthesis in the kidney is decreased with an accumulation of citrulline. The inventors have found that rising citrulline levels significantly correlate to rising creatinine levels r 0.54 p

A low Arg modulator s ratio in a biological sample from a subject relative to a value of the ratio in a normal subject is a reflection of decreased arginine bioavailability which can be due to for example increased arginase activity. For example where the Arg modulator s ratio is Arg A B once this ratio nears about 0.65 or is less than 0.65 arginine availability for nitric oxide production has reached a competitive disadvantage. An Arg A B ratio of less than about 0.8 usually less than about 0.75 more usually less than about 0.70 still more usually less than about 0.65 is considered low and indicative of a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. elevated arginase activity .

For example an arginine ornithine citrulline ratio that nears about 0.65 or is less than 0.65 indicates arginine availability for nitric oxide production has reached a competitive disadvantage. For example an arginine ornithine citrulline ratio of less than about 0.70 is considered low and indicative of a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. due to elevated arginase activity . Patients with such a finding regardless of the disease pathology can be treated with an appropriate therapy e.g. L Arg monotherapy arginase inhibitor monotherapy arginine arginase inhibitor combination therapy arginine magnesium combination therapy or a conventional appropriate therapy .

A patient having an Arg A B ratio of less than about 0.8 or less than about 0.75 but greater than for example about 0.7 is generally diagnosed as having a condition in which arginine availability for nitric oxide production is at a competitive disadvantage and thus the patient is at risk of a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. dysregulated arginine metabolism e.g. elevated arginase activity . For example a patient having an arginine ornithine citrulline ratio of less than about 0.80 but greater than about 0.70 is diagnosed as being at risk of a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. due to elevated arginase activity .

In general a patient having an Arg A B ratio less than or equal to about 0.75 but greater than about for example 0.70 is diagnosed as having a borderline Arg A B ratio and is at risk of developing a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. due to elevated arginase activity . A patient having an Arg A B ratio of about or less than about 0.70 0.65 0.60 0.55 0.50 or lower is diagnosed as having or at risk for developing a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. due to elevated arginase activity .

In one embodiment the Arg A B ratio is an arginine ornithine citrulline ratio. An arginine ornithine citrulline ratio less than or equal to about 0.75 but greater than about for example 0.70 is diagnosed as having a borderline arginine ornithine citrulline ratio and is at risk of developing a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. due to elevated arginase activity . A patient having an arginine ornithine citrulline ratio of about or less than about 0.70 or lower is diagnosed as having or at risk for developing a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. due to elevated arginase activity .

In some embodiments the ratio of arginine to a single modulator e.g. one of ornithine citrulline etc. is assessed as an indicator of arginase activity level. A patient having an arginine single modulator e.g. arginine ornithine arginine citrulline etc. ratio of less than about 1.2 or less than about 1.1 is diagnosed as having a condition in which arginine availability for nitric oxide production is at a competitive disadvantage and thus the patient is at risk of a condition having elevated arginase activity. For example in general a patient having an arginine modulator ratio less than or equal to about 1 but greater than about for example 0.95 is diagnosed as having a borderline arginine modulator ratio and is at risk of developing a condition having elevated arginase activity. A patient having an arginine modulator ratio of about or less than about 0.95 0.8 0.7 0.6 or lower is diagnosed as having or at risk for developing a condition having elevated arginase activity. In some embodiments a patient having an arginine modulator ratio of about or less than about 0.95 0.8 0.7 0.6 or lower is diagnosed as having or at risk for developing cardiovascular disease.

A patient who presents with an arginine modulator ratio of about 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 or lower has or is at risk of an elevated arginase condition of a greater severity than a patient who presents with an arginine modulator ratio of 1.0. In general an arginine modulator ratio that is not equal to or greater than normal but is at least about 75 80 or 85 of the value of normal arginine modulator ratio indicates the subject has or is at risk of an elevated arginase condition. If the arginine modulator ratio value is more than 25 reduced from the normal arginine modulator ratio value then the subject is diagnosed has having a condition of elevated arginase activity. The lower the arginine modulator ratio value relative to a normal arginine modulator ratio value the greater the severity of the disease. In particular embodiments of interest a patient who presents with an arginine modulator ratio of about 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 or lower has or is at risk of cardiovascular disease of a greater severity than a patient who presents with an arginine modulator ratio of 1.0. In some embodiments a patient who presents with an arginine modulator ratio of about 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 or lower has an increased mortality risk compared to a patient who presents with an arginine modulator ratio of 1.0.

Amino acid levels and thus arginase levels can be assessed according to the invention in any suitable biological sample. Biological sample as used in the context of arginine ornithine ratio analysis is meant to include any biological sample from a patient particularly a patient having at risk of or suspected of having a condition associated with elevated arginase activity where the sample is suitable for amino acid content analysis. Exemplary biological samples include but are not necessarily limited to blood samples e.g. blood serum plasma and other blood derived samples urine cerebral spinal fluid bronchoalveolar lavage and the like. Amino acid levels can be assessed either quantitatively or qualitatively usually quantitatively.

Diagnosis as to the particular type of condition having low arginine bioavailability can be made based on both an Arg modulator s ratio e.g. an Arg A B ratio e.g. arginine ornithine citrulline ratio in combination with clinical signs and symptoms generally clinical signs or symptoms that distinguish among conditions associated with elevated arginase. For example a subject who has sickle cell disease and presents with shortness of breath decreased exercise tolerance and a low Arg modulator s ratio e.g. Arg A B ratio is a candidate for diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension complicating their sickle cell disease. In contrast a patient who presents with a low Arg modulator s ratio e.g. Arg A B ratio and cough and or wheeze is a candidate for diagnosis with asthma.

In another example a patient who presents with a low Arg modulator s ratio e.g. Arg A B ratio and has a hemolytic disorder like thalassemia is a candidate for diagnosis with pulmonary hypertension. In another example a patient who presents with a low Arg modulator s ratio e.g. Arg A B ratio and respiratory symptoms of shortness of breath and or decreased exercise tolerance that is not clinically related to asthma is a candidate for diagnosis with pulmonary hypertension and or pulmonary fibrosis and likely would benefit from further assessment including for example that includes pulmonary function tests and or Doppler echocardiography.

In another example a patient who presents with a low Arg modulator s ratio e.g. Arg A B ratio and one or more of chest pain numbness nausea cold sweats numbness or weakness of the face or one or more limbs confusion slurred speech dizziness blurred vision cardiac arrhythmia and heart palpitations is a candidate for diagnosis with a cardiovascular disease. Cardiovascular disease includes atherosclerosis coronary artery disease which may result in myocardial infarction angina stroke hypertension and heart failure. For example a patient who presents with a low Arg modulator s ratio e.g. Arg A B ratio and chest pain may have coronary artery disease may have had a myocardial infarction or may be at increased risk of dying from coronary artery disease. In another example a patient who presents with a low Arg modulator s ratio e.g. Arg A B ratio and one or more of numbness nausea cold sweats numbness or weakness of the face or one or more limbs may have suffered a stroke or be at risk of suffering a stroke.

Other examples of clinical signs or symptoms of conditions identified herein as having decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. due to elevated arginase activity are well known to the ordinarily skilled artisan and the power of the use of an Arg modulator s ratio as described herein e.g. the Arg A B ratio such as the arginine ornithine citrulline ratio in combination with such clinical signs and symptoms in diagnosis and differential diagnosis will be readily apparent to the skilled reader. In general the Arg modulator s ratio e.g. Arg A B ratio provides a tool for the clinician to guide his or her clinical suspicion.

In some settings the Arg modulator s ratio can be diagnostic where symptoms alone do not point to a definitive diagnosis. For example with infants and small children a clinical diagnosis of asthma is difficult to make since many kids cough or wheeze and do not have asthma. However the Arg modulator s ratio e.g. Arg A B ratio assessment of the present invention in combination with these symptoms allows the clinician to make a diagnosis of asthma. In providing a test for early diagnosis of asthma or other disease that might otherwise go undiagnosed the invention avoids the situation where diagnosis is only made after repeated events of clinical signs or symptoms while the underlying cause of the symptoms goes untreated e.g. repeated events of respiratory symptoms while inflammation progresses untreated . In the context of asthma an early diagnosis can avoid the situation where the untreated or maltreated patient develops airway remodeling that could have been avoided if the patient had received early anti inflammatory treatment e.g. inhaled steroids oral steroids and the like or a treatment of the invention during the acute exacerbation.

In addition an Arg modulator s ratio that is substantially low relative to the Arg modulator s ratio e.g. Arg A B ratio associated with an unaffected individual can indicate disease severity. A decrease in the Arg modulator s ratio from an individual s baseline may also reflect disease exacerbation or progression of disease. In addition to its correlation with arginase activity the Arg modulator s ratio is a reflection of relative arginine bioavailability and is influenced by many factors including the body s ability to compensate for low arginine levels through increased intestinal absorption of dietary arginine or increased de novo synthesis from the kidneys. These compensatory mechanisms will help maintain a more normal Arg A B ratio even when arginase activity is elevated. However compensatory mechanisms may be affected or overwhelmed under certain conditions of disease or progression of disease in which case the Arg modulator s ratio would decrease. A similar increase in arginase activity may have a greater impact on disease pathogenesis under conditions whereby arginine bioavailability is already compromised e.g. as in conditions of renal dysfunction with decrease in de novo arginine synthesis.

For example a patient who presents with an Arg A B ratio of about 0.50 or lower has or is at risk of condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. an elevated arginase condition of a greater severity than a patient who presents with an Arg A B ratio of 0.70. In general an Arg A B ratio that is at least 15 20 or 25 less than an Arg A B ratio that is considered normal indicates the subject has or is at risk of a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. an elevated arginase condition . Where the Arg A B ratio is an arginine ornithine citrulline ratio a patient who presents with for example an arginine ornithine citrulline ratio of about 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 or lower has or is at risk of a condition decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. an elevated arginase condition of a greater severity than a patient who presents with an arginine ornithine citrulline ratio of 0.6 or 0.65. In general an arginine ornithine citrulline ratio that is at least about 75 80 or 85 of an arginine ornithine citrulline ratio that is considered normal indicates the subject has or is at risk of a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. an elevated arginase condition .

The ratios of the invention e.g. the Arg A B Arg A B C ratios and particularly arginine ornithine citrulline ratios can also be used to assess efficacy of treatment of subject having or at risk of a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. due to elevated arginase activity and further provides a means for rational therapy including selection of therapy adjustment of doses or dosage regimen and the like. In general therapy is indicated as being efficacious where therapy maintains or increases the arginine to ornithine ratio by at least about 5 10 15 or 20 or more. In general normalization of the ratio is a therapeutic goal or endpoint. For example normalization of the Arg A B ratio e.g. arginine ornithine citrulline ratio to provide for an Arg A B ratio of greater than about 0.70 or 0.75 usually greater than about 0.8 0.9 1 or more is contemplated by the invention.

One or more additional parameters can be analyzed to assess disease status. For example in the analysis of asthma patients and or patients having or suspected of having pulmonary hypertension additional analyses that may be performed include analysis of TH 2 cytokines VCAM and ICAM nitric oxide metabolite levels in blood breath and urine genetic markers IgE sPla2 levels respiratory syncytial virus RSV e.g. in 

NOcan be measured in serum plasma or urine using any known assay e.g. Sievers NOAnalysis software for liquid sampling Sievers Instruments Inc. Denver Colo. . See e.g. Waugh et al. Nutritional Research 1999 19 501 518 Meurs et al. Br J Pharmacol 2002 136 391 398 and Morris et al. 2002. Elevated serum arginase activity in patients with sickle cell disease and pulmonary hypertension. The 30th Anniversary of the National Sickle Cell Program Washington D.C. As one example serum nitrite is measured by acidifying serum to a pH

Exhaled nitric oxide is measured in exhaled air using standard methods. As one example microprocessor based chemiluminescent NOanalytical instrumentation is used. The test is easily performed and has been successfully used in many clinical trials. Hamid et al. Lancet 1993 342 1510 1513 Morris Annu Rev Nutr 2002 22 87 105 Morris 2000. Regulation of arginine availability and its impact on NO synthesis. Nitric Oxide. Biology and Pathobiology. Academic Press San Diego. 187 197 . Subjects inhale to total lung capacity from a reservoir bag through a one way valve Hans Rudolph Kansas City Mo. with incoming NO free air to ensure the absence of environmental NO. Next the subjects exhale to residual volume into the Teflon tube which enters into the NO analyzer. The subjects exhale at a pressure of 20 mmHg into the tubing connected to the analyzer. Exhalation at this expiratory pressure without a nose clip is a maneuver that closes the velum of the posterior nasopharynx and excludes contamination by nasal NO.

Secreted phospholipase A2 sPLA2 protein is readily measured using e.g. ELISA. sPLA2 activity is readily measured using breakdown of thioester via standard methods. See e.g. Styles et al. Blood 1996 87 2573 8. Serum levels of cytokines such as TNF a sIL 2R IL 1 IL 2 IL 4 IL 6 IL 10 g Interferon and CD40L are readily measured using known or standard assays e.g. commercially available ELISA kits. Similarly levels of vascular cell adhesion molecule VCAM intercellular adhesion molecule ICAM and sCD40L are readily measured using known or standard assays e.g. ELISA.

There are known single nucleotide polymorphisms SNPs in the NOS3 gene. Since NO may play a key role in the regulation of bronchomotor tone and inflammation of the airways Li Current Opinions in Pulmon Med 1997 3 10 16 genetic studies evaluating the NOS gene in asthmatics will in some embodiments be of interest. A method for rapidly genotyping multiple SNPs simultaneously has been developed at Roche Molecular Systems Alameda Calif. and involves analysis of gene products amplified by polymerase chain reaction PCR . Exemplary PCR products that contain SNPs in genes thought to play a role in asthma include TNF CCq TNFR1 TNF IL5R TNF IL9 CCR2 IL4R CCR5 RMS1 2AR CC16 Fc RI CTLA4 SCYA11 IL4R IL4 and IL6.

Calculation of the Arg modulator s ratio and comparison to a normal Arg modulator s ratio can be performed manually. Alternatively calculation of the levels of arginine and modulators of arginine bioavailability e.g. citrulline ornithine and the like and diagnosis of a ratio as being normal borderline or below normal can be partially or fully automated e.g. using a computer based system.

For example the levels of arginine a first modulator of arginine bioavailability and a second modulator of arginine bioavailability can be can be entered into a programmed computer where these data can be entered manually or directly from a device which measures these amino acid levels. The programmed computer then calculates the desired Arg modulator s ratio e.g. the Arg ornithine ratio the Arg citrulline ratio the Arg A B ratio e.g. arginine ornithine citrulline ratio the Arg A B C ratio and the like and optionally compares the selected ratio to a normal ratio.

Where the program determines the calculated ratio is at least equal to or greater than a normal ratio also referred to as a normal threshold value the computer then provides a read out indicating the patient has a normal Arg modulator s ratio. Where the program determines the Arg modulator s ratio is at less than or equal to a normal threshold value e.g. for Arg A B less than or equal to about 0.7 but greater than a threshold value associated with a disease threshold value e.g. for Arg A B greater than about 0.7 then the computer then provides a read out indicating the patient has a borderline Arg A B ratio and is at risk of developing a condition having elevated arginase activity. Finally where the program determines the ratio is less than a disease threshold value e.g. for Arg A B ratio is less than about 0.7 then computer then provides a read out indicating the patient has an abnormally low ratio and the patient has or is at risk of developing a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. due to elevated arginase activity .

Associated programming for carrying out the computer based methods of the invention can be recorded on computer readable media i.e. any medium that can be read and accessed by a computer . Such media include but are not limited to magnetic storage media such as floppy discs hard disc storage medium and magnetic tape optical storage media such as CD ROMs and DVDs electrical storage media such as RAM ROM and EPROM and hybrids of these categories such as magnetic optical storage media.

In one embodiment the programming for carrying out analysis of an Arg modulator s ratio according to the invention is provided in computer based system. As used herein a computer based system refers to a suitable combination of based on the method to be carried out and how the program is to be provided a software element a data storage element and optionally a hardware element and an output element. The software element provides the programming that when implemented on a computer provides for calculation of an Arg modulator s ratio e.g. an Arg A B ratio e.g. arginine ornithine citrulline ratio and or other amino acid ratios and optionally comparing the calculated Arg modulator s ratio to a value of a normal Arg modulator s ratio e.g. a normal Arg A B ratio to provide a diagnosis. The data storage element can provide for storage of the program and optionally storage of data involved in calculating the ratio as well as the result of such calculation. The hardware element provides the means for executing the program while the display element allows for display of the analysis particularly the result to the user. The minimum hardware of the computer based system generally comprises a central processing unit CPU input element output element and data storage element. A skilled artisan can readily appreciate that any one of the currently available computer based system can be programmed to implement the method of the invention and arc suitable for use in the present invention. The data storage element can comprise any manufacture comprising a recording of the present sequence information as described above or a memory access means that can access such a manufacture.

As exemplified in the ratio of arginine ornithine citrulline ratio is calculated by dividing the arginine level value by the sum of the ornithine level value and the citrulline level value to provide a calculated arginine ornithine citrulline ratio value. The calculated value is then compared to a normal arginine ornithine citrulline ratio value. If the calculated value is not less than the normal value then a diagnosis of normal arginine bioavailability is made. As illustrated in this diagnosis can be displayed to the user. If the calculated value is less than the normal value then the program queries whether the calculated value is at least 95 90 85 80 or 75 of the normal value with at least 75 of normal exemplified in . If yes then a diagnosis of compromised arginine bioavailability is displayed to the user which may optionally also display a diagnosis of risk of decreased arginine bioavailability. Where the calculated value of the Arg modulator s ratio is not equal to or greater than normal but is at least for example 75 of the value of the normal Arg modulator s ratio then a diagnosis of at risk for low arginine bioavailability is displayed to the user e.g. arginine bioavailability is not so low as to provide a diagnosis of an existing condition of decreased arginine bioavailability but the patient is at risk of developing such a condition . If the Arg modulator s ratio value is not at least 75 of a normal Arg modulator s ratio value i.e. the Arg modulator s ratio value is at least 25 less than an normal Arg modulator s ratio value then a diagnosis of a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability e.g. due to elevated arginase activity is displayed to the user.

In another embodiment the calculated Arg modulator s ratio value exemplified by the arginine ornithine citrulline ratio value is simply displayed with the further steps illustrated in being optional. In another embodiment the program is modified so as to provide a display that reflects efficacy of a therapy which the patient is receiving. For example if the calculated Arg modulator s ratio value e.g. arginine ornithine citrulline ratio value is not less than the normal value then the display can indicate that therapy is efficacious or that arginine bioavailability has normalized. As illustrated in this example in if the calculated arginine ornithine citrulline ratio is not a normal value but is at least about 75 of the normal value then the display can indicate that low arginine bioavailability persists and or modification or termination of current therapy is advised. If the calculated value is not at least about 75 of the normal value then a display indicating partial or possible efficacy and that modification of therapy e.g. adjustment of dose or dosage regimen may be indicated.

The methods of the invention can be used to monitor therapy. For example following administration of a therapy according to the invention efficacy can be assessed in the patient by assessing arginine bioavailability e.g. by assessing normalization of an Arg modulator s ratio as described herein. Doses of agents administered can be adjusted in accordance to patient need e.g. to provide for an increase in an Arg modulator s ratio as described herein and thus an increase in arginine bioavailability to within a normal range e.g. within a range such that arginase levels are not above normal levels more than about 5 10 15 or 20 or a sufficient increase in plasma arginine concentration to the extent that arginine bioavailability is no longer limiting factor for nitric oxide production i.e. levels above the Km for arginine transport 120 M and a normalization of the arginine to ornithine ratio e.g. 1.5 .

Therapy can also be assessed by examining improvement in one or more clinical symptoms of disease. Successful therapy is normally considered to be a significant improvement in one or more clinical symptoms after treatment according to the invention as compared to prior to such treatment e.g. improvement in one or more clinical parameters of the condition by at least about 10 at least about 15 at least about 25 at least about 50 or more compared to the clinical parameter prior to therapy or compared with a placebo control or an untreated control. For example in pulmonary hypertension clinical parameters assessed can be one or more of an improvement in mean pulmonary artery systolic pressure as estimated by tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity measured by Doppler echocardiograpy improved exercise tolerance as measured by a 6 minute walk blood pressure in systemic hypertension etc .

In the context of conditions that affect lung function the clinical parameters can be for example forced inspiratory flow FIF forced expiratory flow FEF forced vital capacity FVC diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide DLco and or the like. For example in asthma therapy can be assessed by spirometry lung volume airway resistance and or oxygen saturation as well as improvements in clinical symptoms such as cough wheeze night time wake ups due to cough or respiratory problems decreased need for rescue med usage such as albuterol and the like. In patients having pulmonary hypertension therapy can be assessed using lung function tests as well as assessing mean pulmonary artery pressure e.g. at rest and or with exercise . It should be noted that successful therapy according to the invention includes outcomes where the underlying disease state is not significantly altered but one or more clinical symptoms including symptoms that arise from or are associated with the disease are treated.

In the context of sickle cell disease clinical parameters include for example one or more of a decrease in the number of pain crisis number emergency department visits number of hospitalizations and or duration of hospitalization amount of pain medication use incidence of and or occurrence of complications such as skin ulcers need for transfusion oxygen use etc. Also improved pain scores and quality of life assessment tools can be followed.

In the context of cardiovascular disease clinical parameters include e.g. one or more of decrease in the number or incidence of chest pain decrease in the number or incidence of symptoms of stroke e.g. numbness of face and or limb s blurred vision dizziness etc. decrease in mortality and improved cardiovascular function e.g. as assessed by electrocardiogram etc. .

The Arg modulator s ratio can provide guidance to the practitioner to adjust therapy. Such adjustments can include adjustment to a dosage regimen e.g. increasing or decreasing dose of a therapeutic agent increasing or decrease frequency of dose and the like or switching the patient to a different therapy. The therapy can involve any suitable therapeutic agent such as L arginine monotherapy arginase inhibitor for monotherapy L Arg and arginase inhibitor combination therapy combination therapies involving magnesium or other therapy see e.g. WO 2004 073623 .

The invention also provides kits having components and instructions for use in assessing levels of arginine and modulators of arginine bioavailability e.g. ornithine levels citrulline levels proline levels creatine levels methylated arginines and the like in a subject. In one embodiment the kit includes a chart to facilitate calculation of Arg modulator s ratio of the invention e.g. the Arg A B ratio and or for assessing whether the Arg modulator s ratio is normal borderline or indicative of a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability. In another embodiment the kit includes a handheld device which is preprogrammed to receive the values of the levels of arginine and arginine bioavailability modulators e.g. citrulline and ornithine calculate an Arg modulator s ratio e.g. the Arg A B ratio and optionally provide a readout indicating whether the calculated Arg modulator s ratio is normal borderline or low as described above. The device can also optionally provide a diagnosis of normal at risk or having a condition of decreased arginine bioavailability. In another embodiment the kit includes the materials necessary to determine e.g. measure the quantitative levels of arginine and arginine bioavailability modulators e.g. citrulline and ornithine from the sample provided.

Kits can optionally include instructions for using the components of the kit to practice the subject methods. The instructions for practicing the subject methods are generally recorded on a suitable recording medium. For example the instructions may be printed on a substrate such as paper or plastic etc. As such the instructions may be present in the kits as a package insert in the labeling of the container of the kit or components thereof i.e. associated with the packaging or subpackaging etc. In other embodiments the instructions are present as an electronic storage data file present on a suitable computer readable storage medium e.g. CD ROM diskette etc. In yet other embodiments the actual instructions are not present in the kit but means for obtaining the instructions from a remote source e.g. via the internet are provided. An example of this embodiment is a kit that includes a web address where the instructions can be viewed and or from which the instructions can be downloaded. As with the instructions this means for obtaining the instructions is recorded on a suitable substrate.

The following examples are put forth so as to provide those of ordinary skill in the art with a complete disclosure and description of how to make and use the present invention and are not intended to limit the scope of what the inventors regard as their invention nor are they intended to represent that the experiments below are all or the only experiments performed. Efforts have been made to ensure accuracy with respect to numbers used e.g. amounts temperature etc. but some experimental errors and deviations should be accounted for. Unless indicated otherwise parts are parts by weight molecular weight is weight average molecular weight temperature is in degrees Celsius and pressure is at or near atmospheric.

Asthma patients. Patients with asthma presenting to the emergency department and clinics at Children s Hospital and Research Center at Oakland were recruited. Blood samples and exhaled nitric oxide levels in patients old enough to perform peak flow are obtained at presentation to the emergency department or clinic and followed daily during hospitalization for those patients ill enough to require admission.

Baseline blood was obtained at least 4 weeks after resolution of the acute exacerbation. Blood samples were analyzed for arginine and amino acid levels arginase activity and arginine to ornithine ratio.

Sickle cell patients. Seventeen sickle cell disease patients with documented pulmonary hypertension at steady state were enrolled in the study. All known patients with pulmonary hypertension receiving care at the Northern California Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center were approached for participation in this analysis. Twelve patients were homozygous for hemoglobin S three patients had hemoglobin type SC and two patient had hemoglobin S thalassemia. The mean age of patients was 32.7 15 years with a range of 13 to 63 years. There were seven women enrolled. Ten ethnically matched normal non sickle cell disease volunteers were enrolled as a control group in order to compare amino acid levels and arginase activity. The mean age was 20.6 10 years ranging from 10 to 34 years. There were four females and six males enrolled. Pulmonary hypertension was defined as estimated pulmonary artery pressures 30 mm Hg by echocardiogram or tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity of greater than 2.5 m sec two months duration not associated with acute chest syndrome. A chart review was performed on all patients to obtain tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity data from previous echocardiograms.

Amino Acid Levels. A complete amino acid panel including arginine citrulline ornithine and L arginine analogue asymmetric di methyl L arginine . Quantitative plasma amino acid levels were measured in mol L using a Beckman 6300 amino acid analyzer. The amino acids were separated on an lithium ion exchange column and then reacted with ninhydrin to generate a color response. The data are collected and analyzed using Beckman 32 Karat software at the Molecular Structure Facility University of California Davis Calif.

Arginase Arginase specific activity was determined in plasma by methods previously described. Morris et al. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 1998 275 740 747 .

Reductions were seen in plasma levels of many amino acids in asthmatic patient experiencing an acute exacerbation of respiratory symptoms Table 1 . Strikingly the greatest decrease was in plasma levels of arginine which were approximately half those of normal controls 45 22 M vs. 94 29 M p

As arginine ornithine and lysine are taken up by cells via the same transport system the ratio arginine ornithine lysine provides an index of relative arginine availability at any given plasma arginine concentration. Relative arginine availability also was significantly lower in asthmatic patients as compared to normal controls 0.30 0.13 vs. 0.42 0.14 p

Plasma levels of ornithine Table 1 a product of arginine catabolism were generally lower in asthmatics relative to controls and relative ornithine availability ornithine arginine lysine was somewhat higher in asthmatics than in controls 0.25 0.07 for controls 0.34 0.17 for asthma but neither of these trends reached statistical significance. On the other hand citrulline the precursor of endogenous arginine synthesis was significantly reduced in asthmatics relative to normal controls Table 1 possibly contributing to the decrease in plasma arginine levels in these patients.

Table 2 shows plasma amino acids in normal controls vs. patients with sickle cell disease SCD . An abnormal amino acid profile is found in patients with sickle cell disease. The greatest deficiency is found in plasma arginine concentration. SCD in the subject was accompanied by a decreased Arg ornithine citrulline ratio compared to non asthmatic controls.

Table 3 illustrates plasma amino acid levels that differ in sickle cell disease patients with pulmonary hypertension compared to those without pulmonary hypertension. Elevated downstream by products of arginase activity occur in SCD patients who have developed pulmonary hypertension.

Including citrulline in the Arg modulator s ratio e.g. to calculate the Arg ornithine citrulline ratio takes into consideration the impact of renal insufficiency on de novo arginine synthesis in addition to the impact of elevated arginase activity on arginine catabolism an thus is a superior reflection of global arginine bioavailability. In addition to its association with asthma and sickle cell disease the Arg ornithine citrulline ratio is associated with pulmonary hypertension in both sickle cell disease primary pulmonary hypertension and in pulmonary artery hypertension associated with collagen vascular disease. In addition the Arg ornithine citrulline ratio represents an independent risk factor for mortality in sickle cell disease risk ratio 3.4 1.5 7.7 p

Alterations in amino acid metabolism occurring in pulmonary artery hypertension PAH that could be impacted by elevated arginase activity were investigated. Plasma amino acids were determined in normal NL controls and patients diagnosed with primary pulmonary hypertension PH or PAH associated with scleroderma or systemic lupus erythematosis. These data are provided in Table 4 below.

Plasma Arg levels were low Orn levels were high and the Arg to Orn ratio was low in PAH as compared to normal controls. Consistent with a shift in Arg metabolism away from NO production and towards the ornithine dependent pathways both glutamic acid and proline levels were elevated in PAH. Citrulline levels were also high in PAH. Since Arg is produced from citrulline in the kidneys renal dysfunction may also contribute to decreased Arg bioavailability. The Arg Orn Citrulline ratio correlated with mean pulmonary artery pressure PAP measured on cardiac catheterization r 0.68 p

Decreased Arg bioavailability and a shift of metabolism towards ornithine dependent pathways are play a role in PAH again supporting the use of therapies that maximize Arg and NO bioavailability in treatment of such conditions.

Data on the levels of amino acids and arginase activity in plasma samples obtained from thalassemia thal patients was collected 8 thal major 4 E beta thal 2 Hb H alpha thal . All but 3 patients were on chronic transfusion therapy. Echo results were available on 9 patients and demonstrated 6 9 with a tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity 2.5 m s. The data are provided in

Plasma arginine concentration trended lower in patients with thalassemia with values ranging from normal to very low 19.5 to 122 M median 50 M . Ornithine levels were high and the arginine to ornithine ratio low in thalassemia patients. Plasma arginase activity was significantly elevated although a range of values is observed 0.06 1.17 mol cc hr median 0.83 mol cc hr . Proline was also elevated a downstream metabolite of arginase activity and likely a contributor to pulmonary vascular remodeling. Of interest exhaled nitric oxide levels were also significantly elevated in thalassemia 49 41 parts per billion vs. 18 8 ppb p 0.02 thal vs. normal controls suggesting an upregulation of nitric oxide synthase in the lungs of patients with thalassemia in addition to higher plasma arginase activity.

These data indicate that the Arg Orn citrulline ratio is an indicator of disease in thalassemia and further that thalassemia patients are candidates for therapy according to the invention.

The goal of this study was to identify the source of increased plasma arginase activity in a large cohort of patients with sickle cell disease and to evaluate the contribution of dysregulated arginine metabolism to patient morbidity.

Patients. The patient population was comprised of 228 sequentially enrolled subjects with sickle cell disease hemoglobinopathies and includes a subset of 195 subjects that has been described in detail Gladwin et al. 2004 350 22 31 . Informed consent was signed by each subject for an institutional review board approved protocol to obtain clinical information echocardiography blood specimens and prospective clinical follow up data for research analysis. Detailed patient characteristics are shown in Table 6.

In this population of patients with sickle cell disease right heart catheterization studies have confirmed that a tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity 2.9 meters second corresponds to moderate severe pulmonary hypertension Gladwin et al. 2004 350 22 31 . Pulmonary hypertension was prospectively defined as a tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity 2.5 meters second on Doppler echocardiography. Additionally 45 matched African American control subjects similar to the sickle cell patients in age and gender distributions were evaluated for race based comparisons of laboratory and echocardiographic data.

Amino Acid Measurement. Plasma amino acids were quantified via ion exchange chromatography Beckman model 6300 amino acid analyzer Fullterton Calif. at the Mayo Clinic Rochester Minn. by methods recommended by the manufacturer.

Arginase activity. Arginase activity consecutively obtained in the first 140 patients participating in the study was determined as the conversion of C guanidino L arginine to C urea which was converted to COby urease and trapped as NaCOfor scintillation counting as previously described Morris et al. 1998 275 E740 747 . Briefly aliquots of plasma or red blood cell lysate were spun down upon collection and frozen at 80 Celsius. Samples were later incubated for 10 min at 55 C. in complete assay mixture lacking arginine. The reaction was initiated by addition of labeled arginine and incubation was continued at 37 Celsius for 2 hours. The reaction was terminated by heating at 100 Celsius for 3 minutes. Samples were incubated with urease at 37 Celsius for 45 minutes and NaCOwas trapped on NaOH soaked filters following acidification of the samples with HCl to volatilize the CO.

Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay ELISA . Plasma levels of sVCAM 1 sICAM 1 sE selectin and sP selectin were measured using commercially available ELISA kits R D Systems Minneapolis Minn. .

Measurement of Myeloperoxidase levels. Myeloperoxidase levels were measured with use of an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay PrognostiX Cleveland Ohio . Each plate included a standard curve with isolated myeloperoxidase extinction coeffecient of 178 000 Mcm and controls to correct for interplate variability.

Data Analysis. Data were collected for patients with all genotypes of sickle cell disease. Descriptive statistics presented are mean standard deviation geometric mean and 95 confidence interval CI or percentage with characteristic as appropriate. Two sided t tests were used to compare amino acid values in sickle cell patients and normal controls. Linear regression was used to evaluate relationships between amino acid values and tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity. Since normal distributions provided poor approximations for many of the variables of interest bivariate associations were assessed using the Spearman rank correlation coefficient. Multiple regression analysis of arginase activity used log transformed values for arginase as well as for laboratory correlates for which logarithms were better fit than untransformed values by normal distributions. Proportional hazards Cox regression was used to study relationships between mortality in sickle cell patients and covariates of interest. P values 

Plasma amino acid levels in sickle cell disease patients were compared to ethnically matched control subjects without sickle cell disease Table 7 . Table 7 Distribution mean standard deviation of amino acids linked to the L arginine nitric oxide pathway in sickle cell disease patients with tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity TRV 

An abnormal amino acid profile was observed in patients with sickle cell disease that is consistent with altered arginine metabolism. The observed dysregulation of the arginine to nitric oxide metabolism was greatest in sickle cell disease patients with pulmonary hypertension. Although plasma arginine concentrations were low in sickle cell disease compared to normal controls these levels were similar in patients with and without pulmonary hypertension. However plasma ornithine levels were higher in sickle cell patients with pulmonary hypertension vs. sickle cell disease patients without pulmonary hypertension suggestive of elevated arginase activity. The arginine to ornithine ratio an indirect measure of arginase activity and relative arginine bioavailability was low in patients with sickle cell disease compared to normal controls p

Plasma proline concentrations were also significantly increased possibly indicating increased conversion of ornithine to proline in sickle cell disease that is amplified in patients with pulmonary hypertension Table 7 . Highest proline levels occurred in patients with moderate severe pulmonary hypertension p 0.01 . Citrulline levels also trended higher in patients with pulmonary hypertension and correlated with rising creatinine levels r0.54 p

Arginase Activity in Plasma. In order to understand the mechanism responsible for dysregulation of L arginine metabolism plasma arginase activity was measured in patients and controls. Plasma arginase activity was significantly elevated in patients with sickle cell disease n 140 compared to normal controls n 45 p

Arginase Activity and Associations with Clinical Markers. The relationship between arginase activity and clinical laboratory markers of disease severity was evaluated in order to identify mechanisms for increased enzymatic activity and associated effects on organ function Table 8 .

Plasma arginase activity was significantly associated with several markers of increased hemolytic rate including cell free hemoglobin p

After bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons cell free hemoglobin aspartate aminotransferase triglycerides P selecting and soluble VCAM 1 remain significantly associated with elevated arginase activity in plasma. In multiple regression modeling arginase activity was independently related to cell free hemoglobin sP selectin and triglycerides Table 9 .

In these patients in steady state sickle cell disease LDH levels more closely correlate with markers of intravascular hemolysis than liver dysfunction. LDH closely correlated with aspartate aminotransferase which is released by both erythrocytes during hemolysis and hepatocytes with an r value of 0.74 p

Arginase Activity in Red Blood Cells. In order to further identify the source of increased plasma arginase activity arginase activities were determined also for red blood cell lysates of normal controls and a subset of patients with sickle cell disease Panel A . Arginase activity in red blood cell lysate of patients with sickle cell disease was significantly higher than that of normal controls p

Relationship of Dysregulated Arginine Metabolism to Mortality Rate. Since enrollment in the study seventeen subjects have died as of October 2004 with median follow up of 26 months for all subjects for whom follow up information after the initial visit is available n 194 . Median survival time was 12 months for the 17 patients who died. Thirteen out of the 17 had an elevated tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity 2.5 meters second and the presence of pulmonary hypertension by this definition was the most significant risk factor for death risk ratio 7.4 2.4 22.6 p

These ratios were an independent risk factor for death in this population even after adjustment for tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity and renal insufficiency. In shifting L arginine metabolism away from NO production and towards ornithine dependent pathways increased arginase activity contributes to events that put patients at risk for early death . The increased mortality risk ratio observed after citrulline was included in the Cox regression analysis probably reflects effects of renal dysfunction on arginine bioavailability. Indeed citrulline levels trended higher in sickle cell disease patients with pulmonary hypertension and correlated with rising creatinine levels r 0.54 p

Citrulline is the endogenous precursor for de novo arginine synthesis which occurs primarily within the kidney. The increased mortality risk ratio observed after citrulline was included in the Cox regression analysis probably reflects effects of renal dysfunction on arginine bioavailability. Indeed citrulline levels trended higher in sickle cell disease patients with pulmonary hypertension and correlated with rising creatinine levels r 0.54 p

Sequential subjects presenting to an emergency department with the complaint of chest pain were enrolled. Patients had baseline plasma levels of Arg Ornithine and Citrulline and the relationship with cardiovascular mortality risk was assessed at 1 year and 5 year outcomes.

The data presented in Table 11 show the differences in ratio of Arg ornithine citrulline vs mortality risks for the cohort. Note that a significantly lower ratio indicative of a global arginine deficiency is observed in subjects with increased cardiovascular mortality risk at both 1 year and 5 years.

While the present invention has been described with reference to the specific embodiments thereof it should be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes may be made and equivalents may be substituted without departing from the true spirit and scope of the invention. In addition many modifications may be made to adapt a particular situation material composition of matter process process step or steps to the objective spirit and scope of the present invention. All such modifications are intended to be within the scope of the claims appended hereto.

