---

title: System, apparatus, and method for dynamically customizing and configuring applications
abstract: A system and method for dynamically customizing and/or configuring applications on devices. The user interface of a base application resident on a terminal can be modified in accordance with the invention. Terminal-related information is transmitted from the terminal upon initial activation of the base application at the terminal. The terminal-related information is received at a configuration server system, where application variant information for the terminal is derived based on the terminal-related information. This application variant information is transmitted back to the terminal, and the user interface of the base application is modified as specified by the application variant information.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09002342&OS=09002342&RS=09002342
owner: Nokia Corporation
number: 09002342
owner_city: Espoo
owner_country: FI
publication_date: 20051202
---
This invention relates in general to device configuration and more particularly to a systems apparatuses computer program products and methods for dynamically customizing and or configuring applications on devices.

In recent times functional capabilities of computers and communication devices continue to migrate towards one another. Computers are used for electronic mail file transfer and even telephone communications. Communication devices such as mobile phones originally provided primarily telephone services but now continue to gain processing power and capabilities traditionally limited to computers. For example mobile devices now typically include capabilities to send and receive electronic mail e.g. e mail Short Message Service Multimedia Messaging Service etc. as well as data communication capabilities. These advances in mobile devices and the associated mobile network infrastructures allows mobile devices to gain access to content and other data that was once only within the ambit of larger wired computers.

Mobile operators and service providers have taken advantage of these new capabilities of mobile terminals. A variety of mobile content is now available to mobile terminal users including images ring tones music files games calendars contact management device utilities and so forth. While these advances benefit operators service providers users and others involved in the content distribution chain some complexities arise as a result of the various developers service providers operators and other vendors who provide services that ultimately enable this content to be provided to end users. For example the content service providers need to be able to make their content services available to the consuming public. Operators often have different service content offerings and need to have a way to identify and select the desired service content that they will offer.

Another complexity involves the delivery and presentation of this content and or services in a manner desired by the content providers and operators. Just as retail products are labeled according to the entity that makes the products it is advantageous for mobile content service providers and operators to present certain mobile content and services with their own look and feel. Currently this is done by creating several variants of the applications and installing them on terminals at the factory or otherwise prior to retail purchase or normal use. These different application variants present a significant burden to product development. For example content may need to be ready months before the terminal is shipped or otherwise leaves the facility where the content is installed. Other disadvantages with such prior art methodologies is that it is difficult to later update the developers operators desired user interface presentation characteristics once these application variants have initially been installed on the terminal.

Accordingly there is a need for a manner of allowing developers operators and the like to be able to brand their network accessible products and services while avoiding the burdens addressed above. The present invention fulfills these and other needs and offers a variety of advantages over prior art solutions.

To overcome limitations in the prior art described above and to overcome other limitations that will become apparent upon reading and understanding the present specification the present invention discloses systems apparatuses computer program products and methods for dynamically customizing and or configuring applications on devices.

In accordance with one embodiment of the invention a method is provided for modifying a base application resident on a terminal. Terminal related information is transmitted from the terminal upon initial activation of the base application at the terminal. Application variant information is received from a configuration server system which is used to modify a user interface of the base application.

In more particular embodiments of such a method the method may involve providing the same base application on each of a plurality of terminals. In such an embodiment the terminal related information is respectively transmitted from each of the terminals when each particular terminal respectively performs its initial activation of the base application. The user interface of each base application is modified at each of the terminals when the respective terminal receives its application variant information from the configuration server.

In another particular embodiment of such a method the terminal retrieves an address of the configuration server upon initial activation of the base application and transmits the terminal related information to a configuration server that is addressed by the address. The address is a Uniform Resource Identifier URI in some embodiments.

In some embodiments the application variant information correlates to entity specific information associated with at least one entity in a distribution chain of deliverable content to which the base application is requesting. The user interface of the base application may then be modified to include such entity specific information.

In particular embodiments of the method the user interface of the base application is modified with visual presentations audio presentations and or tactile presentations. Visual presentations may include for example display backgrounds logos icons color schemes trademarks service marks etc.

Embodiments of the invention involve various types of terminal related information all or part of which may be provided to the configuration server. This may include information identifying characteristics of the terminal examples of which include a User Agent Profile UAProf International Mobile Equipment Identifier IMEI the terminal s current language selection possible roaming indicator etc. In other embodiments the terminal related information includes information identifying the operator or service provider associated with the service utilized by the base application. For example this may include the Mobile Country Code MCC Mobile Network Code MNC Service Provider Name SPN or Short Message Service Center SMSC number and or other information that can identify the operator service provider etc. In yet other embodiments the terminal related information can include information identifying whether the terminal is a variant wherein the information comprises firmware. Other embodiments include a Unique Identifier UID that uniquely identifies the base application. These and other types of terminal related information may be provided to the configuration server to allow the configuration server to identify the proper application variant information to provide to the terminal.

In other embodiments of such a method updated application variant information may be obtained after obtaining the application variant information upon the initial activation of the base application. For example this may involve obtaining the updated application variant information each time the terminal is in communication with the configuration server periodically in response to a triggering event etc.

In accordance with another embodiment of the invention a method is provided for facilitating modification of a base application capable of residing on a terminal. The method involves receiving terminal related information which relates to the terminal and deriving application variant information based on the terminal related information where such application variant information is usable by the terminal to modify a user interface of the base application. The application variant information is then transmitted to the terminal where the user interface of the base application can be modified accordingly.

Other features of such a method may include determining whether the software version of the base application corresponds to an earlier version of the base application. This may be provided by way of for example the terminal related information. In response an updated software version of the base application can be provided if it is determined that the version of the base application corresponds to an earlier version e.g. out of date version of the base application.

In some particular embodiments of the method content is provided to the terminal together with the application variant information where such content relates to the particular base application being executed on the terminal. For example the content may be a list of selectable catalogs where the base application is a catalog client.

Other embodiments of this method involve deriving the application variant information by identifying using the terminal related information the appropriate application variant information from multiple variant data sets defined or otherwise associated different entities. Stated differently the terminal related information may be used to identify an appropriate entity defined variant data set from multiple variant data sets associated with various entities. The variant information may in essence be culled from a set of variant information associated with the different entities.

In accordance with another embodiment of the invention a server operable on a network is provided. The server includes a receiver configured to receive terminal related information transmitted from a terminal upon a first activation of a client at the terminal. A user interface variant identification module is provided which is executable by a processing arrangement and configured to derive modified user interface information for the client based on the terminal related information. A transmitter is configured to transmit the modified user interface information to the terminal for use by the client in modifying the client user interface.

Particular embodiments of such a server involve a database of the modified user interface information that is available for multiple terminals where the user interface variant identification module is configured to identify within the database the modified user interface information for a particular terminal based on the terminal related information provided by that particular terminal. In other embodiments multiple servers are provided in a distributed fashion i.e. distributed to multiple server locations where at least some of the modified user interface information is replicated in databases associated with each of the multiple server locations. In another embodiment a redirect module is provided that is executable by the processing arrangement and configured to redirect the terminal related information and responsibility of deriving the modified user interface information to an alternative server addressable by an address available to the server.

In other particular embodiments the processing arrangement is configured to derive the modified user interface information by choosing the modified user interface information from a set of variant information collectively defined by multiple entities. In another embodiment the processing arrangement is configured to derive the modified user interface information by using the terminal related information to identify an entity specific modified user interface information from a plurality of modified user interface information sets corresponding to different entities.

In accordance with another embodiment of the invention a terminal is provided that is capable of transmitting and receiving information. The terminal includes a user interface a transmitter and a memory storage element s to store at least a base application access information of a configuration server and terminal related information. The terminal includes a processing system that is configured to recognize an initial activation of the base application on the terminal and to direct the transmitter to transmit the terminal related information to the configuration server in response to recognizing the initial activation of the base application. A receiver is configured to receive user interface modification information generated at the configuration server based on the terminal related information. The processing system then modifies a presentation associated with the base application by way of the user interface as specified by the user interface modification information.

In more particular embodiments of such a terminal the terminal may be a mobile phone PDA computing device etc. In one embodiment the terminal is capable of wireless communication with a network. The terminal may include a display s where the presentation associated with the base application involves at least a visual presentation provided on the display s . A speaker s may also be provided in which case some of the presentation to the user may be by way of audio. Other user interface mechanisms may similarly be employed such as tactile feedback or other known user interface mechanisms.

In accordance with another embodiment of the invention computer readable media is provided which has instructions stored thereon that are executable by a processing system for modifying a user interface of a client application resident on a terminal. These computer executable instructions stored on the media perform steps including receiving terminal related information from the terminal upon a first activation of the client application at the terminal deriving modified user interface information for the client application based on the terminal related information and transmitting the modified user interface information to the terminal for use by the client application in modifying the client user interface.

In accordance with another embodiment of the invention computer readable media is provided which has instructions stored thereon that are executable by a processing system for modifying a client application resident on a terminal. These computer executable instructions stored on the media perform steps including detecting a first activation of the client application and transmitting terminal related information relating to the terminal upon detection of the first activation of the client application. Application variant information derived from the terminal related information is received and a user interface of the client application is modified based on the application variant information.

In accordance with another embodiment of the invention a system is provided for modifying a client application. The system includes at least a terminal and a configuration server. The terminal includes a user interface and a terminal processing system configured to recognize a first activation of the client application on the terminal to initiate transmission of terminal related information to the target address in response to recognizing the initial activation of the client application and to modify a presentation associated with the client application via the user interface pursuant to received user interface modification information. The configuration server includes a receiver configured to receive the terminal related information and a user interface variant identification module executable by a server processing system and configured to derive the user interface modification information based on the terminal related information. The configuration server further includes a transmitter configured to transmit the user interface modification information to the terminal for use by the client application in modifying the presentation associated with the client application by way of the user interface.

These and various other advantages and features of novelty which characterize the invention are pointed out with particularity in the claims annexed hereto and form a part hereof. However for a better understanding of the invention its advantages and the objects obtained by its use reference should be made to the drawings which form a further part hereof and to accompanying descriptive matter in which there are illustrated and described particular representative examples of systems apparatuses computer program products and or methods in accordance with the invention.

In the following description of various exemplary embodiments reference is made to the accompanying drawings which form a part hereof and in which is shown by way of illustration various embodiments in which the invention may be practiced. It is to be understood that other embodiments may be utilized as structural and operational changes may be made without departing from the scope of the present invention.

Generally the present invention provides systems apparatuses and methods for applying one or more application variants to a base application s upon initial activation or other initial use of the base application. For example a method that may be implemented in accordance with the principles of the invention involves a manner for modifying a base application s resident on a terminal. The terminal may include for example mobile phones Personal Digital Assistants PDAs laptop notebook computers workstations and or other devices capable of executing applications and communicating information to and from a network s . These devices may communicate with a network via wireless and or wired mechanisms. The base application s may be for example an application s that is installed on or otherwise delivered to the terminal at the time of manufacture or other time prior to retail delivery or may be delivered to the terminal at a retail store or after purchase of the terminal by a user. These representative examples are to merely show that any device that executes applications that can be made to reside on the terminal and can communicate with other devices via a network or otherwise can be used in connection with the present invention.

The illustrative method for modifying a base application s resident on the terminal includes embodiments where terminal related information is transmitted from the terminal upon activation including any predefined initial use of the application at the terminal. For example a common base application or client may be delivered as a resident application client in a terminal or group of terminals. When a user retailer testing personnel or the like initially activates or otherwise uses the base application for the first time terminal related information is transmitted from the terminal. When referring to first time this means the first time the application is activated used under normal circumstances such as the first time a user invokes the particular application. In other words there may be prior design testing experimental etc uses where the feature is disabled prior to the first actual activation use of the application under normal circumstances.

As is described more fully below this terminal related information may include any number of different attributes including any one or more of characteristics of the specific terminal identifications of the operator service provider associated with the terminal terminal firmware client identifiers phone language and others. This information is received at a server s for processing. The server may receive the information via one or more networks including Global Area Networks GANs such as the Internet or other wide area networks mobile networks such as Global System for Mobile Communications GSM General Packet Radio System GPRS CDMA short range or proximity networks such as via local Wireless Access Points WAPs in the case of Bluetooth and or other networks etc. It is relevant only that the terminal can provide its terminal related information via the relevant network s to reach the specific or distributed server system of the invention. This stand alone or distributed server system is hereinafter interchangeably referred to as configuration server system or configuration database CDB which represents the database of information associated with the configuration server system. The configuration server system derives application variant information for the terminal associated with the received terminal related information and uses the terminal related information as the basis for deriving the application variant information. Accordingly the configuration server system may derive or otherwise create different application variant information for different terminals having different terminal related information.

When this application variant information is derived or otherwise obtained via the configuration server system it is transmitted back to the terminal where it is used to modify the application that was undergoing its first activation use in accordance with the application variant information. For example in one embodiment the application variant information includes user interface UI information including any one or more of display backgrounds icons brand information colors audio etc. In this manner the same common base application may be provided on a number of terminals being placed on the market and operator specific service provider specific vendor specific or other analogous information may be used to modify the application presentation accordingly. In a more particular embodiment the application variant information provides branding and or skinning information to modify the first time used application at the terminal.

Thus embodiments of the present invention provide mechanisms and methods for automating and enabling updating configuring branding and or other modifications to post sales terminal applications based on any one or more attributes. The updating configuring branding etc. can involve partial or entire modifications to the application. The invention provides a number of advantages and benefits such as shortening the time in which it takes before shipping a new terminal with bundled content. Currently content must be ready months prior to shipping which includes specific content for every application variant that may be used for any of the terminals. The invention also provides consistency and reduces latency issues. For example where an operator specific variant of an application is installed on a mobile phone during manufacture it may be months before a user actually uses the application and the UI or other modifications desired by the operator may already be out of date. The present invention ensures that the user will modify the application upon first use with the most recent configuration data available in the configuration server system. Further because the configuration server system can be implemented as a globally hosted database such a distributed system provides redundancy with minimized latency to serve any client consistently regardless of the terminal users whereabouts. Another advantage is that the configuration server system can aggregate collections of media gathered from multiple independent sources where these collections of media and or updates to such collections can be provided to the users. The aforementioned advantages are merely representative examples of advantages provided by the present invention and does not represent an exhaustive list of all of the advantages provided by the present invention.

The terminal related information transmitted from the terminal is received at the configuration server system. The configuration server system derives application variant information for the terminal based on the terminal related information provided by the terminal. For example the terminal related information may include information relating to the operator service provider terminal characteristics and the like and from this information the appropriate application variant information for that terminal can be accessed from the CDB. The application variant information is then transmitted back to the terminal where it can be used by the terminal to modify the base application accordingly. Such modification may include modifying the user interface UI of the base application in a manner identified by the application variant information as described more fully in connection with ensuing exemplary embodiments.

Referring now to the illustrated embodiment involves a method where a common or base application is provided to the application client on the terminal. For example when a mobile terminal is being manufactured various applications may be installed on the terminal. According to the present invention such an application can be the same base application which can then be updated with the appropriate client variants as described below. More particularly upon first access of the client application an activity to retrieve a stored Uniform Resource Identifier URI can be invoked . This URI hereinafter referred to as the Master URI can be retrieved in any known manner. For example the activity that is invoked at block may involve invoking an application or API that manages retrieval of the URI. In another embodiment the base application itself may include instructions to invoke a memory operation such that the processor s operating on the terminal retrieve the Master URI from a known memory storage location. In yet another embodiment the Master URI is retrieved from a remote server. Any manner of retrieving the Master URI may be used in accordance with the invention.

Using the Master URI as an address of the configuration server system the terminal sends certain terminal related information from the terminal to the configuration server system via a network s . This terminal related information may include any information that can identify the appropriate UI variant information in the CDB of the configuration server system. For example the terminal related information may include information for determining the terminal type and characteristics. One such example is a User Agent Profile UAProf that describes the capabilities of a device and or client. This or analogous profile information may include hardware and software characteristics of the terminal such as the display size resolution audio capabilities operating system network characteristics e.g. GSM GPRS capable browser or other access application particulars etc. Terminal related information may also instead include information to determine the operator and or service provider such as a Mobile Country Code MCC Mobile Network Code MNC Service Provider Name SPN Short Message Service Center SMSC numbers etc. This information may be derived from the Subscriber Identify Module SIM or otherwise. Other terminal related information may include information to determine whether the terminal is a variant such as firmware information. Terminal related information may also instead include terminal and or client information such as an International Mobile Equipment Identifier IMEI a Unique Identifier UID that uniquely identifies the client application. Still further examples of terminal related information include the terminal s current language selection roaming indicator etc.

As indicated above the terminal related information may include information to determine the operator service provider application developer or other similar entity. For example information such as the MCC MNC SPN SMSC and the like may be used by the receiving configuration server to select the appropriate UI variant information from an aggregation of variant information owned and or defined by different entities. As an example if the MCC MNC and or SPN is provided as part of the terminal related information the configuration server may identify a particular operator who has defined certain application variant information to be provided when the MCC MNC and or SPN corresponds to that particular operator. Thus this variant information may be provided by controlled maintained and or otherwise defined by operators service providers application developers and the like and in some embodiments the configuration server uses the relevant terminal related information to identify which variant information or subset of variant information among the collection or totality of variant information associated with these entities is to be selected. An exemplary implementation of such an embodiment may include providing information such as the MCC MNC SPN or other codes that can be obtained at the terminal such as via the terminal s SIM or other storage. Other information such as the Internet Protocol IP address from which the query is originating can be traced back to the operator s network and possibly to particular nodes such as a WAP gateway. This information may be gathered manually from operators and other data sources e.g. MCC MNC lists available to the public and configured to the configuration database. The updating of the variant information of different entities at the configuration server may be performed manually at the configuration server or otherwise such as allowing operators service providers and others to update their variant information via an appropriate service. There are various manners in which different entities can obtain update and or manage their respective variant information made available by the configuration server and the present invention is applicable to any such manners.

Different combinations of these and or other terminal related information may be used to identify particular UI variant information at the CDB. For example the information may be used to index or otherwise locate particular UI variant data stored at the CDB. In an alternative embodiment the CDB may optionally redirect the query to any other URI as determined at decision block . If redirection is to be employed in this fashion a different CDB e.g. CDB 2 may be used . Using redirection in this manner provides the ability to create CDB subsystems such as virtual CDBs within the global CDB system that are dedicated to different purposes and can ensure flexible scalability.

In another embodiment the Master URI can in some cases be configured not to point to the globally hosted CDB but rather to some other URI. For example the URI could point to an operator service provider s or other vendor s own CDB. In such an example the operator service provider or other entity could keep information separate from the globally hosted CDB and provide this information themselves. This may be particularly practical where the terminal is manufactured as a variant for a particular operator service provider etc. where it may be known that the CDB data will be associated with that particular operator service provider etc.

When the particular UI variant information has been identified it is provided to the terminal. In an exemplary embodiment of the invention this is provided via a network s although it is feasible to provide the information directly between the terminal and CDB by way of point to point transmission. When the terminal has received the information it may modify one or more UI features of the client with the UI variant information. For example this UI variant information may be used to skin the client with operator specific service provider specific or similar entity specific branding logos icons backgrounds audio tactile feedback vibration and or other perceptible UI features or overlays.

This may be particularly useful in situations where mobile operators or other network service entities may want certain terminal applications to be branded to incorporate that entity s look and feel. One existing prior art manner of providing this information is to create several variants of the applications and install them in the factory or in any event prior to the purchase or actual use of the terminal. The need for these multiple different variants cause significant burden to product development. The present invention allows as few as a single base application client to be installed in the terminal and the branding or other UI variations are effected when the client is first attempted to be used.

Various optional features may be implemented in connection with the UI variation system and methodology of the present invention. illustrates some representative examples of such optional features. For example periodic and or situation triggered events may invoke subsequent queries to the configuration server system to check for updated UI and or other CDB data. This is depicted at decision block where it is checked whether a particular event s occurred to trigger such a subsequent query s . As a more particular example the terminal client may have a pre defined refresh counter that causes it to invoke a query to the CDB periodically whereby the event may be the expiration of a time duration and or reaching a pre defined count . In another embodiment if the client is already communicating with the configuration server system for any reason the client can be configured to automatically make a request to refresh the UI information from that server. In yet another embodiment the terminal user can be given the ability to force the client to contact the configuration server system via the UI to perform such a refresh. In any case if such a request is made the CDB checks for updates as shown at block . If there are changes to be made this updated information can be provided to the terminal which in turn can again modify the UI feature s of the client with the newly provided UI variant information.

Another optional feature includes having the CDB automatically check the software version of the accessing client and provide a new version to be installed on the fly. For example the software version may be checked and if the software version is not up to date the software version may be updated .

In another optional embodiment one or more content URIs may be provided to the terminal as determined at decision block . For example the accessing client may be a client seeking information such as operator service provider catalogs. It may be beneficial for an operator service provider to be able to provide their logo icon look and feel and or other branding information as part of such a catalog client. When the UI of the catalog client is modified in accordance with the present invention any content URIs requested by and provided to the catalog client as determined at decision block can be presented to the user in the manner desired by the operator service provider. If such content URIs are provided the catalog or analogous client can fetch the desired content from a server s addressable by the provided URI s . Because such a catalogs client itself can fetch independent catalogs from multiple sources indicated with URIs a set of catalog addresses can be returned with some common theme and CDB solution providers can provide end users collections of media. For example media may be gathered from multiple independent sources such as from service provider A service provider B etc. The implementation of such a catalog client is a particularly practical use of the present invention as the UI associated with the client in the terminal that is to access content from a particular operator service provider may be branded or otherwise modified to reflect the operator service provider of the content or content selections.

Still other optional features may be implemented such as where a client is shared to another terminal e.g. Bluetooth superdistribution the stored Master URI in the terminal may enable the configuration of the shared client in the new host terminal according to that particular end user s and his her service provider s profile. Further optional features may also be employed in connection with the present invention.

The invention thus provides as described in connection with a solution that may be used for among other things configuring and branding settings and the UI of a terminal client. This may be based on the terminal variant s needs local variants needs operators needs operators post sales needs vendors post sales needs etc. The solution may also be used for dynamically changing the content within the application by providing tailored content such as a tailored URL link list based on various attributes of either both the end user s preferences the terminal s capabilities the operator s service provider s or other content retailer s preferences and the like. The invention may further be used for updating old software versions of the terminal counterpart application which provides the actual service. Additionally the information within the CDB may be updated directly via the terminals variant databases and or operators databases through appropriate Application Programming Interfaces APIs provided by the CDB. Reports and statistical data regarding the usage of the system and for example the number of clients accessing it may also be gathered. The invention facilitates these and other uses.

Assume that Application A is invoked for the first time. An original UI presentation as set by the factory for that Application A is provided. For example in the context of visual UI features a terminal display device not shown as controlled by a processor can present a first default UI presentation. In another embodiment the original UI presentation may be no presentation e.g. blank screen etc. . When Application A is opened or otherwise initiated by the user the first time or otherwise in association with a particular user attempt to invoke the application the relevant Master URI is retrieved and the terminal related information is sent via transmitter to the configuration server system and associated CDB A which correspond to the Master URI via a network s . As previously indicated the configuration server system CDB may be distributed as represented by the one or more additional or in some cases virtual CDBs B.

In response to the terminal related information the relevant UI variant information for the accessing terminal is retrieved from the CDB A B. This information is received via the receiver of the terminal and can be stored or otherwise associated with Application A as represented by block . The processor can execute the Application A using the UI variant information to provide a modified UI presentation . For example the visual presentation of the Application A may now include a skin or other UI modifications to provide a new UI from which the user of the terminal can view and or interact with.

As previously noted the present invention may be used in connection with an online content catalog service s . Such services may be implemented in accordance with systems as described herein and or as described in co pending U.S. patent application Ser. Nos. 10 868 672 and 10 868 499 both of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties. In such a case at least one of the applications clients on the terminal to be impacted by the modified UI variants may be a catalog client. The CDB and or associated database may include a master catalog serving as a catalog of mobile content applications services etc. Developers can arrange to have their content applications and services associated with a global and or company operated CDB to bring their solutions to any number of online retail storefronts. Different operators may have different offerings taken from the master catalog whereby operator branded purchasing clients portals and other interfaces may be provided to users. The present invention allows such interfaces to be branded with operator and or service provider characteristics such as logos icons backgrounds sounds trademarks servicemarks colors designs etc. upon first use of such catalog clients. provides a diagram of an exemplary embodiment of the UI variant infusion of the present invention used in connection with a catalog client where content made available by a particular operator is presented to the user with the operator s preferred UI presented to the user.

As shown in a terminal display A may provide an original or default presentation for the catalog client. This original default client presentation may be part of the base application e.g. the default portion of the client installed at the factory for a volume of terminals shipped from the factory. Alternatively the presentation may be null or blank in that the modified UI is obtained before any particular presentation is displayed. In any case the first time that the catalog client is opened or otherwise used the client contacts the CDB using the Master URI previously described. The CDB returns the new UI namely the UI variant information that can be used to skin or otherwise modify the presentation. This new UI is displayed on the display B as presentation which is different than the original default presentation . In the case where the client is a catalog client as in the present example the CDB also provides the URI s i.e. address es to the catalogs server. The client fetches catalogs from the provided catalog address es . During this time a notification window may be presented to notify the user and show the progress of the catalogs download. The catalogs are fetched from the operator s service delivery platform which in turn provides the various catalogs and or informational items as shown at presentation . Selectable catalogs and or informational items are depicted for purposes of illustration at blocks and block represents an area for viewing more detailed information related to any one or more of the blocks .

It should be noted that applying the UI variant information to the terminal UI may occur at a time other than the initial return of information from the CDB . For example the UI variants may be applied at the stage shown as presentation rather than at the stage shown as presentation i.e. at the time of providing the catalogs versus at the time of the client fetching the catalogs. As this example illustrates the particular time at which the UI is actually modified at the user terminal using the UI variant information is not of particular significance.

As was described in connection with the present invention includes various optional features that may be used in connection with the present invention. One such feature is the periodic and or event triggering monitoring for UI variant updates in the CDB. For example the operator service provider and or other entity may want to change any one or more of the colors logos icons trademarks or the like. Therefore in addition to allowing the UI to be modified upon the first use of the particular client subsequent updates are also possible in connection with the present invention. provides a diagram of another exemplary embodiment of the UI variant infusion of the present invention again described in terms of a catalog client for purposes of example only where UI updates are made available to the terminal. Corresponding reference numbers between corresponding items in are used to facilitate an understanding of this feature of the invention.

Hardware firmware software or a combination thereof may be used to perform the functions and operations in accordance with the invention. The terminals in accordance with the invention include any communication device capable of communicating over the air OTA with wireless networks and or capable of communicating via wired networks. Such terminals include for example mobile phones Personal Digital Assistants PDAs computing devices and other networked terminals. A representative system in which the present invention may be implemented or otherwise utilized is illustrated in where the terminal is represented as a wireless terminal capable of communicating information OTA.

The system includes one or more terminals A such as for example a mobile phone PDA computing device or other communication device capable of OTA communication. The terminal A utilizes computing systems to control and manage the conventional device activity as well as the functionality provided by the present invention. For example the representative terminal B includes a processing control unit such as a microprocessor controller reduced instruction set computer RISC or other central processing module. The processing unit need not be a single device and may include one or more processors. For example the processing unit may include a master processor and one or more associated slave processors coupled to communicate with the master processor.

The processing unit controls the basic functions of the terminal B as dictated by programs available in the program storage memory . The storage memory may include an operating system and various program and data modules associated with the present invention. In one embodiment of the invention the programs are stored in non volatile electrically erasable programmable read only memory EEPROM flash ROM etc. so that the programs are not lost upon power down of the terminal. The storage may also include one or more of other types of read only memory ROM and programmable and or erasable ROM random access memory RAM subscriber interface module SIM wireless interface module WIM smart card or other fixed or removable memory device media. The programs may also be provided via other media such as disks CD ROM DVD or the like which are read by the appropriate media drive s . The relevant software for carrying out terminal operations in accordance with the present invention may also be transmitted to the terminal B via data signals such as being downloaded electronically via one or more networks such as the data network or other data networks and an intermediate wireless network s .

For performing other standard terminal functions the processor is also coupled to user input interface associated with the terminal B. The user input interface may include for example a keypad function buttons microphone joystick scrolling mechanism e.g. mouse trackball touch pad screen or other user entry mechanisms not shown . These and other user input components are coupled to the processor as is known in the art.

A user interface UI is provided which allows the user of the terminal A B to perceive information visually audibly through touch etc. For example one or more display devices A may be associated with the terminal B. The display A can display the original default and or modified presentations as previously described. A speaker s B may be provided to present audible information. For example a tone or other sound associated with a particular operator s brand may be included with the UI variant information and played when the user activates the client that has been skinned or otherwise modified with that operator s UI information. Other user interface UI mechanisms can also be provided such as tactile C or other feedback. The UI variant information may provide any type of presentation perceivable by the user.

The illustrated terminal B also includes conventional circuitry for performing wireless transmissions over the wireless network s . The DSP may be employed to perform a variety of functions including analog to digital A D conversion digital to analog D A conversion speech coding decoding encryption decryption error detection and correction bit stream translation filtering etc. The transceiver includes at least a transmitter and receiver thereby transmitting outgoing radio signals and receiving incoming radio signals generally by way of an antenna .

In one embodiment the storage memory stores the various client programs and data used in connection with the present invention. For example the storage memory includes storage to store the client programs applications that when first opened initiate the UI variant infusion concept according to the present invention. The storage memory stores the Master URI s that notifies the terminal B of the address of the configuration server system CDB. The storage memory also includes the terminal related information as described above. Upon receiving the UI variant information from the CDB the UI variant information may be temporarily or permanently stored. These client and data modules are representative of the types of functional and data modules that may be associated with a terminal in accordance with the invention and are not intended to represent an exhaustive list.

In one embodiment the computing system represents the configuration server system previously described. The server system may be a single unit or a distributed system. In one embodiment of the invention the configuration server system is distributed to multiple locations and may be a globally distributed system. Although the server is distributed to multiple locations one embodiment involves replicating the database i.e. each node provides some or all of the same services. This ensures among other things redundancy in the event that a node s has failed.

The computing system server includes a processing arrangement which may be coupled to the storage memory . The processor carries out a variety of standard computing functions as is known in the art as dictated by software and or firmware instructions. The storage memory may represent firmware media storage and or memory. The processor may communicate with other internal and external components through input output I O circuitry . The computing system may also include media drives such as hard and floppy disk drives CD ROM drives DVD drives and other media capable of reading and or storing information. In one embodiment software for carrying out the operations at the computing system in accordance with the present invention may be stored and distributed on CD ROM diskette removable memory or other form of media capable of portably storing information as represented by media devices . Such software may also be transmitted to the system via data signals such as being downloaded electronically via a network such as the data network Local Area Network LAN not shown wireless network and or any combination thereof.

In accordance with one embodiment of the invention the storage memory and or media devices store the various programs and data used in connection with the present invention. For example the single or distributed CDB includes the UI variant information and optionally other data that the requesting client may need for the particular application. The UI variant identification module represents the software firmware or other program information that is operable in connection with the processing control unit to identify the appropriate UI variant information for a particular requesting client. The UI variant identification module may include for example a database indexing program s that uses the received terminal related information to identify the appropriate UI variant information stored in the CDB . The UI variant identification module may alternatively or additionally include comparison functionality to compare certain received terminal related information to stored information to identify the appropriate UI variant information stored in the CDB . Any desired manner of locating the appropriate UI variant information stored in the CDB using the terminal related information may be employed.

The storage memory and or other media devices may also include a redirect module which is operable with the processor to redirect the query and terminal related information to any other desired URI. If redirection is to be employed in this fashion the configuration server system redirects the information to the other URI to be processed in the manner that the configuration server system would otherwise have processed the information in accordance with the invention. Such redirection facilitates the creation of CDB subsystems such as virtual CDBs within the global CDB system that are dedicated to different purposes and that can ensure flexible scalability.

The illustrated computing system also includes DSP circuitry and at least one transceiver which is intended to also refer to discrete transmitter receiver components . While the server may communicate with the data network via wired connections the server may also instead be equipped with transceivers to communicate with wireless networks whereby an antenna may be used.

Using the foregoing specification some embodiments of the invention may be implemented as a machine process or article of manufacture by using standard programming and or engineering techniques to produce programming software firmware hardware or any combination thereof. Any resulting program s having computer readable program code may be embodied within one or more computer usable media such as memory devices or transmitting devices thereby making a computer program product computer readable medium or other article of manufacture according to the invention. As such the terms computer readable medium computer program product or other analogous language are intended to encompass a computer program existing permanently temporarily or transitorily on any computer usable medium such as on any memory device or in any transmitting device.

For example one embodiment of the invention includes a computer readable medium having instructions stored thereon that are executable by a computing system for initiating the UI variant concept upon first use of the client residing on a terminal. Another embodiment includes a computer readable medium having instructions stored thereon that are executable by a computing system for providing the UI variant information to a requesting terminal in response to receiving the terminal related information.

From the description provided herein those skilled in the art are readily able to combine software created as described with appropriate general purpose or special purpose computer hardware to create a computing system and or computing subcomponents embodying the invention and to create a computing system and or computing subcomponents for carrying out the method of the invention.

The foregoing description of the exemplary embodiments of the invention has been presented for the purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed. Many modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teaching. It is intended that the scope of the invention be limited not with this detailed description but rather determined by the claims appended hereto.

