---

title: Method and system for managing instant messaging status
abstract: A system for managing instant messaging status. An occurrence of an event for a user in a calendar application is detected. A status of the user for an instant messaging system is controlled during the occurrence of the event in response to detecting the occurrence of the event.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07584258&OS=07584258&RS=07584258
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 07584258
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051205
---
The present invention relates generally to an improved data processing system. More specifically the present invention is directed to a computer implemented method apparatus and computer usable program code for managing instant messaging status.

There is no doubt that the Internet has changed the way people and businesses communicate. Instant messaging IM is a type of computer application that is designed to facilitate communication among multiple computer users attached to a network such as for example the Internet.

Instant messaging may be implemented in various ways but in general it supports the sending and receiving of instant messages to and from other users. Instant messages are correspondence that appears on a computer display of a recipient more or less instantaneously after being sent. This is opposed to the more traditional e mail messages which typically are logged in a system until a recipient wishes to view them. The ability to receive correspondence instantly gives instant messaging a more spontaneous conversational quality to it than does traditional e mail. Thus instant messaging provides an alternative form of communication using computers attached to a network. Instant message applications may be used by a variety of users such as groups of individuals working closely together on some critical project or more casual users at home wanting to see if someone is available to receive a message immediately.

Instant messaging systems allow a person or business to maintain a list of people that they desire to interact with online. The person or business may send messages to any of the individuals contained on the list often called a buddy list or contact list as long as the individual is online at the time the message is sent. Sending an instant message opens up a small window display on each computer interface so that both individuals involved with in the process may type in and read messages.

Normally instant messaging involves two people online sending notes back and forth to each other. Additionally instant messaging systems may enable users to send alerts to one another. An instant messaging alert may be used to convey information when no response is desired such as for example a meeting reminder. A chat room is a software program that allows a group of people to communicate with each other by allowing each member of the group to type in messages that are seen by everyone in the chat room. An instant messaging system generally comprises a plurality of instant messaging client devices coupled to an instant messaging server via a data processing system network. Messages and connection information is maintained on the server that is controlled by a provider of the instant messaging service. Examples of instant messaging services are Lotus Sametime Microsoft Network MSN Messenger Sun ONE Instant Messenger AOL Instant Messenger AIM and Yahoo Messenger .

Today most computers are connected to some type of network. A network allows a computer to share information with other computer systems. The Internet is only one example of a computer network. Many commercial business environments connect computers via a local area network LAN or by another means. A LAN may be utilized by a business enterprise to connect its computers for the purpose of allowing co workers to instantaneously communicate with each other. In most business environments instantaneous communication between employees is essential to increased productivity. However this ability of allowing co workers to instantaneously communicate with each other may also detrimentally impact the ability of co workers to be productive because of constant interruptions by instant messages especially during scheduled events such as meetings or appointments.

Therefore it would be beneficial to have a computer implemented method apparatus and computer usable program code for managing instant messaging status during scheduled events.

Embodiments of the present invention provide a computer implemented method apparatus and computer usable program code for managing instant messaging status. An occurrence of an event for a user in a calendar application is detected and in response to detecting the occurrence of the event a status of the user for an instant messaging system is controlled during the occurrence of the event.

With reference now to the figures and in particular with reference to exemplary diagrams of data processing environments are provided in which embodiments of the present invention may be implemented. It should be appreciated that are only exemplary and are not intended to assert or imply any limitation with regard to the environments in which aspects or embodiments of the present invention may be implemented. Many modifications to the depicted environments may be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention.

With reference now to the figures depicts a pictorial representation of a network of data processing systems in which aspects of the present invention may be implemented. Network data processing system is a network of computers in which embodiments of the present invention may be implemented. Network data processing system contains network which is the medium used to provide communications links between various devices and computers connected together within network data processing system . Network may include connections such as wire wireless communication links or fiber optic cables.

In the depicted example server and server connect to network along with storage unit . In addition clients and connect to network . These clients and may be for example personal computers or network computers. In the depicted example server provides data such as boot files operating system images and applications to clients and . Clients and are clients to server in this example. Network data processing system may include additional servers clients and other devices not shown.

In the depicted example network data processing system is the Internet with network representing a worldwide collection of networks and gateways that use the Transmission Control Protocol Internet Protocol TCP IP suite of protocols to communicate with one another. At the heart of the Internet is a backbone of high speed data communication lines between major nodes or host computers consisting of thousands of commercial governmental educational and other computer systems that route data and messages. Of course network data processing system also may be implemented as a number of different types of networks such as for example an intranet a local area network LAN or a wide area network WAN . is intended as an example and not as an architectural limitation for different embodiments of the present invention.

With reference now to a block diagram of a data processing system is shown in which aspects of the present invention may be implemented. Data processing system is an example of a computer such as server or client in in which computer usable code or instructions implementing the processes for embodiments of the present invention may be located.

In the depicted example data processing system employs a hub architecture including north bridge and memory controller hub NB MCH and south bridge and input output I O controller hub SB ICH . Processing unit main memory and graphics processor are connected to NB MCH . Graphics processor may be connected to NB MCH through an accelerated graphics port AGP .

In the depicted example local area network LAN adapter connects to SB ICH . Audio adapter keyboard and mouse adapter modem read only memory ROM hard disk drive HDD CD ROM drive universal serial bus USB ports and other communication ports and PCI PCIe devices connect to SB ICH through bus and bus . PCI PCIe devices may include for example Ethernet adapters add in cards and PC cards for notebook computers. PCI uses a card bus controller while PCIe does not. ROM may be for example a flash binary input output system BIOS .

HDD and CD ROM drive connect to SB ICH through bus . HDD and CD ROM drive may use for example an integrated drive electronics IDE or serial advanced technology attachment SATA interface. Super I O SIO device may be connected to SB ICH .

An operating system runs on processing unit and coordinates and provides control of various components within data processing system in . As a client the operating system may be a commercially available operating system such as Microsoft Windows XP Microsoft and Windows are trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States other countries or both . An object oriented programming system such as the Java programming system may run in conjunction with the operating system and provides calls to the operating system from Java programs or applications executing on data processing system Java is a trademark of Sun Microsystems Inc. in the United States other countries or both .

As a server data processing system may be for example an IBM eServer pseries computer system running the Advanced Interactive Executive AIX operating system or the LINUX operating system eserver pseries and AIX are trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the United States other countries or both while LINUX is a trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States other countries or both . Data processing system may be a symmetric multiprocessor SMP system including a plurality of processors in processing unit . Alternatively a single processor system may be employed.

Instructions for the operating system the object oriented programming system and applications or programs are located on storage devices such as HDD and may be loaded into main memory for execution by processing unit . The processes for embodiments of the present invention are performed by processing unit using computer usable program code which may be located in a memory such as for example main memory ROM or in one or more peripheral devices and .

Those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the hardware in may vary depending on the implementation. Other internal hardware or peripheral devices such as flash memory equivalent non volatile memory or optical disk drives and the like may be used in addition to or in place of the hardware depicted in . Also the processes of the present invention may be applied to a multiprocessor data processing system.

In some illustrative examples data processing system may be a personal digital assistant PDA which is configured with flash memory to provide non volatile memory for storing operating system files and or user generated data.

A bus system may be comprised of one or more buses such as bus or bus as shown in . Of course the bus system may be implemented using any type of communication fabric or architecture that provides for a transfer of data between different components or devices attached to the fabric or architecture. A communication unit may include one or more devices used to transmit and receive data such as modem or network adapter of . A memory may be for example main memory ROM or a cache such as found in NB MCH in . The depicted examples in and above described examples are not meant to imply architectural limitations. For example data processing system also may be a tablet computer laptop computer or telephone device in addition to taking the form of a PDA.

Aspects of the present invention provide a computer implemented method apparatus and computer usable program code for managing instant messaging status. A calendar application detects an occurrence of an event for a user within the calendar application. The event may be for example a scheduled calendar appointment or meeting. In response to detecting the occurrence of the event the calendar application controls a status of the user for an instant messaging system during the occurrence of the event. The instant messaging status for the user may be for example do not disturb or I am in a meeting.

The calendar application changes the instant messaging status of the user if the status is different from a preferred status specified for the event. However either the calendar application or the instant messaging system may control the instant messaging status for the user during the scheduled calendar event. The calendar application and the instant messaging application may be linked together during the occurrence of the event in order for the calendar application to control the instant messaging status for the user. The user links the calendar application with the instant messaging application by setting preferences and inputting the address of the linked application in each of the applications preference windows.

A benefit of embodiments of the present invention may be that productivity of a user may be increased. Productivity of the user may be increased because the user receives fewer interruptions during important scheduled calendar events when the instant messaging status is automatically controlled by the calendar application which records the date and time for each user scheduled event. Another benefit of embodiments of the present invention may be that the user has more flexibility in managing instant messaging interruptions. This increased flexibility is accomplished by the user setting calendar application preferences from within the calendar application to control how many interruptions the user is willing to accept during a scheduled calendar event without constantly updating the instant messaging status settings in the instant messaging application.

Referring now to an exemplary block diagram illustrating components used in managing instant messages is depicted in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. In this illustrative example a user utilizing instant messaging client may send or exchange messages over a network with other users using instant messaging clients and . For example client may exchange messages over network with client and client in . The exchanging of messages may be for example via instant messaging broadcast messaging or any other synchronous messaging system that may be utilized by embodiments of the present invention.

Broadcast messaging provides a means for sending a single message instantaneously to all members of a predefined community of instant messaging clients. Broadcast messaging may be utilized within the predefined community to for example conduct instant chat rooms broadcast instant alert messages hold instant web presentations and poll individuals within the predefined community for instant feedback. The predefined community may be for example employees of an enterprise members of an organization students teachers and support staff of an educational institution governmental entities and individuals all of whom may comprise a contact or buddy list individually or in combination.

Instant messaging clients and may be executing on a data processing system such as for example data processing system in . It should be noted that even though the exemplary illustration of depicts three instant messaging clients embodiments of the present invention are not restricted to such. For example an entity using the processes of an embodiment of the present invention may employ fewer or more instant messaging clients as is necessary to complete the mission of the entity.

The exchange of messages in these examples is facilitated through instant messaging server process . Instant messaging server process may be located on a server such as data processing system in . Instant messaging server process allows users to find other users within the instant messaging system as well as aid in the exchange of messages between the different users. Depending on the particular instant messaging system instant messaging server process may only be involved in providing an indication of when particular users are online and for establishing initial contacts while users contacting users already on a buddy list may contact those users directly after seeing that a particular user is online.

In these examples the different users registered to the instant messaging system are stored in user database . User database provides information needed to search for and find other users as well as contact users when they are online.

Turning now to an exemplary block diagram illustrating components of an instant messaging client device is shown in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. Instant messaging client may be for example instant messaging client in . Instant messaging client may include for example graphical user interface GUI calendar application instant messaging application application programming interface API and operating system OS .

A user of instant messaging client utilizes graphical user interface to interact with the applications residing in instant messaging client such as calendar application and instant messaging application . A graphical user interface is a graphics based user interface that incorporates movable windows icons and a mouse. Graphical user interfaces have become the standard way users interact with computers.

The user may employ calendar application to schedule events. A scheduled calendar event may be for example a scheduled appointment a business meeting a business trip vacation and the like. Embodiments of the present invention may utilize any calendar application that is capable of being linked to an instant messaging application such as instant messaging application .

The user may use instant messaging application to connect to and access an instant messaging server over a network. For example instant messaging client utilizes an instant messaging application to access instant messaging server process in . Instant messaging application may be any instant messaging application that may be utilized by embodiments of the present invention.

Application programming interface allows the user of instant messaging client an individual or a software routine to invoke system capabilities using a standard consistent interface without concern for how the particular functionality is implemented.

Calendar application and instant messaging application may run for example on operating system . Calendar application and instant messaging application represents any number of software applications designed to react to data to provide the desired functionality the user seeks. The software applications represented by calendar application and instant messaging application may include those software applications necessary to handle data video graphics photos or text. Embodiments of the present invention may be implemented within calendar application and instant messaging application in these examples.

Operating system is utilized to provide high level functionality to the user and to other software. Such an operating system typically includes a basic input output system. Operating system calendar application and instant messaging application may employ user input devices in order to obtain input from the user. User input devices may include a pointing device such as a mouse and a keyboard or any other input device known to those of ordinary skill in the art. User input devices may be used for example to set user preferences in a preference window displayed on graphical user interface . However embodiments of the present invention are not restricted to utilizing user input devices for the sole purpose of setting user preferences. The user input devices may be used for any purpose necessary to accomplish the processes of embodiments of the present invention.

A processor such as for example processor in performs the basic operations in instant messaging client . The processor may for example display information on graphical user interface . Graphical user interface has a plurality of picture elements collectively referred to as a screen which may define the appearance of a user interface environment displayed on graphical user interface . Graphical user interface screen contents and therefore the appearance of the user interface environment may be controlled or altered by calendar application instant messaging application or operating system either individually or in combination.

With reference now to an exemplary block diagram illustrating an instant messaging application is depicted in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. The components shown in may be found in an instant messaging application such as instant messaging application in . These components may be implemented in a data processing system such as for example data processing system in .

Instant messaging application may for example process messages such as message . As instant messaging application receives messages these received messages are presented in dialog window . Additionally dialog window provides an interface for a user to input text in order to draft and send messages to other users.

Instant messaging application presents contact and preference window to provide the user with a contact list of user names as well as other information. Contact and preference window also provides an interface to allow the user to set different preferences. For example the user may set passwords required to access different names used in instant messaging sessions. Additionally the user may set a preference to link the instant messaging application to another application within the data processing system such as a calendar application. For example a user may set a preference in instant messaging application to link instant messaging application with calendar application within instant messaging client in .

Further the user may use contact and preference window to set other preferences such as alerts colors and fonts used in instant messaging application . These preferences also may include whether a picture is to be sent when an instant messaging session is initiated with another user. Depending on the implementation the preference may be set to allow a user who receives messages to retrieve images of the senders from a remote database such as user database in or a local cache.

In addition contact and preference window stores in contact list a list of names presented by contact and preference window in these examples. The user may edit contact list by adding to or delete from contact list other users. Contact list is utilized for presenting the list of names within contact and preference window .

Referring now to an exemplary block diagram illustrating a calendar application is depicted in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. The components shown in may be located in a calendar application such as calendar application in . These components may be implemented in a data processing system such as for example data processing system in .

Calendar application may for example process appointment and meeting times for a user such as appointment and meeting . Calendar application uses display window to receive appointment and meeting . In addition display window provides an interface for the user to input text with regard to appointment and meeting such as for example names of people involved subject matter description of the event importance of the event et cetera.

Calendar application presents preference window to provide the user with an interface to allow the user to set a variety of preferences. For example the user may set a password to protect calendar application from unwanted intrusion by other users. Moreover the user may set a preference to link the calendar application to another application within the data processing system such as an instant messaging application. For example a user may set a preference in calendar application to link calendar application with instant messaging application within instant messaging client in . Furthermore the user may use preference window to set other preferences such as event alerts and Do Not Disturb and I am unavailable messages used by calendar application .

Turning now to an exemplary illustration of a display window for a calendar application is shown in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. Calendar application display window may be for example display window for calendar application in . A user may utilize calendar application display window to input a scheduled event into the calendar application or to edit previously inputted information concerning a scheduled event.

Calendar application display window may include for example event type event subject event date and time and event description . Event type may be for example a drop down menu which may include event types such as appointment meeting teleconference vacation and the like. Of course embodiments of the present invention are not limited to the above list of event types. Any event type that may utilize processes of embodiments of the present invention may be used. A user may utilize event type to classify the type of each scheduled calendar event.

The user may use event subject as a title or subject line for the scheduled event. Event date and time is used to input the date and the time of the scheduled event. In this illustrative example the scheduled calendar event which is an appointment occurs on Wednesday Oct. 26 2005 from 1 00 p.m. until 2 00 p.m. The user may use event description to describe the scheduled calendar event and to attach any relevant information.

In addition calendar application display window also may include for example instant messaging status check box instant messaging status dialog box and do not disturb check box . A check box is a small box on screen that simulates the equivalent symbol on a paper form. Options in software applications are often selected with a check box. Clicking on the check box with a mouse switches the check box to its opposite state. When a check box contains a checkmark such as instant messaging status check box in this illustrative example the option is enabled. Enabled means that the option is turned on and active. When the check box is empty the option is not active or disabled. 

When a user opens a scheduled calendar event on the calendar application calendar application display window appears in the graphical user interface such as graphical user interface in with instant messaging status check box visible. A checkmark in instant messaging status check box means that the calendar application is in control of the instant messaging status for a linked instant messaging application during the scheduled calendar event. Conversely if instant messaging status check box does not contain a checkmark then the instant messaging status control remains with the instant messaging application. It should be noted that if there are no scheduled calendar events then the instant messaging application controls the instant messaging status. In this illustrative example because instant messaging status check box contains a checkmark the calendar application controls the instant messaging status for the linked instant messaging application for the scheduled event on Wednesday Oct. 26 2005 from 1 00 p.m. until 2 00 p.m.

Instant messaging status dialog box may for example automatically display a default message with regard to the instant messaging application status when instant messaging status check box contains a checkmark. In the illustrative example depicted in instant messaging status dialog box displays the default message I am at an appointment. Consequently for this illustrative example the instant messaging status for the user is I am at an appointment during the scheduled calendar event. Alternatively the user may input by keyboard for example any desired message in instant messaging status dialog box with regard to the instant messaging status. Also the user may change the message in instant messaging status dialog box at any time during the scheduled calendar event thus updating the instant messaging status as the user desires instantaneously.

Do not disturb check box may be used to indicate that the user does not want to be disturbed during the scheduled calendar event. In this particular example do not disturb check box contains a checkmark which means that the do not disturb option is enabled for the scheduled calendar event. Further do not disturb check box may take precedence over or override the message shown in instant messaging status dialog box . In other words if do not disturb check box contains a checkmark then the instant messaging status is do not disturb irrespective of the message contained in instant messaging status dialog box .

Calendar application display window also may contain save and close button . The user may employ save and close button to save the information inputted into calendar application display window when finished and then to close calendar application display window .

With reference now to an exemplary illustration of a preference window for a calendar application is shown in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. Calendar application preference window may be for example preference window for calendar application in . A user may utilize calendar application preference window to input user preferences with regard to the calendar application.

Calendar application preference window may include for example link to instant messaging tab . A user clicks on instant messaging tab with a mouse for example to access preferences and options for linking the calendar application such as calendar application in to an instant messaging application such as instant messaging application in within the data processing system such as instant messaging client in . Link to instant messaging tab may contain for example calendar link to instant messaging application . Calendar link to instant messaging application provides the information necessary for the calendar application to link to and communicate with the instant messaging application.

Calendar link to instant messaging application may include for example instant messaging application type instant messaging application address and instant messaging password . However embodiments of the present invention are not restricted to the above listed information for linking the calendar application with the instant messaging application. Those of ordinary skill in the art should appreciate that any information necessary for embodiments of the present invention to link the calendar application to the instant messaging application may be utilized.

Instant messaging application type may be for example a drop down menu containing a list of instant messaging application names utilized by the user on the data processing system. The instant messaging application type is important information because there may be unique requirements for the link that are directly tied to the instant messaging application. The user selects instant messaging application type by selecting from the list of instant messaging application names included in the drop down menu the name of the instant messaging application that the user desires to link with the calendar application.

Subsequent to selecting instant messaging type the calendar application automatically inserts instant messaging application address . Alternatively the user may input instant messaging application address . Instant messaging application address specifically identifies the selected instant messaging application in instant messaging application type . Instant messaging application address is needed to create the link between the calendar application and the instant messaging application.

Instant messaging password is required in order to access the instant messaging application if the instant messaging application is password protected. The user inputs the instant messaging application password in the dialog box of instant messaging password .

Link to instant messaging tab also may include preferences such as for example auto link via meeting notice check box auto link via appointment notice check box do not disturb meeting check box and do not disturb appointment check box . If auto link via meeting notice check box contains a checkmark which it does in the illustrative example depicted in then the instant messaging status check box on the calendar application display window will automatically contain a checkmark for any scheduled calendar events that are created via a meeting notice. For example instant messaging status check box of will automatically contain a checkmark if auto link via meeting notice check box contains a checkmark and the scheduled calendar event is a meeting. Thus for this illustrative example the calendar application will automatically link to the instant messaging application for scheduled calendar meetings.

Similarly if auto link via appointment notice check box contains a checkmark then the instant messaging status check box on the calendar application display window will automatically contain a checkmark for any scheduled calendar events that are created via an appointment notice. However in the illustrative example depicted in auto link via appointment notice check box does not contain a checkmark. Consequently the instant messaging status check box on the calendar application display window will not automatically contain a checkmark for any scheduled calendar events that are created via an appointment notice. Therefore for this illustrative example the calendar application will not automatically link to the instant messaging application for scheduled calendar appointments.

If do not disturb meeting check box contains a checkmark which it does in the illustrative example depicted in then the do not disturb check box on the calendar application display window will automatically contain a checkmark for any scheduled meeting calendar events. For example do not disturb check box of will automatically contain a checkmark if do not disturb meeting check box contains a checkmark and the scheduled calendar event is a meeting. Hence for this illustrative example the calendar application display window will automatically contain a checkmark in the do not disturb checkbox which will automatically set the instant messaging status for the user as do not disturb during scheduled meetings.

Similarly if do not disturb appointment check box contains a checkmark then the do not disturb check box on the calendar application display window will automatically contain a checkmark for any scheduled appointments. However in the illustrative example depicted in do not disturb appointment check box does not contain a checkmark. Consequently the do not disturb check box within the calendar application display window will not automatically contain a checkmark for any scheduled appointment calendar events. Therefore for this illustrative example the calendar application will not automatically set the instant messaging status as do not disturb for scheduled appointments.

Further link to instant messaging tab also may include default instant messaging status messages such as for example default meeting message and default appointment message . The user may input any desired text within the dialog boxes for default meeting message and default appointment message . Default meeting message is automatically displayed in the instant messaging status dialog box within the calendar application display window for scheduled meetings. For example if the scheduled calendar event is a meeting then default meeting message I am in a meeting will automatically appear in instant messaging status dialog box in .

Likewise the calendar application will automatically display default appointment message in the instant messaging status dialog box within the calendar application display window for scheduled appointments. In other words if the scheduled calendar event is an appointment then default appointment message I am at an appointment will automatically appear in the instant messaging status dialog box within the calendar application display window. However as discussed in the description of above the user may manually change the instant messaging status dialog box message within the calendar application display window at any time.

Furthermore calendar application preference window also may include buttons to save or cancel input preference settings contained within link to instant messaging tab such as for example OK button and Cancel button . The user may click on OK button after entering the user s preferences in order to save the preference settings for the calendar application. Conversely the user may click on Cancel button for the purpose of canceling the preference settings input by the user.

Referring now to an exemplary illustration of a preference window for an instant messaging application is depicted in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. Instant messaging application preference window may be for example contact and preference window for instant messaging in . A user may use instant messaging application preference window to enter user preferences regarding the instant messaging application.

Instant messaging application preference window may include for example link to calendar tab . A user may employ for example a mouse to click on link to calendar tab within instant messaging application preference window to access user preferences for linking the instant messaging application to the calendar application. For example a user may utilize instant messaging application preference window in order to link instant messaging application to calendar application within instant messaging client in .

Link to calendar tab may contain for example instant messaging link to calendar application check box . A user uses instant messaging link to calendar application check box to indicate the user s preference to link the instant messaging application to the calendar application. If calendar application check box contains a checkmark which it does in the illustrative example of then the link is created to the calendar application. The instant messaging application by creating the link to the calendar application allows the calendar application to control the instant messaging status during scheduled calendar events. For example because calendar application check box contains a checkmark the calendar application controls the instant messaging status for the instant messaging application during a scheduled calendar event such as appointment event type that occurs on event date and time Wednesday Oct. 26 2005 from 1 00 p.m. until 2 00 p.m. in . If calendar application check box does not contain a checkmark then the instant messaging application controls the instant messaging status for the user even during scheduled calendar events.

Link to calendar tab also may contain for example calendar application type calendar application address and calendar password . Calendar application type calendar application address and calendar password provide the information necessary for the instant messaging application to link to and communicate with the calendar application. However embodiments of the present invention are not restricted to the information list above for establishing a link between the instant messaging application and the calendar application. Those of ordinary skill in the art should appreciate that any information necessary for embodiments of the present invention to link the instant messaging application to the calendar application may be used.

Calendar application type may be presented as for example a drop down menu containing a list of calendar applications contained within the data processing system. Calendar application type information is important because unique requirements for the linking process may be directly tied to the calendar application. The user selects calendar application type by selecting a calendar application within the drop down menu that the user desires to link with the instant messaging application.

After selecting calendar application type calendar application address automatically appears. Alternatively the user may input calendar application address by using for example a keyboard. Calendar application address specifically identifies the selected calendar application in calendar application type . Calendar application address is required to create the link between the instant messaging application and the calendar application.

Calendar password is needed to open the calendar application if the calendar application is password protected by the user. The user inputs the password into calendar password .

In addition instant messaging application preference window also may include buttons to save or cancel user inputted preference settings contained within link to calendar tab such as for example OK button and cancel button . The user mouse clicks on OK button to save the preference settings for the instant messaging application after the user enters the preferences. Or the user may mouse click on cancel button to cancel the user inputted preference settings.

Turning now to a flowchart illustrating an exemplary process for setting instant messaging preferences for linking an instant messaging application to a calendar application is depicted in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. The process depicted in may be implemented for example in a client device such as instant messaging client in .

The process begins when a user opens an instant messaging application such as instant messaging application in step . The user then selects preferences for example in a menu bar to access an instant messaging application preference window for the opened instant messaging application in step such as instant messaging application preference window in step . The user checkmarks the instant messaging link to calendar application check box such as instant messaging link to calendar application check box in to indicate the user s preference to link the instant messaging application to the calendar application step .

Subsequent to indicating the user s preference to link the instant messaging application to the calendar application in step the user selects the calendar application that the user desires to link to the instant messaging application from a drop down menu such as calendar type in step . Then the user inputs the address of the selected calendar application in step within a calendar address dialog box such as calendar address in step . Alternatively the instant messaging application may automatically insert the calendar address of the selected calendar application in step into the calendar address dialog box. The instant messaging application needs the calendar address in order to link the instant messaging application with the calendar application.

If the calendar application is password protected the user inputs the calendar application password into a calendar password dialog box such as calendar password in step . The user saves the inputted preference settings within the instant messaging preference window by for example mouse clicking on a save button such as OK button in thereby enabling the instant messaging application to link to the calendar application step . The process terminates thereafter.

With reference now to a flowchart illustrating an exemplary process for setting calendar preferences for linking a calendar application to an instant messaging application is shown in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. The process depicted in may be implemented for example in a client device such as instant messaging client in .

The process begins when a user opens a calendar application such as calendar application in step . The user then selects preferences for example in a menu bar to access a calendar application preference window for the opened calendar application in step such as calendar application preference window in step .

Subsequent to accessing the calendar application preference window in step the user selects the instant messaging application that the user wishes to link to the calendar application from a drop down menu such as instant messaging type in step . Then the user inputs the address of the selected instant messaging application in step within an instant messaging address dialog box such as instant messaging address in step . Alternatively the calendar application may automatically insert the address of the selected instant messaging application in step into the instant messaging address dialog box. The calendar application needs the address of the instant messaging application in order to link the calendar application to the instant messaging application. If the instant messaging application is password protected the user inputs the instant messaging application password into an instant messaging password dialog box such as instant messaging password in step .

The user may select other preference options contained within the calendar application preference window such as for example auto link via meeting notice check box auto link via appointment notice check box do not disturb meeting check box and do not disturb appointment check box in by placing a checkmark in the appropriate preference check box step . These other preference options further define the calendar application s control of the instant messaging application s instant messaging status for the user during scheduled calendar events while the two applications are linked.

Then the user inputs default instant messaging status messages such as default meeting message and default appointment message in in a default message dialog box step . The user saves the inputted preference settings within the calendar application preference window by for example mouse clicking on a save button such as OK button in thus enabling the calendar application to link to the instant messaging application step . The process terminates thereafter.

Referring now to a flowchart illustrating an exemplary process for setting instant messaging status within a calendar application scheduled event is shown in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. The process depicted in may be implemented for example in a client device such as instant messaging client in .

The process begins when a user opens a calendar application such as calendar application in step . The user then accesses a scheduled event on the calendar application such as appointment event type in step . If the user desires for the calendar application to control the instant messaging status during this scheduled calendar event then the user places a checkmark in the instant messaging status check box such as instant messaging status check box in step . If the user does not want the calendar application to control the instant messaging status during this scheduled calendar event then the user removes the checkmark in the instant messaging status check box. Thus the user has the ability to change the instant messaging status for each individual scheduled calendar event within the scheduled calendar event s display window. The instant messaging status default setting may be determined for example by the calendar application preference settings such as auto link via meeting notice check box and auto link via appointment notice check box in set on a calendar application preference window.

Subsequent to placing a checkmark in the instant messaging status check box in step the user inputs an instant messaging status message in an instant messaging status dialog box such as instant messaging dialog box in step . The instant messaging status default message may be determined for example by the calendar application preference settings such as default meeting message and default appointment message in set on a calendar application preference window.

If the user desires not to be disturbed by instant messages during the scheduled calendar event then the user places a checkmark in the do not disturb check box such as do not disturb check box in step . If the user wants to continue to receive instant messages during the scheduled calendar event then the user removes the checkmark in the do not disturb check box. Consequently the user has the ability to change the instant messaging do not disturb status for each scheduled calendar event within the scheduled calendar event s display window. The instant messaging do not disturb status default setting may be determined for example by the calendar application preference settings such do not disturb meeting check box and do not disturb appointment check box in set on a calendar application preference window.

The user saves the inputted information within the scheduled calendar event display window by for example mouse clicking on a save button such as save and close button in thus saving the inputted information and closing the scheduled calendar event display window step . The process terminates thereafter.

Turning now to a flowchart illustrating an exemplary process for instant messaging status control within a client device is depicted in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. The process depicted in may be implemented for example in a client device such as instant messaging client in .

It should be noted that prior to beginning the process in step a user has opened an instant messaging application such as instant messaging application in and a calendar application such as calendar application in within the client device. In addition as discussed above the user has set the preference settings for linking the instant messaging application to the calendar application.

The process begins when the instant messaging application receives an instant message such as for example when instant messaging application receives message in step . The instant messaging application then makes a determination as to whether an instant messaging link to a calendar application preference such as instant messaging link to calendar application check box in is set step . If the instant messaging link to a calendar application preference is not set no output of step then the instant messaging application retains control of the instant messaging status step and the process terminates thereafter. If the instant messaging link to a calendar application preference is set yes output of step then a determination is made as to whether an instant messaging status check box such as instant messaging status check box in contains a checkmark within the scheduled calendar event step . If the instant messaging status check box does not contain a checkmark within the scheduled calendar event no output of step then the process returns to step where the instant messaging application retains control of the instant messaging status. If the instant messaging status check box contains a checkmark within the scheduled calendar event yes output of step then the instant messaging application passes control of the instant messaging status to the scheduled calendar event contained within the calendar application step .

Subsequent to the instant messaging application passing control of the instant messaging status to the scheduled calendar event contained within the calendar application in step a determination is made as to whether a do not disturb check box such as do not disturb check box in contains a checkmark within the scheduled calendar event step . If the do not disturb check box contains a checkmark within the scheduled calendar event yes output of step then do not disturb is the instant messaging status during the scheduled calendar event step . The process proceeds to step thereafter. If the do not disturb check box does not contain a checkmark within the scheduled calendar event no output of step then a determination is made as to whether the user input an instant messaging status message in an instant messaging status dialog box within the scheduled calendar event such as instant messaging status dialog box in step . If the user did not input an instant messaging status message in an instant messaging status dialog box within the scheduled calendar event no output of step then a default instant messaging status message such as default meeting message or default appointment message in is the instant messaging status during the scheduled calendar event step . The process proceeds to step thereafter. If the user did input an instant messaging status message in the instant messaging status dialog box within the scheduled calendar event yes output of step then the user input instant messaging status message is the instant messaging status during the scheduled calendar event step .

Afterward a determination is made as to whether the instant messaging application received another instant message step . If the instant messaging application receives another instant message yes output of step then the process returns to step . If the instant messaging application did not receive another instant message no output of step then a determination is made as to whether the scheduled calendar event time passed such as event date and time in step . If the scheduled calendar event time has not passed no output of step then the process returns to step . If the scheduled calendar event time has passed yes output of step then the process terminates thereafter.

Thus embodiments of the present invention provide a computer implemented method apparatus and computer usable program code for managing instant messaging status. The invention can take the form of an entirely hardware embodiment an entirely software embodiment or an embodiment containing both hardware and software elements. In a preferred embodiment the invention is implemented in software which includes but is not limited to firmware resident software microcode etc.

Furthermore the invention can take the form of a computer program product accessible from a computer usable or computer readable medium providing program code for use by or in connection with a computer or any instruction execution system. For the purposes of this description a computer usable or computer readable medium can be any tangible apparatus that can contain or store the program for use by or in connection with the instruction execution system apparatus or device.

Examples of a computer readable medium include a semiconductor or solid state memory magnetic tape a removable computer diskette a random access memory RAM a read only memory ROM a rigid magnetic disk and an optical disk. Current examples of optical disks include compact disk read only memory CD ROM compact disk read write CD R W and digital video disc DVD .

A data processing system suitable for storing and or executing program code will include at least one processor coupled directly or indirectly to memory elements through a system bus. The memory elements can include local memory employed during actual execution of the program code bulk storage and cache memories which provide temporary storage of at least some program code in order to reduce the number of times code must be retrieved from bulk storage during execution.

Input output or I O devices including but not limited to keyboards displays pointing devices etc. can be coupled to the system either directly or through intervening I O controllers.

Network adapters may also be coupled to the system to enable the data processing system to become coupled to other data processing systems or remote printers or storage devices through intervening private or public networks. Modems cable modems and Ethernet cards are just a few of the currently available types of network adapters.

The description of the present invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description and is not intended to be exhaustive or limited to the invention in the form disclosed. Many modifications and variations will be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art. The embodiment was chosen and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention the practical application and to enable others of ordinary skill in the art to understand the invention for various embodiments with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.

