---

title: Method of facilitating the marketing, redemption, and reimbursement of prepaid vehicle services in a vehicle service network
abstract: A computer-assisted method of facilitating the marketing, redemption, and reimbursement of prepaid vehicle services in a vehicle service network. A network administrator screens vehicle service stations, and accepted participant service stations pay fees, which may be used to advertise the network to consumers. The network administrator enrolls consumers in the network as members, and receives prepaid vehicle service fees from the members to credit member accounts in exchange for vehicle services to be rendered by the participant service stations. The administrator issues voucher data to the members and associates the voucher data with member accounts. Members redeem the voucher data at participant service stations, wherein the voucher data is used to verify membership, authorize vehicle services at the participant service stations, and debit the member accounts. The participant service stations send receipt data to the administrator, which reimburses the participant service stations for the rendered vehicle services.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08452648&OS=08452648&RS=08452648
owner: 
number: 08452648
owner_city: Dearborn Heights
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050818
---
The present invention relates generally to a method of facilitating vehicle service and more particularly to a method of facilitating the marketing redemption and reimbursement of prepaid vehicle services in a vehicle service network.

At one time or another every automobile operator will have a need for automotive repair or service. For example an operator of a new vehicle will have to take the vehicle to a dealership or service station to perform an oil change to comply with a manufacturer s vehicle warranty. In another example an operator of a used vehicle will also need to obtain vehicle oil changes and will additionally require routine replacement of worn components like tires brakes fluids and more.

Current cost estimates of necessary annual vehicle services average approximately 250 for new vehicles and about 750 to 1 000 for used vehicles. Unfortunately however vehicle operators are often persuaded to pay much more in the form of inflated prices or unnecessary services. Accordingly automobile repair fraud is widely known to consistently rank at the top of consumer complaints to government authorities.

Although a few prior art business methods for providing automobile service have been proposed there is no comprehensive method of facilitating secure cost effective and reliable vehicle servicing. For example no present approaches provide a thorough process that involves initial screening of service stations and allowing consumers to choose a service station among a pre screened network of participant service stations. As another example no current approaches provide marketing of prepaid vehicle services to consumers secure redemption of the prepaid vehicle services and reimbursement to the service stations for the prepaid vehicle services. As a further example no current approaches provide a centralized system accessible anywhere including a program to access various vehicle service management features or a centralized database containing all data relevant to member customers and participant service stations. As yet another example many vehicle service approaches deploy expensive mailed coupon campaigns or complicated incentive loyalty or rewards programs or the like but no existing approaches include a means for pooling marketing resources of screened service stations to target consumers as potential customers or network members. Accordingly there is much room for improvement in method of facilitating automobile servicing.

According to an exemplary embodiment of a computer assisted method of facilitating the marketing redemption and reimbursement of prepaid vehicle services in a vehicle service network a network administrator may screen vehicle service stations and accepted participant service stations may pay fees which may be used to advertise the network to consumers. Moreover the network administrator may enroll consumers in the network as members and may receive prepaid vehicle service fees from the members to credit member accounts in exchange for vehicle services to be rendered by the participant service stations. The administrator may then issue voucher data to the members and associate the voucher data with member accounts. Members may redeem the voucher data at participant service stations wherein the voucher data may be used to verify membership authorize vehicle services at the participant service stations and debit the member accounts. The participant service stations may thereafter send receipt data to the administrator which may then reimburse the participant service stations for the rendered vehicle services.

In general a system will be described in an illustrative embodiment of a method of facilitating vehicle service carried out on a prepaid and reimbursement basis. The embodiment will be described with reference to its use in an automobile servicing environment. However it will be appreciated as the description proceeds that the invention is useful in many different applications and may be implemented in many other embodiments. In this regard and as used herein and in the claims it will be understood that the term vehicle refers not only to automobile applications but also to other vehicle applications including but not limited to trucks buses recreational vehicles and the like.

Referring specifically to the drawings illustrates an embodiment of an operating environment service network or system for implementing a computer assisted method of facilitating the marketing redemption and reimbursement of prepaid vehicle services in a vehicle service network. The vehicle service network may include a plurality of vehicle service stations that are network participants a network administrator and a plurality of consumers who are network members.

The system may include one or more of the following subsystems or system elements or components one or more network administrators or centers for receiving processing and transmitting data one or more consumer computers for receiving processing and transmitting data one or more service organizations O that may include one or more service stations S having service station computers for receiving processing and transmitting data one or more web hosting portals for hosting a website one or more third party enablers and one or more communication networks that may include the Internet for providing communication among the various system elements. Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the various computers described below may have hardware and software aspects in common which will not be repeated for each computer description. Accordingly the descriptions of the various computers are mutually incorporated by reference.

The network center may include one or more physical locations. In one example the network center is a voice and or fax call center office station or the like. In an alternative or additional example the network center is a data processing center office station or the like. In any case the network center provides verbal data and or fax communications between a live human network representative in the network center and a member or consumer via consumer computer participant service station S via service station computer and or the like. The network center and web hosting portal may be located in the same or different facilities.

In any case the network center may include one or more communication devices such as modems voice and data switches or the like and one or more network computers or servers and one or more live network representatives managers and or the like. The communication device connects to the web hosting portal and or communication network and may transmit and receive voice data fax and or like transmissions over the network .

The network center may be implemented as any suitable hardware and software capable of providing one or more of a variety of services including but not limited to member and participant enrollment service station support marketing reimbursement communication via data voice fax and or the like with the consumer computers the service center computers the web hosting portal and or the third party enabler via the communications network or otherwise. In an exemplary implementation the network server may include a processor and internal memory for executing and storing computer applications data files and or databases for managing and storing data supplied by the member or consumer computers participating service stations web hosting portal and or third party enabler . The network server may also include an input device interface output device interface and a communications module .

The communications module may be any type of suitable device or module including a system bus which couples the various above described system components or modules. The communications module may provide for data transmission internally between each of the elements in the server and externally between the internal elements of the server and any other elements external of the computer such as the communications device . The communications module may represent one or more of any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus an accelerated graphics port a processor or local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures and the like. By way of example and not limitation such bus architectures may include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus and the like.

The processor may be configured to execute control logic that provides the functionality for at least a portion of the network center . In this respect the processor may encompass one or more processing units controllers microprocessors micro controllers discrete logic circuit s having logic gates for implementing logic functions upon data signals application specific integrated circuits ASIC with suitable logic gates complex programmable logic devices CPLD programmable or field programmable gate arrays PGA FPGA any combinations of the aforementioned and the like. The processor may be interfaced with the memory which is a medium configured to provide at least temporary storage of data and or computer software or computer readable instructions that provide at least some of the functionality of the system and that may be executed by the processor . As used herein the term processor also includes any ancillary devices such as clocks power supplies and the like.

The internal memory may include computer readable storage or media in the form of removable and or non removable volatile memory and or non volatile memory. Exemplary volatile memory may include random access memory RAM static RAM SRAM dynamic RAM DRAM and the like for running software and data on the processor . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by the processor . By way of example and not limitation the volatile memory may include an operating system application programs other memory modules and data.

Exemplary non volatile memory may include read only memory ROM erasable programmable ROM EPROM electrically erasable programmable ROM EEPROM dynamic read write memory like magnetic or optical disks or tapes and static read write memory like flash memory for storing software and data. A basic input output system BIOS is typically stored in ROM for containing basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within the server such as during server boot up.

The server may also include other removable non removable volatile non volatile data storage or media. For example and although not shown in the figures a mass external storage read write device module may be used in the form of a dynamic read write hard disk drive that may read from or write to non removable non volatile magnetic media. Also a dynamic read write device module such as a magnetic or optical drive that reads from and writes to a removable non volatile device such as a magnetic floppy disk magnetic tape cassette digital versatile disk digital video tape optical disk like a CD ROM or other optical media. Moreover a static read write module may be used in the exemplary operating environment for use with a static read write device including but not limited to a flash memory card integrated circuit chip and the like.

The memory media modules discussed above enable storage and communication of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer. For example the mass storage device may store an operating system application programs other program modules and program data. Note that these components may either be the same as or different from the operating system application programs other program modules and data of the internal memory of the server . It is recognized however that such programs and components may reside at various times in different storage media associated with the server and may be executed by the processor . Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that suitable computer programs may be installed or loaded into a secondary memory of a computer such as the mass storage device dynamic storage device or static storage device. Upon execution by the processor such computer programs may be loaded at least partially into a primary memory such as the internal memory . Any suitable non volatile memory interface may be used to connect the mass storage device and other memory modules to the communications module .

The input device interface is provided to communicate with any suitable peripheral input devices such as a pointing device e.g. a mouse trackball pen touch pad or the like keyboard modem internal card reader and the like that may be used to enter commands and information into the server . Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that such peripheral devices may be internal or external with respect to the server . Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick satellite dish wireless communication device scanner or the like. The input device interface preferably connects the above described input devices and possibly other input devices to the processor preferably via the communications module but may be connected by other interfaces and bus structures such as a parallel port Universal Serial Bus USB infrared device or the like.

The output device interface is provided to communicate with peripheral output devices such as a printer a monitor or other type of display device or other peripheral device such as speakers not shown and the like that may also be connected to the system bus via the interface which may be any suitable printer video etc. type of interface. Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the peripheral devices are actually external devices with respect to the server .

As used herein the term interface broadly means any suitable form of electronic device or adapter or even a software module or adapter which enables one piece of equipment to communicate with or control another. Any of the interfaces disclosed herein may conform to any suitable protocols such as Ethernet or field buses such as Profibus Interbus Devicenet RS 232 parallel small computer system interface USB wireless protocols such as Bluetooth infrared and the like and any other suitable input output I O protocols.

Moreover an interface in the context of a software architecture may include a software module component code portion or other sequence of computer executable instructions. Such an interface may include for example a first module accessing a second module to perform computing tasks on behalf of the first module. The first and second modules may include in one example application programming interfaces APIS such as provided by operating systems component object model COM interfaces e.g. for peer to peer application communication and extensible markup language metadata interchange format XMI interfaces e.g. for communication between web services . The interfaces may be tightly coupled synchronous implementations such as in Java 2 Platform Enterprise Edition J2EE COM or distributed COM DCOM examples. Alternatively or in addition the interfaces may be loosely coupled asynchronous implementations such as in a web service e.g. using the simple object access protocol . In general the interfaces may include any combination of the following characteristics tightly coupled loosely coupled synchronous asynchronous and the like. Further the interfaces may conform to a standard protocol a proprietary protocol or any combination of standard and proprietary protocols.

The interfaces described herein may all be part of a single interface or may be implemented as separate interfaces or any combination therein. The interfaces may execute locally or remotely to provide functionality. Further the interfaces may include additional or less functionality than illustrated or described herein.

The server may operate in a networked environment as shown wherein software modules and or data used by the server or portions thereof may be stored in other computer s or a remote memory storage device not shown associated therewith or connected thereto. By way of example and not limitation remote application programs data may reside in memory of a remote computer.

The network logical connections or communications may include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include any other suitable networks and connections. The LAN and or WAN may be a wired network a wireless network a combination thereof and the like. Such networking environments may be commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and global computer networks e.g. the Internet or World Wide Web . When used in a local area networking environment the computer is preferably connected to the LAN through the communications device which may be a network adapter or interface. When used in a wide area networking environment the computer preferably includes the communications device which may be a modem or any other means for establishing communications over the WAN. The modem which may be internal or external is preferably connected to the communications module via the input interface or other appropriate arrangement. The network and network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the various system elements or computers may be used.

In operation the processor is powered by a power supply not shown and initially operates on instructions stored in memory . The processor may receive commands or data from a live network representative through one or more input devices and receives processes and stores data or instructions from various storage media including the memory and may output data or instructions to output peripheral devices.

Generally such data processors are programmed to carry out computer executable instructions such as those associated with or embedded in software or computer programs such as operating systems application programs and the like. Computer programs or software may include executable instructions for implementing logical functions and can be embodied in any computer readable medium for use by or in connection with a processor that can retrieve and execute the instructions. The software may include but is not limited to routines modules objects components data structures and the like for performing particular tasks and or implementing particular abstract data types. Computer programs may exist in a variety of forms both active and inactive. General examples include software programs comprised of instructions in source code object code executable code or other formats firmware programs or hardware description language HDL files and the like. Specific examples include assembler C C objects Visual Basic Visual C XML Java and Microsoft Foundation Classes PERL PHP SQL and the like.

As mentioned previously the server is adapted to use at least some form of computer readable media which may include volatile and or non volatile media removable and or non removable media and which may be any suitable medium that may be accessed by a computer. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media include computer storage media communication media and any combination thereof. The system and methods described herein may include these and other various types of computer readable media wherein such media may contain store and or carry instructions or programs for implementing some or all of the method steps described below in conjunction with the processor or other data processor. At least some portion of the method may be practiced locally or in a distributed computing environment where tasks may be performed by remote computers or processing devices that are linked through a communications network such as the LAN WAN or the like. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

Computer storage media may be used to distribute computer programs locally and may include volatile and non volatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions program modules data structures other data and the like. More specifically computer storage media may include RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or memory sticks integrated circuits CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium that may be used to store the desired information and that may be accessed by a computer.

Communication media preferably embody computer readable instructions program modules data structures other data and the like in a compressed or uncompressed data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport means and include any information delivery media. Those skilled in the art are familiar with modulated data signals which have one or more characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signals. In any event exemplary computer readable signals whether modulated using a carrier or not are signals that a computer system hosting or running a computer program can be configured to access including signals downloaded using the Internet or other networks. Wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media are examples of communication media. In a sense the Internet itself as an abstract entity is a computer readable medium and the same is true of computer networks in general. It is therefore to be understood that the methods may be performed by any computing devices suitable for executing one or more of the specified functions using any media and being located anywhere.

The service stations S may include the service station computers which may be personal computers or the like. The service station computers may include a network interface or communication device such as a wired or wireless telephone or cable modem or the like for communicating with the communications network . The communication device connects to the communication network and may transmit and receive voice data fax and or like transmissions over the network .

The service station computers may also include a processor and a memory for processing and storing data and a computer usable media including well known and widely available Internet browser and Internet access computer programs for sending and receiving data over the communications network to the web hosting portal. The processor and memory may also be configured to process and store computer usable media including a point of sale POS application program that will be described in further detail herein below. The service station computers may also include an input device interface output device interface and a communications module .

The service station computers may send service station data to the network center consumer or member computers web hosting portal and or third party enabler through a web page interface using communication standards such as hypertext transport protocol HTTP transport control protocol and Internet protocol TCP IP and or the like.

Moreover the service station may include other devices such as any suitable input and or output devices. More specifically the service station may include member data input devices such as bar code scanners for reading a member voucher card or keypad input devices for input of a member personal identification number PIN and facsimile cards for transmitting member signed authorizations invoices estimates work orders and or the like to the network center . The fax cards may be communicated to the communications modules within the service station computers as shown but may also be external stand alone devices communicated with the computers and the network or may be independent of the computers and in communication with the network .

The consumer computers may be personal computers or the like and may include a communication device such as a wired or wireless telephone or cable modem or the like for communicating with the communications network. The consumer computers may include processors and memory for processing and storing data and computer usable media such as well known and widely available Internet browser and Internet access computer programs for sending and receiving data over the communications network to the web hosting portal . The consumer computers may send consumer data to the web hosting portal through a web page interface using communication standards such as hypertext transport protocol HTTP transport control protocol and Internet protocol TCP IP and or the like. Moreover the consumer computers may include other devices such as any suitable input and or output devices such as a keyboard monitor and or the like.

The communication network may be any suitable local area network wide area network including the Internet or the like. The communication network may include a wireless system land network any combination thereof or the like that is adapted to transmit and receive signals to and from one or more of the network center consumer computers service station computers web hosting portal and or third party enabler .

In one implementation the communication network may be a wireless carrier system including a wireless communications carrier a mobile telephone system satellite broadcast system or the like that incorporates any type of telecommunications in which electromagnetic waves carry signals over part of or an entire communication path. For example the wireless carrier system may be implemented as a CDMA GSM or other cellular communication system or any other suitable wireless system.

In another implementation the communication network may be a land network used to connect the consumer computers service station computers web hosting portal network center and or third party enabler. As such the land network may be a public switched telephone network PSTN an Internet protocol IP network wired network optical network fiber network and or any combination thereof. The land network may be connected to one or more landline telephones facsimile machines computers or the like.

The web hosting portal may include one or more communication devices like data modems or the like for communicating with the communication network and one or more web servers . The web hosting portal may be directly connected by wire to the network center . Or the web hosting portal may be directly connected by phone lines cable lines and or wirelessly to any suitable land network or wireless network which is connected to the network center . For example the web hosting portal may be connected to the network center using the communications network .

The web server may be implemented as any suitable hardware and software capable of providing web services to receive and transmit data from and to the consumer computers the service center computers the network center and or the third party enabler such as via the communications network . In an exemplary implementation the web server may include a processor and memory for executing and storing computer applications data files and or databases for managing and storing data supplied by the consumer computer service station computer network center and or third party enabler . As with the other computers disclosed herein the server may include a communications module .

The server s of the web hosting portal may include dual redundant hard disks wherein files are backed up and archived nightly weekly and monthly. The web hosting portal may include Gig E connections from ten or more major internet backbone providers and may include redundancy in power network connectivity HVAC fire suppression and security.

The third party enabler may be implemented as any suitable hardware and software capable of providing services via receiving and transmitting data from and to the consumer computers the service center computers the network center and or the web hosting portal such as via the communications network . One example of a third party enabler is the well known PayPal system.

A network administrator consumers members and service stations can access a web hosting portal such as the web hosting portal of through any suitable online web browser s . As shown the service stations can also access the web hosting portal through a point of sales application which makes requests through a communications encryption library or package and receives responses through an encrypted web service . Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the features and functionality provided by the point of sales application may also be hosted on the web hosting portal or network administrator and communicated to the service stations through the suitable web browser . As used herein a web service is a collection of protocols and standards used for exchanging data between applications or systems located on a network or the Internet. Further an encrypted web service communicates data that is intentionally obscured so that it is not readable by any unauthorized attempts.

The network administrator acting through the browser may access other elements of the system through the web hosting portal or through a fulfillment application of the network center that also makes requests through the communications encryption package and receives responses through the encrypted web service . The fulfillment application preferably retrieves a list of new members creates welcome letters marks the members as having been fulfilled and assigns a barcoded key fob to each new member.

The web hosting portal includes software with all classes that interact with the browsers accessible by consumers members service stations and the administrator or network center. Additionally the web hosting portal software includes all classes that receive requests from the encrypted communications library and responds via the encrypted web service . Finally the web hosting portal cooperates with third party enabler software such as software of PayPal or the like.

Referring now to the web hosting portal may be enabled by Apache Webserver and MySQL Database may use PHP Nuke www.phpnuke.org and may extend upon the basic software used in the system through custom coded PHP programs. illustrates an exemplary PHP relationship within the web hosting portal . The PHP programs may be used to perform one or more of the following functions allowing consumers to enroll into the network as members NewUser.php modifying vehicles owned by members Member Auto.php modifying membership classifications PARC Member Class.php searching existing members Member.php modifying member demographic data Member.php invoking a third party enabler such as PayPal to charge a member or service station credit card Charge.php performing an instant payment notification IPN.php refunding a member or service station credit card Refund.php carrying out redemption of a members voucher Member UseCoupons.php and the like. The PHP files are stored in a portal database that may be resident in the memory of the web hosting portal of wherein the portal database is communicated to an application database that may be resident in the memory of the network center via the encrypted web service .

In an exemplary implementation consumers may see advertising for the network and may wish to enroll in the network as members. In one example a consumer may call a network representative at the network center of and enroll over the telephone in person or in any suitable manner. In another example the consumer may enroll as a network member using any computer linked to the Internet such as the consumer computer of . In any case membership data associated with the consumer or member is stored in a suitable member account in any suitable database s such as in one or both of the network center or web hosting portal . As used herein the term member account may include any suitable data record and or the like that includes demographic data financial data and or the like. Also as used herein the term database includes any suitable data file module and or the like stored in any suitable memory of the system .

Using any suitable Internet browser carried by the consumer computer a consumer may navigate the Internet to arrive at a website home page of the network center that is hosted by the web hosting portal . From the home page the consumer may select an enroll now button to activate the NewUser.php program. The NewUser.php program may define and initialize suitable variables display a data entry form save entered data upon successful data addition or editing call a credit card processing program and update member records upon a suitable response from a credit card charging attempt. Upon initial execution the NewUser.php program displays a member data screen including a demographics form. Upon any subsequent executions the program may make it possible for a member to edit data display any error messages and update the database with new member data.

At the member information screen the consumer may fill out the form to include demographics data including last name first name address city state zip code home phone number mobile phone number work phone number pager number fax number email address one or more PIN s and a verification phrase such as last four numerals of the consumers social security number driver s license number and or the like. In response a member code may be assigned automatically and the Member Auto.php program may be initialized wherein the consumer may fill out a vehicle data form including vehicle data such as make model year mileage and vehicle identification number.

Then membership fees may be received from the members in exchange for membership in the network and prepaid vehicle service fees may received from the members in exchange for vehicle services to be rendered by service stations participating in the network. The member accounts are accordingly credited in amounts corresponding to the amounts of the prepaid vehicle service fees. The vehicle services may be discounted wherein the prepaid vehicle service fees may be sold by the network administrator to consumers at any suitable discount such as 10 or any suitable discount amount.

As will be discussed in detail below the consumer may select a pay now button which calls a credit card charge script and passes suitable codes so that a PayPal callback knows who and what any given payment was for. Alternatively if the consumer does not want to use PayPal the consumer may select another payment alternatives button. In this alternative flow a screen may instruct the consumer to print the member data screen list the address of the network administrator and ask the consumer to remit a check or money order of a predetermined amount to the listed address. Upon receipt and cashing of the payment the network representative may use the web portal to look up the member identification set an eligibility date to the current date and set a fulfillment switch to yes .

The fulfillment application of the network center includes all suitable classes that communicate with a suitable web hosting portal database through the communication encryption package retrieves a list of members to be fulfilled wherein fulfillment switches associated with these members is set to yes and prints fulfillment letters to new members.

A manager or representative of the network administrator issues voucher data to a member and the fulfillment application is used to associate the member and member data with the voucher data which is then stored in any suitable database. The voucher data could be manifested in a barcode card or keychain tag for convenient use by a member. The voucher data could also be manifested in any tangible article such as a tag card key fob or the like as any type of optical mark that may be scanned by any optical mark reading or sensing device or any type of radio frequency RF tag that may be scanned by any suitable RF scanner or any other machine readable code that may be read by a scanner. As used herein the terminology voucher data includes a physical voucher article with data therein and or intangible data such as a code PIN password and or the like.

Then manager or representative may use the fulfillment program to mark each member data file record or account as having been fulfilled such as by setting fulfillments switches to no and populating the fulfillment date with the current date and may thereafter print a fulfillment report of all members for whom a fulfillment letter and voucher data was just created.

A manager of the network administrator preferably associates the vouchers to the members in the following manner. The manager compares each fulfillment letter to the printed report checking off each letter as manually processed. For each letter the manager looks up the member record on the portal database selects a random unused voucher or barcode tag selects an edit member button selects or highlights a barcode tag data field and scans the voucher or barcode tag to enter its data into the member s record. Finally each member is issued voucher data. For example the manager may stuff the letter voucher data or barcode tag and any other suitable materials into an envelope addressed for each member and mails the envelopes to the new members. Alternatively those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the members may be issued voucher data and other information using the network system such as via email or the like.

Any suitable third party payment system may be used such as PayPal to process credit card debit card or the like transactions wherein a consumer may buy into network membership and or a network member may buy prepaid automotive services or the like. A credit card transaction may triggered such as from the NewUser.php program and the Charge.php and IPN.php programs may be used to implement the credit card processing routine. The Charge.php script may receive and kick off the charging process wherein suitable calling modules may pass item number and price to Charge.php which may wrap this data in a button it may build to allow the user to initiate the charge process. The IPN.php script may receive and process an instant payment notification from PayPal.

A PayPal enabled implementation of a credit card process is illustrated in . The PayPal enabled process may be triggered at step in any suitable manner such as through a check out and pay button. Thereafter at step a PayPal instant payment notification IPN signal with encrypted code is received from PayPal. Those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that detailed information on PayPal IPN i.e. IPN integration guide may be obtained from PayPal and or PayPal developer forums on the Internet.

The IPN data with encrypted code is then relayed back to PayPal at step . Exemplary PHP code is provided below.

At step it is determined whether the communication is invalid or verified. If invalid and as shown in step a fraud alert may be posted to the portal or network center databases and the process thereafter terminates.

If valid or verified however it is determined at step whether the status is failed pending or complete. If failed then at step a note to this effect is posted to the member s record and the process thereafter terminates. If pending then the pending status is posted to the portal database at step and the process terminates for the time being. If complete then at step the complete status is posted to the portal database and the PayPal IPN form name item number may be used to track purchase item details. This form name may map back to a portal database table which has a unique numeric code an indicator referring to the type of purchase membership or prepaid service and the key to that table such as a member identification number for a membership purchase or one or more service codes for prepaid service purchases.

Thereafter it is determined at step if the price is correct for the type of purchase. If not then a suitable error message is posted to the portal at step and the process thereafter terminates. If so then at step it is determined whether the receiver email is correct. If not then at step a suitable error message is posted to the portal and the process thereafter terminates. If so then it is determined at step whether the transaction identification is a duplicate. If so then an error message is posted to the portal at step and the process thereafter terminates. If not then at step the type of payment is determined. If the payment is for membership then at step membership is granted and a fulfillment switch is set to yes and the process thereafter terminates. If the payment is for prepaid services then at step such services are granted to the member and associated with the barcode tag in the database and the process thereafter terminates.

In an exemplary implementation a service station may be solicited by the network administrator or may approach the network administrator wishing to enroll in the network as a participant service station. In one embodiment the service station may initiate enrollment as a network participant using any computer linked to the Internet. Alternatively a service station may call the network administrator and initiate the enrollment process with a network representative over the telephone in person or in any suitable manner.

In any case the network representative at the network administrator provides the service station with network benefits and enrollment requirements such as an application and screening process. In one implementation the network performs a pre screening of potential participant service stations. In the event the service station passes the screening the network will offer the service station a paper application. The service station completes a detailed paper application and submits a check or money order to the network administrator. It is also contemplated that at least a portion of the application process could be carried out at least partially electronically using fax equipment email PayPal other portions of the network and or the like. In any case participant data associated with the service station is stored in a suitable participant account in any suitable database s such as in one or both of the network center or web hosting portal . As used herein the term participant account may include any suitable data record and or the like that includes demographic data financial data and or the like.

In either case a manager at the network administrator reviews the application for compliance with any suitable predetermined criteria and screens the service station by conducting or ordering a background check on the service station. The background check may include checking with government authorities the Better Business Bureau or ordering an investigation by a third party and or the like. If the outcome of the background check is favorable then the network manager cashes the check or otherwise receives payment in the form of participant fees from the service station in exchange for accepting enrolling and or maintaining the service station in the network as a participant service station by creating a participant account for the service station and sending a welcome letter instructions and network access codes to a manager or general manager associated with the service station. In any case data associated with the service station is stored in any suitable database s such as in one or both of the network center or web hosting portal .

Additionally the network manager may insert an audit trail function to the service station participant account that may maintain a history of every communication and transaction associated with the service station that occurs within the web hosting portal and or network center. Thereafter a user such as a manager or customer service representative CSR associated with the service station may use the access codes to access the network via the Internet perform account maintenance and view the audit trail.

Finally some or all of the participant fees may be used by the network administrator in marketing the vehicle service network to prospective consumers. In other words the network administrator may pool participant fees and thereby leverage multiple service station resources to achieve relatively wide scale advertising and sales of prepaid vehicle services.

A member may choose any participating service station within the network. Such service stations are those which have been enrolled and which are current on their monthly participant network fees. A member may find a participating service station by using the network administrator web site by viewing an advertisement of a participant or of the network or by any suitable manner. In any case the member may arrive for service and preferably presents the member s network voucher but may also or instead present the voucher data such as member name and PIN on the network.

From here a CSR at the service station may log into the network system using the point of sales application or using a suitable browser. At this point the web hosting portal may check to see if the service station is up to date with its participant fees or within a grace period of for example 14 days or so. If not then network access may be denied the participant service station wherein a message is presented to the CSR to pay the outstanding network fees. If the service station is within the grace period then a message may be presented to the CSR to pay the participant fees immediately.

If the service station is not paid up then the network representative at the network administrator may notify members who have visited that service station or who live or work near e.g. within a predetermined number of miles from the service station that the service station is currently unavailable to members in the network. For example the network representative may send an email message to such members or letters or the like. It is also contemplated that the network computer may run a program to automatically output such messages or letters to such members using a list of unpaid service stations as input. The program would accept the list of unpaid service stations cross reference that list with a list of such members and automatically generate email messages to be mailed automatically or letters to be printed stuffed in envelopes and mailed by hand or the like.

If the service station is paid up then the CSR may now verify membership of the member and authorize use of the member s network voucher for at least some of the prepaid vehicle services using the point of sales application or a suitable browser in communication with the web hosting portal. The point of sales application preferably displays a text box that is password protected wherein the CSR can scan the member s bar coded voucher or manually input the voucher data to populate the text box. In one exemplary implementation it may also be desirable to have the CSR present the member customer with a keypad input device to allow the member customer to enter their PIN or other suitable membership data.

Thereafter the POS application checks the portal database for prepaid services belonging to the member. All of the unused prepaid services belonging to the member will be returned and listed for selection by the CSR. The CSR then informs the member of the services available the member requests the services the member desires to have performed at that time and the CSR selects those services to be debited from the member s account.

Thereafter the point of sales application sends an authorization request to the web hosting portal and the portal responds with acceptance or rejection of the request. If the request is denied an error message may be presented to the CSR explaining the problem. But if the authorization request is accepted the web hosting portal may mark the service as authorized for the member debit the member s account for the prepaid services and may set the identification of the service station in a data table associated with the member. The service station may then perform the service for the member.

Thereafter the CSR may use the point of sales application to indicate that service is complete to initiate printing of a receipt for the member s signature. The receipt may include all suitable identifying or authorization data including member s signature date service station identification member identification and identification of services performed. Also the receipt may be in tangible written form or may also be in electronic form for electronic communication between the service stations and the network center.

It is contemplated that any suitable aspects of this method may be carried out in conjunction with the assistance of a network representative at the network administrator over the telephone.

The service station CSR sends receipt data which may include a signed or otherwise authorized receipt of the member to the network administrator for reimbursement. A network representative at the network administrator receives the signed receipt and cross references it against the member s record in the portal database. If the services indicated on the receipt have in fact been marked as used in the member s record then the network representative reimburses the service station. For example the network representative may credit a network account of the service station via a third party enabler such as PayPal or otherwise or mail a check or money order to the service station and or the like.

In some cases a member may request a refund of their membership fee and or their prepaid services fees. In either case a member may log into the web hosting portal using their computer and browser. The member may fill out an appropriate web form to send the network representative a request for a refund of membership or service fees.

The network representative receives the request and determines whether any services have been used. If so then the network representative sends a denial of refund request to the member via email to the member s listed email address. If no services have been used and the request is for a refund of membership fees then the network representative terminates the membership and forwards the request with the member email to a manager at the network administrator. If no services have been used and the request is for a refund of prepaid fees then the representative cancels all prepaid services and forwards the request with the member email to the manager at the network administrator. Upon receipt of requests for refunds the network manager authorizes the refunds and sends an email to the former member acknowledging the refund. The refunding may be handled using a third party enabler such as PayPal similar to the credit card charging process described previously. In other words the network manager may reverse the charge s to the members credit card account.

In addition to receiving prepaid services a member may also wish to inquire into and possible receive other services at the point of sale at the service station. Among other features the point of sales application also allows the service station CSR to initiate complete and modify estimates for vehicle service create diagnostic inspection sheets and service checklists for a technician enter recommendations print an invoice and finalize the invoice upon receiving payment from the member. The POS application also includes service estimate and or invoice override and or confirmation features that are aimed at preventing or reducing the likelihood of service station fraud. Accordingly the POS application was developed to establish industry best practices and provide those practices to participant service stations.

If however at step the CSR selects a create new estimate button then the method proceeds to step . At step the CSR may enter customer identification into the POS application such as phone number last name etc. Similarly at step the CSR may enter vehicle identification into the POS application. At step the POS software searches existing estimates created for the particular member and vehicle within a predetermined period of time e.g. the last year if any exist. At step it is determined if any such estimates exist. If so at step the POS software displays a list of the estimates including location date time and the estimate amount. At step it is determined whether the CSR wants to copy any existing estimates so as to add to or modify an existing estimate or if the CSR may want to create or initiate a new estimate. If the CSR wants to create a new estimate the method proceeds to step . If the CSR wants to use the existing estimate the method proceeds to step .

From step if no estimates are found then the method proceeds to step . At step if a CSR needs to create a new estimate then the CSR enters the member s description of the problem with the vehicle. If the source of the problem is not known then the CSR selects a diagnostic check box and adds an appropriate amount of labor to perform a diagnosis of the vehicle problem to identify the problem source. If the source of the problem is known then this portion of the step may be skipped.

At step the CSR saves the diagnostic estimate prints the diagnostic estimate and an associated inspection sheet and logs out of the POS application. At this point the member then signs the estimate retains a copy and leaves the vehicle with the service station for inspection and the CSR gives the inspection sheet to a technician at the service station.

At step the technician reviews the member s vehicle fills out the inspection sheet and returns the completed inspection sheet to the CSR.

At step the CSR logs back into the POS application accesses the member s records or account as described previously and selects the pending estimate for modification. In developing the details of the estimate the CSR may use experience consult with a standard vehicle servicing and pricing manual or the like.

In any case the CSR enters cost of recommended labor in increments of half an hour and enters cost of recommended materials like parts and shop supplies such as by selecting a material description material vendor and or material code from a predetermined list of available materials. If a description vendor and or code of a desired material is not in the predetermined list then the CSR may select an add new material using the POS software interface.

As the labor and materials costs are added the POS application displays a running total. But prior to totaling a parts portion of the materials is marked up based on cost according to the following exemplary Table 1.

Similarly a shop supplies portion of the materials cost is calculated based on the subtotal of labor and marked up parts according to the following exemplary table 2.

The running total is calculated as total parts parts markup labor shop supplies sales tax on materials. It is contemplated that labor rate parts and supplies markups and tax are configurable within the POS application. All entered labor and materials data are then saved in memory.

In step it is determined whether any changes in labor materials and or price need to be made. If so then the process goes into an override mode starting at step . In step a service station manager enters his identification and password to allow override of the estimate data. In step the CSR edits the labor and or materials quantity price and or like data. In step the CSR saves the override changes wherein the changes are saved and also automatically sent via a message such as an email message to the service station manager and or to the network manager. Thereafter the process returns to step . The override feature is considered a precautionary measure to prevent or reduce the likelihood of service station fraud at the CSR and technician level.

If at step no changes are necessary then the process goes directly to step . At step the CSR calls the member to discuss the results of the estimate explaining mandatory service items and recommended service items. The CSR can deselect individual items to cause an associated line item amount to be deducted from the total for on the fly estimating while speaking with the member. It is contemplated that the override loop of steps through could be adapted for use here in the process as well.

In step it is determined which if any services the member would like to have performed. If the member does not want any services performed then the method proceeds to step .

At step the CSR may deselect all service items and save the estimate. The POS software then prompts the CSR to schedule follow up with the member regarding any or all of the unselected services. The CSR may enter a follow up date that the POS software may use to automatically prompt the CSR in the future to call the member or mail the member a reminder.

If at step it is determined that the member wants some or all service then the method proceeds to step . At step the CSR obtains member authorization for some or all services. The CSR enters the member s authorization code such as the last four digits of the member s social security number the member s full driver s license number and or member s signature. Any services the customer declines may be deselected by the CSR. The CSR then saves the estimate and the POS software then prompts the CSR to schedule follow up with the member regarding any or all of the unselected services. The CSR may enter a follow up date that the POS software may use to automatically prompt the CSR in the future to call the member or mail the member a reminder.

At step service is initiated when the CSR prints the finalized estimate and an associated technician work order and logs out of the POS application. At this point the member then signs the estimate retains a copy and leaves the vehicle with the service station for vehicle service and the CSR gives the work order to a technician at the service station.

At step the technician reviews the work order performs the indicated service makes changes to the work order if necessary and returns the completed work order to the CSR upon completion of all service items.

At step the CSR reviews the work order logs into the POS application to change the estimate if necessary and contacts the member for vehicle pick up.

At step upon arrival of the member the CSR logs into the POS application and opens the member s file and it is determined whether the customer wishes to cash out. If not then the CSR saves the invoice at step . If so then at step the CSR selects a cash invoice out button.

Then at step the member renders payment to the service station in any suitable manner wherein the POS application may record the type of payment made such as credit card check cash or the like.

Thereafter at step the CSR finalizes the invoice wherein the POS application requests the CSR to confirm one or more of the following service information for each line item of the invoice vendor information for each material used during the rendered vehicle service a purchase order number for each material used and or a date of purchase for each material. The confirmation feature is another precautionary measure to prevent or reduce the likelihood of service station fraud at the CSR and technician level.

At step it is determined whether all recommended service was authorized and performed. If so then the CSR may proceed to save the invoice at step . If not then at step the CSR asks the member if the service station may schedule a follow up communication with the member to remind the member that the service is recommended for the vehicle.

At step it is determined whether the follow up was scheduled. If not then at step a message indicating a lack of follow up is sent the web hosting portal. If so then the CSR may enter a suitable follow up date before the invoice is saved at step .

As has been discussed above the POS application may be configured to remember vehicle service follow up reminders to members. For example the CSR may select a follow ups button of the POS application to list all scheduled follow ups in the system. The follow ups may be listed in descending order starting with the oldest follow up. The CSR may select any given follow up to open an associated previously entered estimate. Thereafter the CSR may contact the member to schedule a service appointment reschedule another follow up communication cancel follow ups altogether for that member or the like. The CSR enters information in a reasons field to indicate why the customer has cancelled or rescheduled the follow up.

A service station manager may wish to perform a cash audit to verify a cash drawer amount balance. But first each morning the manager enters a daily beginning balance in the POS application. For example the manager may log into the POS application first thing in the morning. From a main menu the manager may select a utilities button to access a utilities screen. From there the manager may select a daily start button which invokes a screen requesting the manager to count and enter the amount of beginning cash in the service station cash drawer. The POS application may require that the current POS user have a certain security level such as level 4 which may be associated with the manager. The manager enters the amount into the POS application and selects an ok button to complete and save the daily start data.

Thereafter any time during the day the manager may log in to the POS application to perform a cash audit. The manager may select a utilities button from a main menu in the POS application to access a utilities menu screen. Thereafter the manager may select a cash audit button from a utilities menu whereafter the POS application sums cash sales for the day and beginning cash amount and return the total amount. Again the POS application may require the user to have a service station manager level 4 access. Then the manager may compare the total amount to the actual amount in the cash drawer in the service station.

A general manager of the network administrator may use the POS application to establish an organization and one or more service station locations associated with the organization. This functionality allows service stations to work independently or within an organization and allows the network administrator to service the organization and its service stations.

The general manager may log into the POS application and select a utilities button from a main menu screen. From here the general manager may select a maintain organizations button to access a maintain organizations screen. Thereafter the general manager may select an organization from a list of organizations to access an organizational detail screen. From there the general manager may add a location by selecting an add location button associated with the selected location. Accordingly a location screen appears wherein the general manager may enter location information for each location associated with the selected organization including name geographic location users and or the like. Then the general manager may select an ok button to complete and save the entry.

Similarly upon accessing the organization screen the manager may select a delete organization button to access a delete organization screen. Thereafter a list of all organizations is presented to the general manager who may then select one or more organizations to be deleted. Then the manager may select an ok button to complete and save the deletions. Additionally the general manager may delete a single location from an organization by selecting the desired locations from the organization screen and selecting a delete button.

Likewise upon accessing the organization screen the manager may select a modify organization button to access a modify organization screen. Thereafter a list of all organizations is presented to the general manager who may then select a location to be modified and thereby access a user screen that displays demographic details about the selected location. The general manager may then modify data such as name geographic location users and the like. Then the general manager may select an ok button to complete and save the modifications.

A service station manager may wish to modify a user account for their service station location. The manager may log into the POS application and select the utilities button to access the utilities screen. Then the manager may select an add user button to access an add user screen or fields. Thereafter the manager may add demographic information for each user including name user identification security level and or the like. The security level may be a lower setting such as 2 for a CSR and a higher setting such as 6 for a general manager. Then the manager may select an ok button to complete and save the entry.

Similarly upon accessing the utilities screen the manager may select a delete user button to access a delete user screen. Thereafter a list of all users is presented to the manager who may then select one or more users to be deleted. Then the manager may select an ok button to complete and save the deletions.

Likewise upon accessing the utilities screen the manager may select a modify user button to access a modify user screen. Thereafter a list of all users is presented to the manager who may then select a user to be modified to access a user screen that displays demographic details about the selected user. The manager may then modify data such as name user security level and the like. Then the manager may select an ok button to complete and save the modifications.

With either of the maintain organizations or the maintain users functions discussed above the POS application may be configured to deny access to those locations or organizations for non payment to the network administrator. For example upon initialization the POS application may check with the web hosting portal to verify if the initializing location is up to date with its participant fees or at least within their grace period. If not then the POS application may enter a suspend mode to prevent any further network functionality.

The system may include any instrumentality or aggregation of instrumentalities operable to compute classify detect display handle originate manipulate manifest process record reproduce receive retrieve switch store or utilize any form of data information intelligence for academic business production scientific or other purposes. Although described in connection with an exemplary computing system environment including a computer the disclosed system and method are operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. The computing system environment is not intended to suggest any limitation as to the scope of use or functionality of the system or method. Moreover the computing system environment should not be interpreted as having any dependency or requirement relating to any one component or combination of components illustrated in the exemplary operating environment. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics personal digital assistants mobile telephones network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

As used in the sections above and claims below the terms for example for instance and such as and the verbs comprising having including and their other verb forms when used in conjunction with a listing of one or more components or other items are each to be construed as open ended meaning that the listing is not to be considered as excluding other additional components elements or items. Other terms are to be construed using their broadest reasonable meaning unless they are used in a context that requires a different interpretation. When introducing elements of the present invention or the embodiments thereof the articles a an the and said are intended to mean that there are one or more of the elements.

It is to be understood that the invention is not limited to the particular exemplary embodiments disclosed herein but rather is defined by the claims below. In other words the statements contained in the foregoing description relate to particular exemplary embodiments and are not to be construed as limitations on the scope of the invention as claimed below or on the definition of terms used in the claims except where a term or phrase is expressly defined above. And although the present invention has been disclosed in conjunction with a limited number of presently preferred exemplary embodiments many others are possible and it is not intended herein to mention all of the possible equivalent forms and ramifications of the present invention. Other modifications variations forms ramifications substitutions and or equivalents will become apparent or readily suggest themselves to persons of ordinary skill in the art in view of the foregoing description.

In other words the present invention encompasses many reasonable substitutions or equivalents of limitations recited in the following claims. Indeed the present invention is intended to embrace all forms ramifications modifications variations substitutions and or equivalents as fall within the spirit and broad scope of the following claims.

