---

title: System and method for detecting an acoustic signal in the presence of flow noise
abstract: A system and method are provided for detecting an acoustic signal in the presence of flow noise produced by the turbulent flow field that develops about a hosewall of a towed array. Pressure is sensed with pressure sensors at two diametrically-opposed locations at the surface of the hosewall over a period of time. The sensed pressure signals are used to generate an ensemble-averaged cross-spectra which effectively cancels out the flow noise while retaining the acoustic signal associated with a possible target of interest.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07130242&OS=07130242&RS=07130242
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07130242
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050715
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention relates generally to acoustic signal detection in the presence of flow noise and more particularly to a system and method for detecting an acoustic signal in the presence of flow noise produced by the turbulent flow field that develops about a hosewall of a towed array being towed through the water.

Currently towed arrays have a limited tow speed range over which they can operate effectively because of flow noise. Flow noise which can mask an acoustic signal of interest is generally divided into direct noise from the predominantly non acoustic turbulent boundary layer wall pressure fluctuations and flow induced noise due to structural vibrations excited by the turbulent boundary layer. Existing towed array systems designed to mitigate against or reduce direct flow noise effects are currently only effective over a specific towing speed and frequency range. However turbulent wall pressure fluctuations resulting from the turbulent boundary layer exist over the entire array at all operating speeds.

Accordingly it is an object of the present invention to provide a system and method for detecting an acoustic signal in the presence of flow noise caused by the turbulent boundary layer of a towed array.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a system and method that can detect an acoustic signal in the presence of flow noise over the entire range of tow speeds of a towed array.

Other objects and advantages of the present invention will become more obvious hereinafter in the specification and drawings.

In accordance with the present invention a system and method are provided for detecting an acoustic signal in the presence of flow noise produced by the turbulent flow field that develops about a hosewall of a towed array as the array is towed through the water. Pressure is sensed with pressure sensors at two diametrically opposed locations at the surface of the hosewall over a period of time. The sensed pressure signals are used to generate an ensemble averaged cross spectra which effectively cancels out the flow noise portion of the signal while retaining the acoustic portion of the signal.

Referring now to the drawings and more particularly to a conventional towed array assembly includes an outer hose a plurality of hydrophones H arrayed along a central portion of hose and electrically coupled to one another via signal lines and a telemetry system TS coupled to hydrophones via a signal line . Towed array assembly is towed through the water in the direction of for example arrow . As is well understood in the art as towed array assembly is towed through the water each of hydrophones circumferentially averages pressures sensed thereby. The sensed pressures are propagated along signal lines and to telemetry system which in turn relays the sensed pressures to an end user or system not shown that is typically located onboard the towing vessel not shown .

As mentioned above and as is well known in the art a turbulent flow field or turbulent boundary layer as it is known develops about hose as towed array assembly moves through the water. This turbulent boundary layer causes turbulent wall pressure fluctuations at the entire surface of hose for all tow speeds. The turbulence length scales corresponding to the wall pressure fluctuations are typically very small and have very short correlation or spatial coherence lengths. In particular these turbulence length scales are much smaller than acoustic wavelengths at low to moderate frequencies. The system and method of the present invention exploit these properties to detect the presence of an acoustic signal of interest in the presence of flow noise.

In accordance with the present invention towed array assembly can be modified as follows to provide for acoustic signal detection in the presence of flow noise. Pressure sensors PS and are used to sense pressure fluctuations over a period of time at the surface of hose . More specifically fluctuating pressure is sensed at two diametrically opposed locations on the surface of hose . For clarity of illustration pressure sensors and are located forward of hydrophones and telemetry system . However pressure sensors and can be located anywhere along the length of hose without departing from the scope of the present invention. Additional pairs of diametrically opposed pressure sensors could also be used. By way of a non limiting example each of pressure sensors and could be a simple ceramic pressure sensor potted into the wall of hose as best seen in . A thin film of an acoustic potting compound can be used to cover and protect the surface of each of pressure sensors and .

Fluctuating pressures sensed by each of pressure sensors and are processed by a processing system that can be realized by a single processor or specialized processing elements without departing from the scope of the present invention. Further although processing system is illustrated as being within towed array assembly the present invention is not so limited as some or all of the functions performed by processing system could also be located at the end user location e.g. onboard the towing vessel that receives analog or digitized outputs from telemetry system . That is pressure sensors and could have their analog outputs or digitized outputs coupled directly to telemetry system with such outputs then being transmitted to the end user location for processing.

Regardless of where the functions of processing system take place the sensed pressures from sensors and are respectively digitized by analog to digital A D converters A and B. The respective digitized sequences are then converted into the frequency domain by respective fast Fourier Transforms FFT A and B. The resulting FFTs are then processed to generate an ensemble averaged cross spectra . As is known in the art of frequency domain processing an ensemble averaged cross spectra is generated by multiplying a first FFT e.g. that generated by FFT A times the complex conjugate of a second FFT e.g. that generated by FFT B . The frequency range and sampling rate of telemetry system can be used to define the frequency range and sampling rate for performing ensemble averaged cross spectra .

As mentioned above conventional array hydrophones located in the center of the array circumferentially average the incoming pressure signal. In the case where an acoustic array e.g. the array defined by hydrophones is flow noise limited the direct flow noise component due to the turbulent boundary layer at a given frequency masks the acoustic signal of interest. The present invention makes use of the fact that the coherence or correlation between two sensors e.g. sensors and diametrically opposed in the array assembly s hose is approximately zero when time averaged. As a result when sensors and are exposed to an acoustic signal of interest the cross spectra between the diametrically opposed sensors will effectively cancel out the flow noise portion of the signal while retaining the acoustic portion of the signal. Thus the cross spectra generated from the output of pressure sensors and can be used to detect the presence of an acoustic signal at a given frequency even when the array defined by hydrophones is flow noise limited. Such detection could be used to alert the towed array assembly s operator to the presence of a possible target of interest. Further a detection by the present invention could also be used to indicate that special processing techniques may have to be applied to the output of hydrophones in order for their measurements to be effective for target localization and or classification.

The advantages of the present invention are numerous. The present invention is applicable to single and multi line towed arrays. The pressure sensors can simply be integrated into a towed array s hosewall. These sensors are very small inexpensive and lightweight and would be compatible with existing towed array telemetry. The two sensors are at the same axial or streamwise location and will measure the identical acoustic field from sources over frequency ranges generally of interest. In other words the measured acoustic field is perfectly correlated and the flow noise from the turbulent boundary layer is highly uncorrelated in the transverse or spanwise direction.

It will be understood that many additional changes in the details materials steps and arrangement of parts which have been herein described and illustrated in order to explain the nature of the invention may be made by those skilled in the art within the principle and scope of the invention as expressed in the appended claims.

