---

title: Method and system for defining page size when displaying a data list
abstract: A system for setting data list parameters for displaying a data list in pages. An application program receives a first and second user input, wherein the first user input defines a number of items displayed within a page, and wherein the second user input defines a page size tolerance. In response to receiving the first and second user input, the application program sets the number of items displayed within the page and the page size tolerance. Then the application program displays the data list in a graphical user interface according to the set number of items displayed within the page and the set page size tolerance.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07735006&OS=07735006&RS=07735006
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 07735006
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051014
---
The present invention relates generally to an improved data processing system. More specifically the present invention is directed to a computer implemented method apparatus and computer usable program code for distributing data list items across multiple pages when display of the data list requires more than one page.

A graphical user interface GUI permits an end user to interact with a computer through the more intuitive operations of point and click on graphical display elements with a pointer controlled by a mouse or other user interface device. A mouse is typically employed by a user of a computer to interact with the computer s GUI. A pointer is an iconic image controlled by a mouse and is displayed on the computer s GUI for the user to visually select or manipulate icons menus and other types of graphical objects.

A popular way to present information to computer system users is via a GUI. A GUI is usually a component of a computer environment which is provided by an operating system. However an application program also may create a GUI by independently displaying objects on a screen for utilities provided by the operating system. In addition a combination of the operating system and application program approaches also may be used to create a GUI.

Information or data is often presented to an end user in a GUI environment using a graphical user interface component known as a window. A window is a scrollable viewing area on a GUI and is generally rectangular in shape. Each window conveys information about an application program or other process executing in the computer. A window is the central way to provide information to and receive information from a user. Usually one or more active windows are present on a display screen at any given time.

The number of horizontal and vertical pixels rates display screens. For example 1024 768 means that the display screen displays 1024 pixels in each row and there are 768 rows or lines. A pixel or picture element is the smallest addressable unit on the display screen.

Users of application programs such as databases e mail online shopping search engines and the like are familiar with viewing windows containing returned results of data lists. Sometimes users face a challenge with managing large lists of returned results. Often the large list of returned results is displayed on more than one page. For example the returned result may display 1 10 of 31 on a first page 11 20 of 31 on a second page 21 30 of 31 on a third page and 31 of 31 on a fourth page.

Currently returned result window views are configurable such that the page size is set to show a specific number of items per page. This current configurable page size window view may create returned result views that contain relatively few items on the last page such as in the example illustrated above the fourth or last page of the returned result data list contains only 1 item. In the case of the depicted example above the user may not want to waste time by viewing a page containing only 1 item because the user may feel that the effort reward ratio is too small. As a result of not viewing the last page containing 1 item the user may miss important information.

A small number of items placed on the last page of a returned result data list are similar to placing the last line of a paragraph from a previous page at the top of the next page. In the publishing or printing industry this carry over of the last line of a paragraph to the next page is known as a widow because the widow stands alone. For reasons of efficiency a widow is undesirable in print and is undesirable in viewing a data list of returned results.

Embodiments of the present invention provide a method apparatus and computer usable program code for setting data list parameters for displaying a data list in pages. An application program receives a first and second user input wherein the first user input defines a number of items displayed within a page and wherein the second user input defines a page size tolerance. In response to receiving the first and second user input the application program sets the number of items displayed within the page and the page size tolerance. Then the application program displays the data list in a graphical user interface according to the set number of items displayed within the page and the set page size tolerance.

With reference now to the figures and in particular with reference to a pictorial representation of a data processing system is depicted in which the aspects of the present invention may be implemented. Computer is shown that includes system unit video display terminal keyboard storage devices which may include floppy drives and other types of permanent and removable storage media and mouse . Additional input devices may be included with personal computer such as for example a joystick touchpad touch screen trackball microphone and the like. Computer can be implemented using any suitable computer such as an IBM eServer computer or IntelliStation computer which are products of International Business Machines Corporation located in Armonk N.Y. Although the depicted representation shows a computer other embodiments of the present invention may be implemented in other types of data processing systems such as a network computer. Computer also preferably includes a graphical user interface GUI that may be implemented by means of systems software residing in computer readable media in operation within computer .

With reference now to a block diagram of a data processing system is depicted in which aspects of the present invention may be implemented. Data processing system is an example of a computer such as computer in in which program code or instructions implementing the processes of the present invention may be located. In the depicted example data processing system employs a hub architecture including a north bridge and memory controller hub NB MCH and a south bridge and input output I O controller hub SB ICH . Processor main memory and graphics processor are connected to NB MCH . Graphics processor may be connected to the MCH through an accelerated graphics port AGP for example.

In the depicted example local area network LAN adapter audio adapter keyboard and mouse adapter modem read only memory ROM hard disk drive HDD CD ROM drive universal serial bus USB ports and other communications ports and PCI PCIe devices connect to SB ICH . PCI PCIe devices may include for example Ethernet adapters add in cards PC cards for notebook computers etc. PCI uses a card bus controller while PCIe does not. ROM may be for example a flash binary input output system BIOS . HDD and CD ROM drive may use for example an integrated drive electronics IDE or serial advanced technology attachment SATA interface. Super I O SIO device may be connected to SB ICH .

An operating system runs on processor and coordinates and provides control of various components within data processing system in . The operating system may be a commercially available operating system such as Microsoft Windows XP Microsoft and Windows are trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States other countries or both . An object oriented programming system such as the Java programming system may run in conjunction with the operating system and provides calls to the operating system from Java programs or applications executing on data processing system Java is a trademark of Sun Microsystems Inc. in the United States other countries or both .

Instructions for the operating system the object oriented programming system and applications or programs are located on storage devices such as HDD and may be loaded into main memory for execution by processor . The processes of embodiments of the present invention are performed by processor using computer implemented instructions which may be located in a memory such as for example main memory read only memory or in one or more peripheral devices.

Those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the hardware in and may vary depending on the implementation. Other internal hardware or peripheral devices such as flash memory equivalent non volatile memory or optical disk drives and the like may be used in addition to or in place of the hardware depicted in and . Also the processes of embodiments of the present invention may be applied to a multiprocessor data processing system.

As some illustrative examples data processing system may be a personal digital assistant PDA which is configured with flash memory to provide non volatile memory for storing operating system files and or user generated data. A bus system may be comprised of one or more buses such as a system bus an I O bus and a PCI bus. Of course the bus system may be implemented using any type of communication fabric or architecture that provides for a transfer of data between different components or devices attached to the fabric or architecture. A communication unit may include one or more devices used to transmit and receive data such as a modem or a network adapter. A memory may be for example main memory or a cache such as found in NB MCH . A processing unit may include one or more processors or CPUs. The depicted examples in and and above described examples are not meant to imply architectural limitations. For example data processing system also may be a tablet computer laptop computer or telephone device in addition to taking the form of a PDA.

An embodiment of the present invention provides an improved computer implemented method apparatus and computer usable program code for displaying a data list in pages. An application program receives a user request to display the data list in pages in a GUI. In response to receiving the user request to display the data list the application program displays a data list preference setting window in the GUI. Subsequent to displaying the data list preference setting window the application program may receive a first user input to define the number of items displayed within a page and a second user input to define the page size tolerance.

The page size tolerance determines the minimum number of data list items that may be displayed on a last page of the data list. For example if the user sets the page size tolerance to 2 then the application program will not display 2 data list items or less on the last page of the data list. The application program aggregates the 2 or fewer data list items that would have been displayed on the last page to previously full pages.

In addition the page size tolerance also determines the maximum amount of page size increase to accommodate aggregation of extra data list items from the last page to previously full pages. For example if the user sets the page size tolerance to 2 then the application program may increase the set number of data list items displayed per page up to a maximum of 2 in order to aggregate the extra data list items from the last page. Thus the page size tolerance has a dual function of determining the minimum amount of data list items displayed on the last page of a data list and also determining the maximum amount of page size increase to accommodate aggregation of extra data list items from the last page.

A third user input may be received by the application program which enables a behavior preference setting. The behavior preference setting may be a maximized normalized or user specified behavior. The maximized normalized and user specified behavior preference settings determine how aggregation of the extra data list items from the last page is accomplished. After the third user input enables the user specified behavior preference the application program may receive a fourth user input that is associated with the third user input. The fourth user input defines the number of previously full pages across which the extra data list items from the last page are aggregated.

In response to receiving the user inputs the application program sets the selected user preferences contained in the data list preference setting window. Then the application program displays the data list in the GUI according to the set user preferences. Alternatively the application program may use a default setting for the purpose of displaying the data list if the user does not select a preference.

In the context of this specification a user is anyone that may interact with the application program such as for example the application program author a system administrator or an end user. In other words the user may change or adjust any and all default settings or user preferences within the application program in accordance with embodiments of the present invention. A benefit of embodiments of the present invention is that the user now has the ability to set variable page sizes within parameters or limits. The user by setting the desired parameters or limits defines the minimum number of items to be displayed on the last page of the data list. The user by defining the last page size parameter avoids the annoyance of having only a few items listed on the last page. Thus embodiments of the present invention decrease the user s efforts and improve the user s experience of viewing items in a data list.

Referring now to a block diagram of a data processing system in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention is shown. Data processing system may be for example data processing system in . Operating system application programming interface and application software may reside for example in processor .

Operating system is utilized to provide high level functionality to the user and to other software. Such an operating system typically includes a basic input output system BIOS . Application programming interface API allows a user of data processing system an individual or a software routine to invoke system capabilities using a standard consistent interface without concern for how the particular functionality is implemented. Application software may run for example on operating system . Application software represents any number of software applications designed to react to data to provide the desired functionality the user seeks. The software applications represented by application software may include those software applications necessary to handle data video graphics photos or text. Embodiments of the present invention may be implemented within application software in these examples.

Processor such as for example processor in performs the basic operations in data processing system . Processor may for example display information on graphical user interface GUI . GUI has a plurality of picture elements collectively referred to as a screen which may define the appearance of a user interface environment displayed on GUI . GUI screen contents and therefore the appearance of the user interface environment may be controlled or altered by application software or operating system either individually or in combination.

Operating system application software or both may employ user input devices in order to obtain input from a user. User input devices may include pointing device and keyboard such as for example mouse and keyboard in or any other input device known to those of skill in the art. User input devices may be used for example to set user preferences in a data list preference window displayed on GUI . However embodiments of the present invention are not restricted to utilizing user input devices for the sole purpose of setting user preferences. User input devices may be used for any purpose necessary to accomplish the processes for different embodiments of the present invention.

With reference now to an exemplary illustration of a graphical user interface displaying a data list preference setting window is shown in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. GUI such as for example graphical user interface in displays data list preference setting window . A preference is an option in an application program that may be changed by the user. Preferences usually control the user interface letting the user customize the way the user views data or information. Preferences also may control routine actions taken by the program. If the user does not select a preference setting then the program may use a default setting.

A default setting is the current setting or action taken by hardware or software if the user has not specified otherwise. Application programs have dozens if not hundreds of default settings that determine everything from the font size that should be used to the folder a file is saved in. Defaults also imply that the setting or action may be changed.

Data list preference setting window contains page size drop down list and tolerance drop down list . A drop down list also known as a pop down list or pull down list is a common type of preference setting tool used with a GUI. Usually a list title is displayed describing the preference setting drop down list. The user by using a user input device such as user input devices in inputs the desired preference setting.

Page size drop down list sets the user preference for the number of items to be displayed on a data list page. Thus page size drop down list defines the page size by limiting the number of items to be displayed per page. Page size drop down list may contain for example numbers from 5 100. However embodiments of the present invention are not limited to the above listed range of numbers for page size drop down list . Any range of numbers that are consistent with embodiments of the present invention may be utilized.

In this depicted example the preference setting for page size drop down list is 10. In other words by using the setting of 10 in page size drop down list the size of each page is limited to 10 items listed or displayed at a time. However the user may select any number setting listed in page size drop down list as a preference setting by using for example a mouse to click on page size drop down list scrolling down the number list and selecting the desired number from the number list by clicking on the desired number. In addition the default setting for page size drop down list also may be for example 10.

Tolerance drop down list sets the user preference for the minimum number of items to be displayed on a last page of a data list. For example if a data list contains more items than the page size set preference but fewer extra data list items than the set page size tolerance then the extra items in the data list are aggregated or added to the previous page or pages in reverse sequential page order. Reverse sequential page order means that the extra item or items are added to the last full page first then to the second from the last full page and so on.

Tolerance drop down list may contain for example numbers from 2 24. However embodiments of the present invention are not limited to the above listed range of numbers for tolerance drop down list . Any range of numbers that are consistent with embodiments of the present invention may be utilized. In this depicted example the preference setting for tolerance drop down list is 2. In other words the last page may not contain 2 or fewer items. However the user may select any number setting listed in tolerance drop down list as a preference setting in the same manner described above for page size drop down list . In addition the default setting for tolerance drop down list also may be for example 2.

Data list preference setting window also may contain radio buttons and . Radio buttons and specify or define the number of full pages that the extra data list items may be distributed or aggregated across. Radio buttons are a series of on screen buttons that allow only one selection. In other words if a radio button is currently selected the currently selected radio button is de selected when another radio button is selected from the series. Radio button preference selection is utilized whenever the user may make only one choice out of several.

When a radio button contains a dot or mark the preference function for that radio button is enabled which means the preference is turned on and active. When the radio button is empty the preference or option is disabled or not active. The user may use for example a mouse click to place a dot in the selected radio button. Performing a mouse click over the selected radio button enables that radio button preference function and disables all other radio button preference functions in the series. Consequently embodiments of the present invention will contain a dot or mark in only one of radio buttons or signifying that the preference function for radio button or is enabled.

Radio button sets the user preference for the program to maximize the number of aggregated extra data list items only onto the last full page up to a maximum page size tolerance limit. In other words the last full page size may be increased over the page size preference limit set by page size drop down list by the page size tolerance preference number set by tolerance drop down list . In this illustrative example the last full page size may be increased from 10 to 12 for the purpose of aggregating extra data list items. Consequently in this specific example 12 is the maximum page size tolerance limit. Also in this illustrative example radio button contains a dot which signifies that the maximize preference is enabled. In addition the maximize preference setting may be for example the program s default setting for radio button series and as well.

Radio button sets the user preference to normalize the number of data list extra items over one or more full pages. Normalization of the extra data list items means to distribute or aggregate the extra data list items as equally or evenly as possible over one or more full pages in reverse sequential page order up to the maximum page size tolerance limit. In other words normalization tries to keep the number of items per page as close to the same as possible. Consequently when a user selects normalize radio button the extra data list items in the data list are aggregated as evenly as possible over one or more pages in reverse sequential page order as opposed to maximizing the number of items listed within the last full page up to the maximum page size tolerance limit when selecting maximize radio button .

Radio button sets a user specified preference. This user specified preference defines how many full pages are utilized in reverse sequential page order to aggregate extra data list items. Associated with radio button is drop down list . Drop down list may only be enabled or utilized when the user selects user specified radio button . Drop down list specifies the number of pages the user desires to aggregate the extra data list items across.

Drop down list may contain for example numbers from 2 100. However embodiments of the present invention are not limited to the above listed range of numbers for drop down list . Any range of numbers that are consistent with embodiments of the present invention may be utilized. In this depicted example the preference setting for drop down list is 2. In other words the user specified in drop down list that only the last 2 full pages may be used to evenly aggregate extra data list items. However the user may select any number setting listed in drop down list as a preference setting in the same manner described above for page size drop down list . In addition the default setting for drop down list also may be for example 2.

Consequently by selecting user specified radio button the user prefers to aggregate the extra data list items evenly across the last user specified number of full pages in reverse sequential page order. In this illustrative example drop down list is set at 2 which means that the user desires to aggregate the extra data list items across the last two pages as equally as possible. In addition 2 may be the program s default setting for drop down list .

As a result when the data list consists of more than one page of displayed items according to the page size set in page size drop down list but the number of extra data list items to be displayed on the last page is less than or equal to the page size tolerance set in drop down list the extra data list items are aggregated or added to the last full page or pages depending upon the page size tolerance setting and whether maximize radio button normalize radio button or user specified radio button is marked. Also it should be noted that if the user preferences or default settings of drop down lists and are higher than the total number of data list items the data list is displayed regardless of the total number of items.

Data list preference setting window also may contain submit button and cancel button . The user utilizes submit button for the purpose of submitting the user s preferences to the application program. The user may for example employ a mouse click over submit button to submit the data list user preferences. Alternatively the user may elect to mouse click over cancel button . The user utilizes cancel button in order to cancel the user s preferences selected in data list preference window . If the user cancels the user preferences or if no user preferences are selected the application program applies the default settings as the user preferences.

In an embodiment of the present invention the application program may automatically display data list preference setting window each time the application program is to display a data list on the GUI in order to obtain user data list preferences. Alternatively data list preference setting window may automatically appear only upon initial application program start up for the user to set data list preferences. Or the application program may use default settings until such time as the user selects user preference settings. The user may select data list preferences by for example mouse clicking on a tools menu and then mouse clicking on preferences which causes data list preference window to appear on the GUI.

In another embodiment of the present invention the user may set a range of displayed items per page to define the page size instead of a single page size number. For example the user may set the page size range at 10 12 items. The page size range means that each full page may display from 10 up to a maximum of 12 items. In addition this page size range means that there is an inherent page size tolerance of 2. In this illustrative example with an inherent page size tolerance of 2 the last page may not contain less than or equal to 2 items. Consequently if the last page is to contain 2 or fewer items then the 2 or fewer extra data list items are distributed over the previous page or pages within the set page size range.

In an alternative embodiment of the present invention the page size and tolerance settings may be set in physical pixels. For example if the page size preference is set at 500 pixels page size tolerance is set at 60 pixels and each data list item uses 20 pixels then the page size is 25 items per page. The page size is calculated by dividing the 500 pixel page size by the 20 pixel item size which equals the 25 items per page. The page size tolerance is calculated by dividing the 60 pixel page size tolerance by the 20 pixel item size which equals a page size tolerance of 3 items. In other words a page size tolerance of 3 allows the page size to expand from 25 to 28 data list items displayed per page in this illustrative example.

Turning now to exemplary illustrations of varying page sizes and page ranges are depicted in accordance embodiments of the present invention. illustrate differences between standard behavior maximized behavior normalized behavior and user specified behavior for data list page configurations. Standard data list configuration behavior represents current market behavior. Maximized normalized and user specified data list configuration behaviors represent varying embodiments of the present invention.

In contrast the user may enable a maximize setting such as maximize radio button in in order to display data list according to the user s viewing preference. Maximized behavior uses 2 pages to display data list with a display configuration of 10 items on the first page and 12 items on the second page. It should be noted that in these particular examples described in below because the page size tolerance is set at 2 embodiments of the present invention will not display 2 items or less on a page unless there is only one page with 2 items or less in the data list. Consequently the user by enabling the maximize setting views the 2 extra data list items on the last full page of maximized behavior because the page size tolerance of 2 allows the page size to increase from 10 to 12 for the purpose of data list item aggregation to previously full pages. Thus in this illustrative example the last full page is maximized to display 12 data list items.

Alternatively the user may enable a normalize setting such as normalize radio button in . Normalized behavior uses 2 pages to display data list which is the same number of pages as maximized behavior . However normalized behavior has a display configuration of 11 items on the first page and 11 items on the second page. Thus the 2 extra data list items are equally distributed over the 2 previously full pages.

On the other hand the user may enable a user specified setting such as user specified radio button in . After enabling the user specified setting the user selects from a drop down list associated with the user specified setting such as drop down list associated with user specified radio button in the number of pages the user desires to aggregate the extra data list items across. In this particular illustrative example the user specified behavior is set to aggregate the extra data list items across the last full pages such as is shown in drop down list in . Accordingly user specified behavior uses 2 pages to display data list with the 2 extra data list items evenly distributed over the 2 previously full pages. Thus user specified behavior has a display configuration of 11 items on the first page and 11 items on the second page which is the same display configuration as normalized behavior in this depicted example.

In contrast maximized behavior uses 4 pages to display data list with a display configuration of 25 items on the first three pages and 28 items on the fourth page. Because the page size tolerance is set at 4 in embodiments of the present invention will not display 4 items or less on the last page of the illustrated examples below. Consequently the last full page displays the 3 extra data list items of maximized behavior because the page size tolerance is set to 4. With the page size tolerance set to 4 the page size may increase from 25 to 29 to allow for aggregation of data list items to previously full pages. Therefore in this illustrative example the last full page is maximized to display 28 items.

Normalized behavior uses 4 pages to display data list . The display configuration of normalized behavior is 25 items on the first page and 26 items on pages two through four. Thus the 3 extra data list items are evenly distributed or aggregated over three previously full pages in reverse sequential page order.

User specified behavior also uses 4 pages to display data list . However the display configuration of user specified behavior is different from normalized behavior in this depicted example. Because user specified behavior is set to aggregate the extra data list items across the last 2 pages the display configuration for user specified behavior is 25 items on pages one and two 26 items on page three and 27 items on page 4. Consequently in this particular example the 3 extra items are aggregated as evenly as possible over the last 2 pages according to the user specified preference.

The total number of items in data list is 24. Standard behavior uses 3 pages to display data list with a display configuration of 10 items listed on pages one and two and 4 items listed on page three. Because embodiments of the present invention will display 3 items or more on the last page in these particular examples due to the inherent page size tolerance maximized behavior normalized behavior and user specified behavior all have the same number of pages and page display configuration as standard behavior .

Total number of items in the data list is 104. Standard behavior uses 5 pages to display data list containing the 104 data list items with a display configuration of 25 items on pages one through four and 4 items on page five. Maximized behavior uses 4 pages to display the data list with a configuration of 25 items listed on the first three pages and 29 items listed on the fourth page. Therefore maximized behavior maximizes the last full page to contain 29 data list items in accordance with the set page range of .

Normalized behavior also uses 4 pages to display data list . However normalized behavior utilizes a different page display configuration than maximized behavior . Normalized behavior lists 26 data list items on all 4 pages. Thus the 4 extra data list items which are found on page 5 of standard behavior are equally distributed over all of the previously full 4 pages.

User specified behavior again uses 4 pages to display data list but user specified behavior uses yet another page display configuration that is different from both maximized behavior and normalized behavior . The page display configuration for user specified behavior lists 25 data list items on pages one and two and 27 data list items on pages three and four. This page display configuration in this illustrative example is a result of the user setting the user specified behavior to aggregate the extra data list items across the last 2 pages. Hence only the last two pages are utilized for data list item aggregation in this specific example.

Referring now to a flowchart is shown illustrating an exemplary process for distributing data list items across multiple pages when display of the data list requires more than one page in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. The process illustrated in may be implemented in a computer such as for example computer in . More specifically the process illustrated in may be implemented in an application program contained within computer in such as for example application software contained within data processing system in .

The process begins when a user inputs a request for example via a mouse or keyboard such as pointing device or keyboard in to display a data list on a GUI step . The data list may be contained within for example the application program itself another application program contained within the computer a database contained within or connected to the computer an online resource connected to the computer or any source that may provide data in a list format. The data list may be any compilation of data or information that the user desires to view in page form on a GUI.

Subsequent to receiving the user request to display the data list in step the application program displays a data list user preference window such as data list preference window in on the GUI for the user to input data list preferences step . The user inputs the desired data list preferences such as page size page size tolerance and maximize normalize or user specified behavior on the data list user preference window. For example the user uses page size drop down list to input the desired number of data list items to display on each page tolerance drop down list to input the desired page size tolerance radio buttons or to input maximize normalize or user specified behavior and drop down list associated with user specified behavior to input the number of pages across which the user desires to aggregate extra data list items in . The application program receives the data list preferences step and then proceeds to set the user preferences. In the absence of receiving a user preference input the application program applies the default settings for displaying the data list.

After receiving the user input as to data list preferences in step the application program determines and sets the total number of items in the data list to be displayed on the GUI step . Then the application program sets the page size according to the user preference input or to the default settings step . The page size is the number of data list items listed per page. Once the page size is set in step the application program determines and sets the number of full pages by dividing the total number of data list items to be displayed by the set page size step .

Subsequent to determining the number of full pages in step the application program determines the number of extra data list items to be placed on a last page step . The remainder of dividing the total number of items to be displayed by the set page size is the number of extra data list items to be placed on the last page. After determining the number of extra data list items to be displayed on the last page the application program sets the page size tolerance according to the user preference input or default setting step . The page size tolerance determines whether the extra data list items remain on a separate page by themselves or whether the extra data list items are aggregated to one or more previously full pages.

In addition the page size tolerance also determines how much a page size may be increased in order to accommodate aggregation of extra data list items to previously full pages. For example if the page size is set at 10 and the page size tolerance is set at 2 the page size may be increase from 10 to 12 if the number of extra data list items on the last page are less than or equal to 2. For example maximized behavior aggregates 2 extra data list items into a previously full last page in data list of . In this particular example 12 is the maximum page size tolerance limit.

Further the application program sets the number of pages the extra data list items may be aggregated across according to a user preference or to a default setting step and sets the current page to the number of full pages step . Subsequently the application program determines whether the number of extra data list items on the last page are less than or equal to the set page size tolerance step . If the number of extra data list items is not less than or equal to the set page size tolerance no output of step then the application program displays the data list in pages on the GUI for the user to view step . The process terminates thereafter.

If the number of extra data list items is less than or equal to the set page size tolerance yes output of step then the application program determines whether aggregation of all the extra data list items has occurred step . If the application program has aggregated all of the extra data list items from the last page yes output of step then the process returns to step where the application program displays the data list. If the application program has not aggregated all of the extra data list items from the last page no output of step then the application program increases the number of items displayed in the current page by 1 step .

After the application program increases the number of items displayed in the current page by 1 in step the application program sets the current page to the current page minus 1 step . Once the number of items displayed in the current page is increased by 1 in step and the current page is set to the previous page in step the application program makes a determination as to whether the number of pages over which the extra data list items are to be aggregated has been achieved step . If the number of pages over which the extra data list items are to be aggregated has not been achieved no output of step then the application program sets the number of extra data list items to the number of extra data list items minus 1. Thereafter the process returns to step where a determination is made as to whether all extra data list items have been aggregated. If the number of pages over which the extra data list items are to be aggregated is achieved yes output of step then the application program sets the current page to the number of full pages step . The process returns to step thereafter.

With reference now to a flowchart is shown illustrating an exemplary user process for viewing a data list in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. The process begins when a user submits a request for example via a mouse or keyboard such as pointing device or keyboard in to view a data list on a computer s GUI step . After submitting the request to view the data list in step the user views a data list preference setting window on the GUI such as data list preference window in step .

While viewing the data list preference setting window in step the user inputs and then submits the user s preferences by for example using a mouse click over a submit button such as submit button in step . Alternatively the user may cancel user preferences by mouse clicking over a cancel button such as cancel button in in which case the application program applies the default settings for the data list parameters. Subsequent to inputting and submitting or canceling the user data list preferences in step the user views the data list according to the set user preferences or applied default settings step . After viewing the data list in the GUI in step the user closes the data list window step and the process terminates thereafter. Alternatively the user may return to step by submitting another request for a data list. In addition it should be appreciated by those skilled in the art that the application program may display a plurality of data list windows in the GUI at any one time.

Turning now to an exemplary algorithm for distributing data list items across multiple pages when display of the data list requires more than one page is depicted in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. A software programmer locates the algorithm for distributing data list items across multiple pages within the application program such as application software in . Algorithm is presented only as an example of an algorithm that may be used by embodiments of the present invention to define data list parameters. Embodiments of the present invention are not restricted to the use of algorithm . Any algorithm may be utilized by embodiments of the present invention that is capable of accomplishing the data list parameter function.

Thus embodiments of the present invention provide a computer implemented method apparatus and computer program product for distributing data list items across multiple pages when display of the data list requires more than one page. The invention can take the form of an entirely hardware embodiment an entirely software embodiment or an embodiment containing both hardware and software elements. In a preferred embodiment the invention is implemented in software which includes but is not limited to firmware resident software microcode etc.

Furthermore the invention can take the form of a computer program product accessible from a computer usable or computer readable medium providing program code for use by or in connection with a computer or any instruction execution system. For the purposes of this description a computer usable or computer readable medium can be any tangible apparatus that can contain store communicate propagate or transport the program for use by or in connection with the instruction execution system apparatus or device.

The medium can be an electronic magnetic optical electromagnetic infrared or semiconductor system or apparatus or device or a propagation medium. Examples of a computer readable medium include a semiconductor or solid state memory magnetic tape a removable computer diskette a random access memory RAM a read only memory ROM a rigid magnetic disk and an optical disk. Current examples of optical disks include compact disk read only memory CD ROM compact disk read write CD R W and DVD.

A data processing system suitable for storing and or executing program code will include at least one processor coupled directly or indirectly to memory elements through a system bus. The memory elements can include local memory employed during actual execution of the program code bulk storage and cache memories which provide temporary storage of at least some program code in order to reduce the number of times code must be retrieved from bulk storage during execution.

Input output or I O devices including but not limited to keyboards displays pointing devices etc. can be coupled to the system either directly or through intervening I O controllers.

Network adapters may also be coupled to the system to enable the data processing system to become coupled to other data processing systems or remote printers or storage devices through intervening private or public networks. Modems cable modem and Ethernet cards are just a few of the currently available types of network adapters.

The description of the present invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description and is not intended to be exhaustive or limited to the invention in the form disclosed. Many modifications and variations will be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art. The embodiment was chosen and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention the practical application and to enable others of ordinary skill in the art to understand the invention for various embodiments with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.

