---

title: Grammatically correct contraction spelling suggestions for french
abstract: A method and product are provided that identify properly spelled words from an input string. Separate lexical entries are identified for different parts of an input word. Grammatical information associated with one of the lexical entries is examined to determine if it satisfies a grammatical constraint associated with another of the lexical entries. A properly spelled word is formed by combining the separate lexical entries if the grammatical information satisfies the constraint. Under some embodiments of the invention, the separate lexical entries are identified by performing a first search of a lexicon using a first part of the input string and by performing a second search of the lexicon using a second part of the input string.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07599828&OS=07599828&RS=07599828
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07599828
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050301
---
The present invention relates to automated spell checking. In particular the present invention relates to suggesting contractions as alternatives to misspelled words.

The role of the spell checker is to identify spelling mistakes and to offer suggestions to correct them. Typically such spell checking is performed by comparing an input string to entries in a lexicon. If an entry is found that matches the word the spell checking system assumes that the word is correctly spelled. If no matching word can be found the spell checker returns a suggestion of possible words in the lexicon that the user may have been trying to spell. These words are selected by comparing the input string to each word in the lexicon and identifying those words that are closest to the input string.

The distance between the input string and a word in a lexicon is measured differently by different spell checkers but in general is based on the number of deletions additions permutations or substitutions that must be performed on the word in the lexicon to form the misspelled word. Words that are further than some threshold distance from the input string are not suggested to the user as alternatives because it is unlikely that the user has made so many spelling mistakes and suggesting words that are substantially different from the input string can cause users to lose confidence in the system.

While such spell checkers have worked well in many languages they have produced a large number of poor suggestions for French contractions that are missing an apostrophe.

In French it is common to form a contraction by shortening a word such as le into an elided form such as l and appending the elided word to the next word in the sentence using an apostrophe. For example instead of writing le arbre the tree the contraction l arbre is used.

One common mistake is to forget the apostrophe when forming the contraction during writing. Thus for example the user may type lorange when the correct form is l orange .

Although it is possible to form all of the contractions as lexical entries this would cause the lexicon to be very large. For example there would need to be an entry for orange and for l orange . To avoid this systems have attempted to dynamically identify when an apostrophe may be missing from a contraction. However these systems have typically used simple rules that identify a first letter or set of letters as belonging to a set of elided words and then simply suggesting placing an apostrophe between the identified letters and the remaining portion of the word.

These simple rules have resulted in a large number of meaningless suggestions being provided to the user since a large number of the contractions formed by the rules are grammatically incorrect.

Thus a spell checker is needed that provides grammatically correct suggestions to the user when suggesting contractions as possible spelling alternatives to words provided by the user without requiring each individual contraction to be found in the lexicon.

A method and product are provided that identify properly spelled words from an input string. Separate lexical entries are identified for different parts of an input word. Grammatical information associated with one of the lexical entries is examined to determine if it satisfies a grammatical constraint associated with another of the lexical entries. A properly spelled word is formed by combining the separate lexical entries if the grammatical information satisfies the constraint. Under some embodiments of the invention the separate lexical entries are identified by performing a first search of a lexicon using a first part of the input string and by performing a second search of the lexicon using a second part of the input string.

The invention is operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers telephony systems distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

The invention may be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by a computer. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. The invention is designed to be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules are located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing the invention includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus.

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies.

A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard a microphone and a pointing device such as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer is operated in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a hand held device a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on remote computer . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Memory is implemented as non volatile electronic memory such as random access memory RAM with a battery back up module not shown such that information stored in memory is not lost when the general power to mobile device is shut down. A portion of memory is preferably allocated as addressable memory for program execution while another portion of memory is preferably used for storage such as to simulate storage on a disk drive.

Memory includes an operating system application programs as well as an object store . During operation operating system is preferably executed by processor from memory . Operating system in one preferred embodiment is a WINDOWS CE brand operating system commercially available from Microsoft Corporation. Operating system is preferably designed for mobile devices and implements database features that can be utilized by applications through a set of exposed application programming interfaces and methods. The objects in object store are maintained by applications and operating system at least partially in response to calls to the exposed application programming interfaces and methods.

Communication interface represents numerous devices and technologies that allow mobile device to send and receive information. The devices include wired and wireless modems satellite receivers and broadcast tuners to name a few. Mobile device can also be directly connected to a computer to exchange data therewith. In such cases communication interface can be an infrared transceiver or a serial or parallel communication connection all of which are capable of transmitting streaming information.

Input output components include a variety of input devices such as a touch sensitive screen buttons rollers and a microphone as well as a variety of output devices including an audio generator a vibrating device and a display. The devices listed above are by way of example and need not all be present on mobile device . In addition other input output devices may be attached to or found with mobile device within the scope of the present invention.

As shown in the present invention provides a spell checking module which receives a text from an application and returns an indication of whether the text is misspelled and possible suggestions for correcting the spelling error in a set of return messages . During spell checking spell checker traverses through a lexicon trie which is a search structure that contains all of the words and grammatical information in a lexicon . In lexicon trie a tree structure is provided with each branch of the tree representing an additional letter in a word and each node of the tree marked by an end of word tag representing a separate word in lexicon . This tree structure allows words that share common letter strings to be stored efficiently. For example big and bigger can share the same branches for the first three letters big in lexicon trie . Thus lexicon trie provides an efficient structure for storing and searching the words in lexicon .

Lexicon trie also includes grammatical information for each lexical entry in lexicon . In particular each complete word node in lexicon trie identifies the part of speech of the word whether the word is singular or plural whether it is masculine or feminine and for verbs the tense of the verb future past or present the grammatical person of the verb first person second person or third person whether the verb is transitive or intransitive and whether the verb is an auxiliary. Note that these are examples of grammatical information and additional grammatical information may be provided in each complete word node. In addition some of the grammatical information listed above may not be present in certain embodiments of the present invention.

Under the present invention spell checker is able to use the grammatical information in lexicon trie to identify possible suggestions for spelling errors involving contractions without requiring all of the contractions to be listed in lexicon trie or lexicon . provides a flow diagram of a method under the present invention for providing such suggestions.

In step of spell checker receives a text string from the application . At step the spell checker starts a new trie which involves setting a pointer that indicates a current location in the trie to point at the root node of the trie.

At step a next node in the trie is selected. Under one embodiment the trie is traversed by sequentially selecting nodes where each node represents a separate letter. By traversing the entire trie structure it is possible to form each word in the lexicon. Although it is possible to traverse the entire trie structure and thus reach each word in the lexicon this is seldom done in practice to improve efficiency. In particular a cutoff threshold is used to avoid consideration of words that are substantially different from the input text string.

At step the method determines if the end of the trie has been reached. This will occur when the entire structure has been traversed. If the end of the trie has not been reached at step the process continues at step where the string of letters represented by the current location in the trie is compared to the same number of letters in the input text string to determine an edit distance between the text string and the current letter string of the trie. The edit distance is measured based on the number of characters that must be inserted into the trie string deleted from the trie string or replaced in the trie string to form the corresponding letters in the input test string. The calculation of such edit distances are well known in the art. Note that the present invention is not limited to a particular technique for calculating the edit distance and other edit distance calculations such as one that applies a higher cost to a deletion of the first letter of a word may be used with the present invention.

If the difference between the trie string and the input text string creates an edit distance that is over some threshold the current search path of the trie is cut at step and a new node in the trie is selected. By cutting the search path any words that could be formed in the trie from the existing trie string are no longer considered. For example if the trie string cor had an edit distance that was over the threshold for the input string the search path would be cut so that words such as corn core and corp would not be compared to the input text string. However other words that could be formed with the first two letters co would still be compared. For example colt could be compared to the input text string.

If the edit distance for the current trie string is not over the threshold the method of then determines if the current trie string represents a full word at step . Each string of letters in the lexicon trie that forms a complete word is marked as a complete word in the trie. Under one embodiment this is done by including full word markers as end nodes for complete words in the trie.

If the current trie string is not a full word the process returns to step to select a next node in the trie.

If the current trie string is a full word it is examined at step to determine if it is the beginning of a possible contraction.

Under the present invention a set of elided words represented as text strings followed by apostrophes are stored in the trie as being full words. These strings represent the beginning portions of contractions. In particular the following elided words with apostrophes are designated as full words in the trie under the present invention 

In determining whether the input text string represents a contraction step first determines if the portion of the trie string before the apostrophe matches except for differences in case the corresponding text in the input text string. If it does not match the input text string is not considered as containing a contraction.

Next the next letter in the input text string after the portion that matches the trie string without the apostrophe is examined to determine if it is a vowel. The list of possible vowels for a French embodiment of the present invention includes 

If the next letter in the text string is not a vowel step does not consider this to be the start of a possible contraction.

If it is determined at step that the input text string may contain a contraction a new threshold is set for the edit distance at step . This new threshold prevents the consideration of any words with large differences between the input text string and the trie string for the portion of the input string after the elided word. By setting this threshold to be smaller only small manipulations such as capitalization or missing accents will be allowed when considering possible suggestions for the proper spelling of the contraction. Alternatively the threshold can be left the same and a flag can be set to prevent any more editing of the string to occur. With this flag set substitutions insertions and deletions cannot be performed but case change and the addition of accents can be performed.

After the threshold has been set a new trie is started at step . In starting the new trie a new pointer is created which points to the root node of a second trie. This allows a new search to be performed for the second part of the contraction by traversing the entire trie once again. Note that the new trie contains the same information as the initial trie.

At step the next node in the second trie is selected and at step the determination is made as to whether the end of the second trie has been reached.

At step the edit distance between the trie string of the second trie and that portion of the input text string that continues after the elided form is compared to the reduced threshold of the second trie. For example if the input text string is quil which has a correct form of qu il the elided form is qu and the portion of the text string that is compared in step to the trie string of the second trie begins with the letter i .

As discussed above if the edit distance is over the threshold the search path is cut at step in the second trie. If the edit distance is not over the threshold the method determines if the trie string represents a full word at step . Note that the full word is only that portion after the elided word of the input text string. If a full word has not been reached at step the next node in the second trie is selected at step .

When a full word has been identified at step the process determines if this is the start of a possible contraction at step . Since the method is in a nested second trie at step it is not possible that a contraction is being started. As such the method proceeds to step where it determines if it is in a nested second trie. If it is in a nested second trie at step the method determines if additional contraction constraints are satisfied by the full word at step .

The additional contraction constraints of the present invention use grammatical information to limit which contractions will be formed from the lexicon. In particular this grammatical information ensures that contractions identified as properly spelled by the method of the present invention are grammatically correct such that there is agreement between the elided form and the remainder of the contraction. The table below provides a list of the part of speech and grammatical information constraints that are associated with various elided forms for a French embodiment of the present invention.

In table 1 pers1 verb indicates that the full word after the elided form must be a first person verb pers3 verb indicates that full word must be a third person verb pron indicates that the full word must be a pronoun verb indicates that the full word must be some type of verb and pers3 Verb Aux indicates that the full word must be a third person verb that is also an auxiliary verb.

If the constraints of table 1 are satisfied a possible spelling for the input word is formed at step by forming a contraction that includes the elided form with an apostrophe followed by the full word identified in the second trie. This possible spelling can be compared to the input string to determine if the string is spelled correctly. It can also be used as a suggestion for the proper spelling of the input text.

After the possible spelling has been formed the next node in the second trie is selected at step . The steps of continue to traverse through the second trie thereby forming contractions for each full word referred to herein as third complete word fourth complete word etc. that meets the contraction constraints for the elided form that was identified before entering the second trie and that is within the threshold edit distance of the input text string. Each formed contraction can be compared to the input string to see if the input string is properly spelled and or can be used as a suggested correct spelling for the input text. When the end of the second trie is reached at step there are no further words to be evaluated in the second trie and the process continues at step .

In step the process determines if it is in a nested trie. If it is in a nested trie it returns to search the initial trie at step . This involves returning to the pointer of the initial trie which is located at the apostrophe of the elided form. The next node in the initial trie is then selected at step . Steps and are then performed to look for the start of other contractions and other possible full words that are within the edit distance of the threshold for the initial trie. If a full word is found in the initial trie at step and it is not part of a possible contraction at step the word will be identified as a possible spelling for the input word at step via step .

If the start of a second possible contraction is determined at step the threshold for a new trie is set again at step and a new trie is started at step by generating a new pointer to the root node of the trie. Thus multiple nested tries may be searched during the search for spelling suggestions under the present invention.

When the end of the initial trie has been reached at step and it has been determined that the initial trie is not a nested trie at step the process ends at step .

By using grammatical information in determining possible spellings for an input text string the present invention reduces the number of poor suggestions that are made to the user thereby building confidence in the spell checker. In addition by not requiring each possible contraction to be stored in the lexicon the present invention reduces the amount of information that must be stored in the lexicon thereby improving the storage efficiency for the lexicon and lexicon trie.

Although the present invention has been discussed with reference to a French embodiment the methods of the present invention may be practiced with other languages

Although the present invention has been described with reference to particular embodiments workers skilled in the art will recognize that changes may be made in form and detail without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

