---

title: Method and system for associating an advertisement with a web page
abstract: A method and system for associating an advertisement with a web page are disclosed. Web pages associated with potential queries may be identified using a search engine. A mapping operation may be performed to obtain a map of the web pages as a function of the potential queries. A reverse mapping operation may be performed to obtain a grouping of potential queries as a function of one of the web pages. An active query may be selected from the grouping of potential queries to provide to an advertising service to associate an advertisement with the web page.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08676781&OS=08676781&RS=08676781
owner: A9.Com, Inc.
number: 08676781
owner_city: Palo Alto
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051019
---
A common advertising model utilized on the Internet in particular with search engine websites involves a system of providing sponsored links. Sponsored links are paid advertisements that appear in addition to search results when users input keywords at search engine websites. For example if a visitor to the search engine website enters the term flowers advertisements that an advertiser believes may be relevant to someone searching for flowers are displayed with particular search results. The advertisements appear as a result of advertisers bidding on particular keywords such as flowers. If multiple advertisers place bids on the same keyword it is common for advertisements with the highest bids to be displayed when a visitor enters a search term that matches the keyword. Oftentimes there is no limit on the number of search terms a particular advertiser may bid on.

The bidding process is commonly managed by an intermediary such as a search engine website. Advertisers bid on keywords and submit advertisements associated with the keywords to the intermediary. The intermediary typically utilizes one or more databases for storing the advertisements associating the advertisements with bids and keywords keeping track of the highest bidders scheduling etc. and ensuring that at any given instance the advertisements corresponding to the highest bids are displayed when search terms matching the keywords are entered by the visitors to the search engine website. Whenever a visitor clicks on a displayed advertisement the intermediary charges the advertiser a fee. The intermediary also commonly monitors the click through rate e.g. how many users actually select or click on the displayed advertisement . In some cases if the number of visitors clicking on the advertisement is too low the advertisement will no longer be displayed even if it is associated with the highest bid.

Another variation of the above described concept is to show the keyword based advertisements on websites other than search engines search result sites. For example if a website contains information about flowers then it is likely that visitors viewing the website may have an interest in advertisements related to flowers. Thus the intermediary may provide special programs to which publishers of websites can subscribe. In such a program the intermediary analyzes the publisher s website to determine a suitable keyword or set of keywords to be associated with the website such as flowers in the above example. The intermediary selects from its database the highest bidder on the determined keyword or keywords and provides the appropriate advertisements for the publisher s website. This type of advertising program is beneficial to the publisher since the publisher is not required to take action other than display the advertisements and collect monetary compensation for displaying the advertisements. The publisher may also receive monetary compensation each time a visitor of the website clicks on the displayed advertisement. This compensation model is often referred to as pay per click. 

In some situations the process of determining a suitable keyword or set of keywords to be associated with a website can be difficult and often may not produce keyword advertisements that benefit visitors. In particular a website may provide individual web pages containing content for a wide variety of subjects and that are typically accessed either without the use of keywords or with keywords that may not be helpful to determine appropriate advertisements for display on these web pages. For example a publisher s website may contain web pages providing detailed information about various individual books for sale. The individual words taken from book titles often do not reflect the subject matter of the book to a degree that a meaningful selection of keyword advertisements may be provided for publication with the individual book detail web pages if these words are used as keywords to be associated with these web pages. It would be beneficial to provide a method and system for associating an advertisement with a web page that enables determination of keywords or set of keywords to be associated with individual web pages so that the associated keyword advertisements may provide greater benefit for visitors and maximize potential revenues for the intermediary.

One embodiment relates to a method of associating an advertisement with a web page. The method includes identifying web pages associated with potential queries using a search engine performing a mapping operation to obtain a map of the web pages as a function of the potential queries performing a reverse mapping operation obtain a grouping of potential queries as a function of one of the web pages and selecting an active query from the grouping of potential queries to provide to an advertising service to associate an advertisement with the web page.

Another embodiment relates to a system for associating an advertisement with a web page. The system includes a search engine configured to identify web pages associated with potential queries a mapping engine configured to determine a grouping of the potential queries associated with one of the web pages an optimization engine configured to select an active query from the grouping of potential queries to associate an advertisement with the web page and a web server configured to provide the web page in response to a request for the web page wherein the web page includes an advertisement provided from an advertisement database based on the active query.

Another embodiment relates to a method of associating an advertisement with a web page. The method includes providing potential queries as inputs to a search engine receiving a list of associated web pages for each potential query and a relevance score for each of the associated web pages determining a grouping of the potential queries associated with one of the web pages and assigning a weight to each of the potential queries based on a performance metric for each of the potential queries. The weight determines a number of requests for the web page for which the potential query is active. The performance metric is based on the relevance score. The method also includes alternately selecting an active query from the grouping of potential queries based on the assigned weights to associate an advertisement with the web page.

Another embodiment relates to a system for associating an advertisement with a web page. The system includes a search engine configured to receive potential queries as inputs and to provide a list of associated web pages for each potential query and a relevance score for each of the associated web pages a mapping engine configured to determine a grouping of the potential queries associated with one of the web pages an optimization engine configured to select an active query from the grouping of potential queries to associate an advertisement with the web page a communication network coupled to an advertisement database and a web server for providing the advertisement for publication with the web page based on the active query in response to a request for the web page and a searchable database configured to facilitate identification of past queries submitted to the search engine by users and corresponding search result web pages and further configured to facilitate selection of the potential queries based on whether the corresponding search result web pages include advertisements.

Another embodiment relates to a method of associating an advertisement with a web page. The method includes determining a grouping of potential queries associated with a web page and assigning a weight to each of the potential queries based on a performance metric for each of the potential queries using an optimization engine. The weight determines a number of requests for the web page for which the potential query is active. The method also includes alternately selecting an active query from the grouping of potential queries based on the assigned weights to associate an advertisement with the web page obtaining an advertisement to provide with the web page based on the active query measuring an actual click through rate for each of the potential queries and adjusting the weights for each potential query based on the performance metric.

Another embodiment relates to a method of associating an advertisement with searchable content. The method includes identifying searchable content items associated with potential queries using a search engine performing a mapping operation to obtain a map of a grouping of the searchable content items as a function of the potential queries performing a reverse mapping operation obtain a grouping of potential queries as a function of one of the searchable content items in the grouping of searchable content items and selecting an active query from the grouping of potential queries to provide to an advertising service to associate an advertisement with the searchable content item.

Advertisement service may include an advertisement database that stores advertisements provided by advertisers . For each advertisement advertisement database may also store other information such as bids made on one or more appropriate keywords by an advertiser associated with the advertisement. The bids may indicate a maximum that each advertiser is prepared to pay in response to a visitor selecting the advertisement from a web page where the advertisement is published based on the associated keyword. Each of the advertisements may thus be linked to or associated with one or more keywords a bid associated with the advertisement keyword and other information.

Keyword mapping service may include a search engine a mapping engine and an optimization engine . Keyword mapping service may also include a database associated with search engine . Keyword mapping service is generally configured to select one or more keywords for associating web pages made available by publishers with advertisements provided by advertisers . In the illustrated embodiment keyword mapping service is shown separate from advertising service and publishers . According to another exemplary embodiment keyword mapping service may be integrated with website publisher . According to yet another exemplary embodiment keyword mapping service may be integrated with advertising service .

Search engine may be any program configured to retrieve data files or documents from a database or network such as the Internet based on search terms entered by for example a visitor or other user of a search engine website. According to an exemplary embodiment search engine may be a product search engine associated with a website of a publisher . For purposes of this example it is assumed that the website of publisher is integrated with keyword mapping service . In this embodiment search engine may be used by visitors for searching the website of publisher which may provide individual web pages containing content for a wide variety of subjects e.g. products services etc. .

In some situations web pages may be accessed by a visitor either without the use of search terms e.g. search terms entered into the product search engine by the visitor to access the content based web pages or with search terms entered by the visitor that may not be helpful to determine appropriate advertisements for display on the web pages such as may be the case with the title of a book movie musical recording etc . Search engine may be configured within keyword mapping service to facilitate the evaluation of potential queries such as keyword queries to be used to associate advertisements with web pages in such situations. The potential queries are possible candidates for queries to be used in place of search terms provided by a visitor to associate advertisements with a particular content based web page when the particular content based web page is requested by the visitor . For example once selected such potential queries may be provided in the form of keywords to advertisement service to obtain advertisements to be published with the content based web page. The advertisements may be in the form of sponsored links paid for by third parties and published on the website of the publisher as an alternative means of generating revenue.

When the search engine is provided with one or more search terms from a visitor the results of the search may be provided by search engine in the form of data such as data for a search results web page which may include a listing of websites and or content based web pages associated with the search term. illustrates a search results web page displayed using search results data from search engine according to an exemplary embodiment. While the search results data provided by search engine is generally described with reference to in the context of a displayable search results web page it will be understood that the search results data may be provided in other forms such as for example a direct data input to mapping engine or another component of system .

In the illustrated embodiment search engine has executed a Web search for the search term bicycles in field and has provided a set of hyperlinks to content based web pages regarding products associated with the search term bicycles. In this embodiment hyperlinks may represent web pages providing detailed information about various individual products for sale and the search term bicycles may represent a potential query such as a keyword query from one of many possible sources that may be evaluated by keyword mapping service as a candidate for associating advertisements with the web pages in the absence of meaningful search terms entered by the visitor to access the content of the web pages . A subset of the resulting hyperlinks are displayed along with a button to allow the next set of search results to be accessed.

Search engine may also provide a relevance score for each of hyperlinks indicating the degree to which each web page represented by a hyperlink is associated with the potential query bicycles. For example in the illustrated embodiment hyperlinks are listed in order of relevance to the potential query bicycles. Product 1 has an associated relevance score of 99 indicating a high degree of relevance while Product 4 has an associated relevance score of 79 indicating a lower degree of relevance. According to various exemplary embodiments the relevance scores may be provided using any suitable format or scale as well as using any number of criteria for determining relevance.

Keyword mapping service may be configured to evaluate several potential queries from multiple sources to optimize the selection of potential queries. According to an exemplary embodiment keyword mapping service includes a database associated with search engine that may be searched to identify search terms submitted by users in the past and the corresponding search result web page logs. Keyword mapping service may be configured to conduct a search of the corresponding search result web page logs to identify search terms that provided a particular type of result. For example keyword mapping service may search database to identify search terms submitted by users in the past that resulted in at least one associated advertisement presented in the form of a sponsored link according to the corresponding search result web page logs. Keyword mapping service may then further search the corresponding search result web page logs to identify those search terms that resulted in at least one associated advertisement presented in the form of a sponsored link where there was a click on the sponsored link a particular click through rate associated with the sponsored link etc. The search terms identified by the search of database may then be used as potential queries to be submitted to search engine for evaluation.

For each of the potential queries identified and submitted to search engine for evaluation search engine may identify web pages associated with the potential query and provide a list of the associated web pages including a relevance score for each. According to an exemplary embodiment the individual web pages may be ranked within the list of associated web pages based on for example the relevance score or other suitable factors. In this embodiment keyword mapping service may be configured to retain only a certain number of the web pages identified in the list for further analysis such as the top N web pages according to the ranking within the list of associated web pages . For example for each of the potential queries identified and submitted to search engine for evaluation keyword mapping service may be configured to retain the top ten web pages according to the ranking within the list of associated web pages .

Mapping engine may be configured to determine a grouping of the potential queries associated with one or more of the web pages identified by search engine . According to an exemplary embodiment mapping engine may be configured to perform a mapping operation to obtain a map of the web pages identified by search engine as a function of each potential query and then to perform a reverse mapping operation to obtain groupings of potential queries as a function of each individual web page identified by search engine rather than the individual web pages being grouped as a function of each potential query.

Optimization engine may be configured to select an active query from the associated grouping of potential queries identified by mapping engine for one or more of the web pages . The active query may be used to associate an advertisement with the web page e.g. by submitting the active query to advertisement service and receiving the advertisement in response. According to an exemplary embodiment optimization engine may be configured to assign a weight to each potential query in a grouping of potential queries in order to facilitate selection of the active query. The weights may determine a number of requests for the web page for which the potential query is active and the active query may then alternate among submitting each of the potential queries in the grouping of potential queries according to the weights assigned to each potential query.

The weights may be assigned according to any suitable factors. For example the weights may be assigned based on performance metrics such as an estimated financial performance for each of the potential queries in a grouping of potential queries in order to maximize the revenue generated by the advertisements associated with the active query. According to an exemplary embodiment the weights may be assigned according to the relevance score provided by search engine for each of the potential queries in a grouping of potential queries. In this embodiment the relevance score provided by search engine for each of the potential queries in a grouping of potential queries may be used as a click through rate prediction factor for advertisements associated with each potential query in the grouping of potential queries. The click through rate prediction factor may be combined with for example an estimated cost per click e.g. an estimated or average bid from advertisers providing ads associated with the potential query to determine an estimated financial performance or other performance metric and assign the weights to each potential query in the grouping of potential queries.

By way of example assume that the each of the potential queries in the grouping of potential queries associated with web page P1 as shown in are provided the following relevance scores by search engine Q1 100 Q3 90 Q4 80 and Q5 70. If each of potential queries Q1 Q3 Q4 and Q5 has an estimated cost per click of ten cents per click i.e. equal value optimization engine may assign weights to each potential query based on the decreasing trend in the relevance scores from Q1 to Q4 such that Q1 is the active query for approximately 29 out of every 100 requests for web page P1 Q3 is the active query for approximately 26 out of every 100 requests for web page P1 Q4 is the active query for approximately 24 out of every 100 requests for web page P1 and Q5 is the active query for approximately 21 out of every 100 requests for web page P1. If the cost per click varies for each potential query then the relative number of times that potential query is the active query may vary in accordance with the cost per click values. Of course many other factors and combinations of factors may be used to assign the weights to each potential query in the grouping of potential queries.

Optimization engine may be further configured to track a performance metric for each active query over a period of time including for example the actual financial performance of each active query. According to an exemplary embodiment optimization engine may be configured to measure an actual click through rate for each active query and combine the actual click through rate with the estimated or average cost per click for each active query in order to update the estimated financial performance. The weights assigned to each potential query in the grouping of potential queries associated with the web page are then adjusted to reflect the updated financial performance as modified by the actual click through rates. In this way the total estimated revenue generated by the each potential query as it becomes active may be optimized.

Queries that fail to meet certain performance standards over time may be eliminated. For example according to an exemplary embodiment queries that fail to be associated with any advertisements over a predetermined period of time may be eliminated. According to another exemplary embodiment queries that fail to be associated with advertisements that receive a certain minimum number of click throughs over a predetermined period of time may be eliminated.

Each active query may be used to associate advertisements with a publisher s web page associated with the active query. According to an exemplary embodiment each of the advertisements stored in advertisement database may be linked to or associated with one or more keywords and each active query associated with a web page may comprise a keyword query that may be used to associate advertisements in advertisement database with the web page when the web page is requested from web server by a visitor to the website of a publisher . For example is a chart that illustrates the relationship between the active query associated with a web page and keywords associated with an advertisement. As shown in P1 is the web page at www.store.com product1.html which may be a content page providing detailed information about Product 1 a product that may be for sale at the website of a publisher e.g. an online retailer . Web page P1 is associated with potential queries Q1 which is the keyword bicycle Q3 which is the keyword racing Q4 which is the keyword sport and Q5 which is the keyword triathlon. When Q1 is the active query for web page P1 a request from a visitor for www.store.com product1.html will retrieve web page P1 for publication to the visitor . The request from visitor for www.store.com product1.html will also launch a query to advertising database based on the active query bicycle which will retrieve Sponsored Link 1 and Sponsored Link 2 from advertising database for publication to the visitor with web page P1 because these advertisements are both associated with the keyword bicycle. Sponsored Link 3 is not retrieved for publication with web page P1 because it is not associated with the keyword bicycle. 

At a step a grouping of associated potential queries is determined using mapping engine for one or more of the web pages identified at step . According to an exemplary embodiment mapping engine performs a mapping operation to map the web pages identified by search engine in step as a function of each potential query and then performs a reverse mapping operation to obtain a grouping of potential queries as a function of each individual web page identified by search engine rather than the individual web pages being grouped as a function of each potential query.

At a step an active query is selected from the grouping of potential queries. The active query may be used to associate one or more advertisements with the associated web page . According to an exemplary embodiment each of the advertisements stored in advertisement database may be linked to or associated with one or more keywords and each active query associated with a web page may comprise a keyword query that may be used to associate advertisements in advertisement database with the web page when the web page is requested from web server by a visitor to the website of a publisher .

Method begins with a step . At step potential queries are provided as inputs to search engine and at a step a list of associated web pages for each potential query and a relevance score for each of the associated web pages is received. At a step a grouping of associated potential queries is determined using mapping engine for one or more of the web pages identified at step .

At a step a weight is assigned to each of the potential queries based on a one or more performance metrics such as an estimated financial performance for each of the potential queries. The weight may determine a number of requests for the web page for which the potential query is active and the performance metric may be based on the relevance score determined in step . According to an exemplary embodiment the relevance score provided by search engine for each of the potential queries in a grouping of potential queries may be used as a click through rate prediction factor for advertisements associated with each potential query in the grouping of potential queries. The click through rate prediction factor may be combined with for example an estimated cost per click e.g. an estimated or average bid from advertisers providing ads associated with the potential query to determine an estimated financial performance and assign the weights to each potential query in the grouping of potential queries.

At a step an active query is alternately selected from the grouping of potential queries based on the assigned weights. The active query may be used to associate one or more advertisements with the associated web page . According to an exemplary embodiment each of the advertisements stored in advertisement database may be linked to or associated with one or more keywords and each active query associated with a web page may comprise a keyword query that may be used to associate advertisements in advertisement database with the web page when the web page is requested from web server by a visitor to the website of a publisher .

At a step the performance metric is measured over a period of time and at a step the weights assigned to each potential query in the grouping of potential queries associated with the web page are then adjusted to reflect the measured performance. According to an exemplary embodiment an actual click through rate is measured for advertisements associated with each active query. The actual click through rate is combined with the estimated or average cost per click for each active query in order to update the estimated financial performance. The weights assigned to each potential query in the grouping of potential queries associated with the web page are then adjusted at step to reflect the updated financial performance as modified by the actual click through rates.

As mentioned above keyword mapping service may be integrated with advertising service such that a single entity provides both services according to an exemplary embodiment. In this embodiment search engine may be a more general search engine that provides a listing of search results based on web pages from multiple websites. In this embodiment a publisher may identify web pages for which it would like to have an associated set of potential queries identified. The publisher may provide the identification of such web pages to the keyword mapping service which may in turn generate a list of keyword queries that return the web pages identified by the publisher . Such keyword queries may be provided to the publisher as potential queries. The potential queries may also be optimized in the manner described above for example by the publisher or by the keyword mapping service e.g. based on performance data provided by the publisher .

Here and throughout terms such as user advertiser publisher visitor and so forth are to be understood in the broadest possible sense. Herein the term user is used generically to refer to advertisers publishers and visitors. By way of illustration and not of limitation an advertiser may be an individual or a commercial government or non profit entity may be directly responsible for placing an advertisement announcement message or the like or may be a broker reseller or intermediary for another s advertisements announcements messages or the like may be advertising for its own products and services or may be advertising on behalf of another may be represented by a human agent or by a web service software agent or other programmatic construct etc. Likewise a publisher is not restricted to persons or entities who purport to be in the on line publishing business or any other kind of publishing business nor to entities who have complete or even primary control over the content of particular websites but rather is used in a more general sense. In the context of Internet based advertising for example publisher includes any person or entity responsible directly or indirectly for putting content on the Internet whether by hosting or sponsoring websites posting pages frames graphics applets blogs audiovisual content etc. on their own or others websites providing web services that can source content for websites or in any other manner. Still further a visitor may be an individual who visits and views or otherwise perceives the content of a web site and pages therein via a web browser or other client software program running on a personal computer wireless handheld device or the like but may also be for example a corporate or other entity whose servers access published web content and advertisements by invoking web services through appropriate application programming interfaces APIs a visitor may or may not be the intended or actual end consumer of a product or service that is the subject of an advertisement etc. A potential customer may be an individual who views advertising regardless of the media in which it is published e.g. print television on line etc and may or may not be the intended or actual end consumer of a product or service that is the subject of an advertisement etc. In sum persons of skill in the art will appreciate that a wide variety of actors more than can be conveniently set forth here can play the roles of advertiser publisher and visitor for purposes of the present invention. It will be further appreciated that the selfsame person or entity may be both publisher and advertiser or both publisher and visitor or both advertiser and visitor or even all three depending on the context. In a similar vein and as will be apparent from the foregoing terms such as web page website and so forth are used to give specific illustrative examples of settings in which on line content and advertisements can be presented to and perceived by users. Such examples are not intended to be limiting and persons of skill in the art will appreciate that many other such settings now known or yet to be developed may be suitable to the practice of the present invention in specific embodiments.

It should be noted that although flow charts may be provided herein to show a specific order of method steps it is understood that the order of these steps may differ from what is depicted. Also two or more steps may be performed concurrently or with partial concurrence. Such variation will depend on the software and hardware systems chosen and on designer choice. It is understood that all such variations are within the scope of the invention. Likewise software and web implementations of the present invention could be accomplished with standard programming techniques with rule based logic and other logic to accomplish the various database searching steps correlation steps comparison steps and decision steps. It should also be noted that the word component as used herein and in the claims is intended to encompass implementations using one or more lines of software code and or hardware implementations and or equipment for receiving manual inputs. It is to be understood that any method steps as recited herein e.g. in the claims may be performed by a configuration utility e.g. Java based executed by a computing device based on input by a user. Of course according to various alternative embodiments any suitable configuration utility application system computing device etc. may be used to execute implement and or perform method steps as recited in this disclosure including the claims .

The invention is described above with reference to drawings. These drawings illustrate certain details of specific embodiments that implement the systems and methods and programs of the present invention. However describing the invention with drawings should not be construed as imposing on the invention any limitations associated with features shown in the drawings. The present invention contemplates methods systems and program products on any machine readable media for accomplishing its operations. The embodiments of the present invention may be implemented using an existing computer processor or by a special purpose computer processor incorporated for this or another purpose or by a hardwired system.

As noted above embodiments within the scope of the present invention include program products comprising machine readable media for carrying or having machine executable instructions or data structures stored thereon. Such machine readable media can be any available media which can be accessed by a general purpose or special purpose computer or other machine with a processor. By way of example such machine readable media can comprise RAM ROM PROM EPROM EEPROM CD ROM or other optical disk storage magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to carry or store desired program code in the form of machine executable instructions or data structures and which can be accessed by a general purpose or special purpose computer or other machine with a processor. When information is transferred or provided over a network or another communications connection either hardwired wireless or a combination of hardwired or wireless to a machine the machine properly views the connection as a machine readable medium. Thus any such connection is properly termed a machine readable medium. Combinations of the above are also included within the scope of machine readable media. Machine executable instructions comprise for example instructions and data which cause a general purpose computer special purpose computer or special purpose processing machines to perform a certain function or group of functions.

Embodiments of the invention are described in the general context of method steps which may be implemented in one embodiment by a program product including machine executable instructions such as program code for example in the form of program modules executed by machines in networked environments. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Machine executable instructions associated data structures and program modules represent examples of program code for executing steps of the methods disclosed herein. The particular sequence of such executable instructions or associated data structures represent examples of corresponding acts for implementing the functions described in such steps.

Embodiments of the present invention may be practiced in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers having processors. Logical connections may include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN that are presented here by way of example and not limitation. Such networking environments are commonplace in office wide or enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet and may use a wide variety of different communication protocols. Those skilled in the art will appreciate that such network computing environments will typically encompass many types of computer system configurations including personal computers hand held devices multi processor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. Embodiments of the invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by local and remote processing devices that are linked either by hardwired links wireless links or by a combination of hardwired or wireless links through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote memory storage devices.

An exemplary system for implementing the overall system or portions of the invention might include a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer including a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit. The system memory may include read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . The computer may also include a magnetic hard disk drive for reading from and writing to a magnetic hard disk a magnetic disk drive for reading from or writing to a removable magnetic disk and an optical disk drive for reading from or writing to a removable optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. The drives and their associated machine readable media provide nonvolatile storage of machine executable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer.

The foregoing description of embodiments of the invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed and modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teachings or may be acquired from practice of the invention. The embodiments were chosen and described in order to explain the principals of the invention and its practical application to enable one skilled in the art to utilize the invention in various embodiments and with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.

