---

title: Methods of treating medical conditions by neuromodulation of the cerebellar pathways
abstract: Methods of treating various medical conditions by neuromodulation of target sites of a cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathway and/or a cortical-ponto-cerebellar pathway. Such medical conditions include unilateral motor deficits, movement disorders, psychiatric disorders, epilepsy, speech or cognitive deficits associated with hemispheric lesions, visual deficits associated with hemispheric lesions, learning disorders associated with hemispheric lesions, vertigo and/or dizziness, gait disturbances, hereditary/genetic disorders, congenital malformations, infectious disease, degenerative disorders, autoimmune disorders, and metabolic disorders. A method of enhancing memory, learning and/or cognitive capacity in a normal individual by stimulating a target site of a cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathway and/or a cortical-ponto-cerebellar pathway is also provided.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07640063&OS=07640063&RS=07640063
owner: The Cleveland Clinic Foundation
number: 07640063
owner_city: Cleveland
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050504
---
The present application claims priority to U.S. Provisional Application Nos. 60 567 441 filed on May 4 2004 and 60 608 419 filed on Sep. 10 2004 both of which are incorporated by reference herein.

The present invention relates to systems and methods of treating medical conditions by electrical and or chemical neuromodulation of target sites of the cerebello thalamo cortical pathway and the cortical ponto cerebellar pathway.

Electrical stimulation of neural tissue is becoming an increasingly preferred form of therapy for certain neurological conditions and disorders where existing therapies generate intolerable side effects require repeated administration of treatment or are simply ineffective in a subset of patients. Electrical stimulation provides distinct advantages over surgical lesioning techniques since electrical stimulation is a reversible and adjustable procedure that provides continuous benefits as the patient s disease progresses and the patient s symptoms evolve.

Currently electrical stimulation of peripheral nerves and the spinal cord is approved for treatment of neuropathic pain. With respect to deep brain targets electrical stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus and the globus pallidus interna is approved for treatment of Parkinson s disease and electrical stimulation of the ventral intermediate nucleus is approved for treatment of essential tremor.

In an embodiment the present invention provides a system for treating a medical condition comprising a therapy delivery device for positioning on a target site of a cerebello thalamo cortical pathway and or a cortical ponto cerebellar pathway and a controller in communication with the therapy delivery device for enabling the therapy delivery device to deliver therapy to the target site to treat the medical condition. The therapy delivery device can be a stimulation lead for delivering electrical neuromodulation or a drug port for delivering chemical neuromodulation to the target site.

The present invention also provides a system for treating a medical condition comprising a therapy delivery device for applying a therapy signal on a target site of a cerebello thalamo cortical pathway and or a cortical ponto cerebellar pathway. The system also include a sensor for detecting a bodily activity associated with the medical condition and for generating a sensor signal. The system also includes a controller in communication with the therapy delivery device and the sensor for activating the therapy delivery device to initiate application of the therapy signal to the target site or to adjust application of the therapy signal to the target site in response to the sensor signal. The therapy signal can be an electrical signal in embodiments where the therapy delivery device is a stimulation lead and a chemical signal in embodiments where the therapy delivery device is a drug port.

The present invention also provides a method for treating a medical condition comprising placing a therapy delivery device on a target site of a cerebello thalamo cortical pathway and or a cortical ponto cerebellar pathway and activating the therapy delivery device to deliver therapy to the target site to treat the medical condition condition.

The present invention moreover provides a method of enhancing memory learning and or cognitive capacity in a normal individual by neuromodulation of a target site of a cerebello thalamo cortical pathway and or a cortical ponto cerebellar pathway.

The present invention provides systems and methods for treating medical conditions by neuromodulating a cerebello thalamo cortical pathway and or a cortical ponto cerebellar pathway. The cerebello thalamo cortical pathway is neural circuitry from the cerebellum to the motor thalamus to the cerebral cortex. The cortical ponto cerebellar pathway is the pathway from the cerebral cortex to the pons back to the cerebellum. Therefore the cerebello thalamo cortical pathway and the cortical ponto cerebellar pathway form a loop to and from the cerebellum. Non limiting examples of target sites within these pathways include deep cerebellar target sites within the cerebellum i.e. not on the cerebellar cortex . Deep cerebellar target sites include the cerebellar nuclei the white matter around the nuclei and the cerebellar peduncles. Cerebellar nuclei include the fastigial nuclei the interposed including the inferior globuse and emboliform nuclei and dentate nuclei. The cerebellar peduncles include the inferior cerebellar peduncle the middle cerebellar peduncle and the superior cerebellar peduncle. The systems and methods of the present invention for treating medical conditions encompass neuromodulation of any combination of one or more target sites of the cerebello thalamo cortical pathway and or cortical ponto cerebellar pathway. The present invention also encompasses systems and methods for treating medical conditions by neuromodulating a red nucleus.

As used herein the term treating a medical condition encompasses therapeutically regulating preventing improving alleviating the symptoms of reducing the effects of and or diagnosing the medical condition. As used herein the term medical condition encompasses any condition disease disorder function abnormality or deficit that is affected by neuromodulation of the cerebello thalamo cortical pathway and or cortical ponto cerebellar pathway. Non limiting examples of medical conditions that can be treated according to the present invention include language deficits visual deficits motor deficits cognitive deficits learning deficits sensory deficits psychiatric disorders movement disorders pain syndromes stroke autism vertigo dizziness hereditary genetic disorders a congenital malformation an infectious disease a degenerative disorder an autoimmune disorder or a metabolic disorder. Further the medical condition can be the result of any etiology including vascular ischemic including stroke thrombotic embolic infectious including bacterial viral parasitic fungal abscessal neoplastic drug induced metabolic immunological inflammatory collagenic traumatic surgical chemotherapeutic radiation idiopathic endocrinological allergic degenerative congenital or abnormal malformational causes.

Non limiting examples of motor deficits include lack of coordination gait disturbance paralysis hemiparesis or paresis. Non limiting examples of visual deficits include blindness. Non limiting examples of cognitive deficits include aphasia and apraxia. A non limiting example of a sensory deficit is hypoesthesia. Non limiting examples of psychiatric disorders are addiction substance abuse obsessive compulsive disorder generalized anxiety disorder post traumatic stress disorder panic attacks social phobia depression bipolar disorder and other mood disorders and schizophrenia. Non limiting examples of movement disorders include Parkinson s disease essential tremor spasticity rigidity bradykinesia post traumatic movement disorder post ischemic and post injury movement disorder. Non limiting examples of pain syndromes include migraine headaches including migraine headaches with aura migraine headaches without aura menstrual migraines migraine variants atypical migraines complicated migraines hemiplegic migraines transformed migraines and chronic daily migraines episodic tension headaches chronic tension headaches analgesic rebound headaches episodic cluster headaches chronic cluster headaches cluster variants chronic paroxysmal hemicrania hemicrania continua post traumatic headache post traumatic neck pain post herpetic neuralgia involving the head or face pain from spine fracture secondary to osteoporosis arthritis pain in the spine headache related to cerebrovascular disease and stroke headache due to vascular disorder reflex sympathetic dystrophy cervicalgia glossodynia carotidynia cricoidynia otalgia due to middle ear lesion gastric pain sciatica maxillary neuralgia laryngeal pain myalgia of neck muscles trigeminal neuralgia post lumbar puncture headache low cerebro spinal fluid pressure headache temporomandibular joint disorder atypical facial pain ciliary neuralgia paratrigeminal neuralgia petrosal neuralgia Eagle s syndrome idiopathic intracranial hypertension orofacial pain myofascial pain syndrome involving the head neck and shoulder chronic migraneous neuralgia cervical headache paratrigeminal paralysis sphenopalatine ganglion neuralgia carotidynia Vidian neuralgia and causalgia.

In a preferred embodiment the medical condition is cognitive function depression or other mood disorders learning and learning disorders or motor learning.

In embodiments where the therapy delivery device is a stimulation lead having a lead proximal end a lead body and a lead distal end the lead distal end comprises at least one electrode. The at least one electrode can be a plurality of electrodes. The electrodes at the lead distal end can be either monopolar bipolar or multipolar and can operate as a cathode or an anode. The electrode can be composed of but not limited to activated iridium rhodium titanium or platinum and combinations of said materials. The electrode may be coated with a thin surface layer of iridium oxide titanium nitride or other surface modifications to enhance electrical sensitivity. The stimulation lead can also comprise carbon doped silicon or silicon nitride. Each lead distal end can be provided with a biocompatible fabric collar or band about the electrode periphery to allow it to be more readily sutured or glued into place for electrodes to be secured in this manner . The stimulation lead may be placed permanently or temporarily in the target site to provide chronic or acute neuromodulation of the target site.

The controller is used to operate and supply power to the therapeutic delivery device and enable the therapy delivery device to delivery a therapy signal such as an electrical signal or a chemical signal to the target site. The controller may be powered by a battery which may be rechargeable an external power supply a fuel cell or a battery pack for external use. The controller may also be integral with the therapeutic delivery device such as a single stimulation lead power generator . When the therapeutic delivery device is a stimulation lead the controller may change the output to the electrode by way of polarity pulse width amplitude frequency voltage current intensity duration wavelength and or waveform. When the therapeutic delivery device is a drug port the controller may change its output such that a pump pressure source or proportionally controlled orifice increases or decreases the rate at which the pharmaceutical is delivered to the target site. The controller may operate any number or combination of electrodes and pharmaceutical delivery devices for example the controller may be connected to stimulation leads and a peristaltic pump for delivering a pharmaceutical to the target site near the stimulation leads. The controller may be implanted within the patient or it may be positioned by leads outside of the patient. A portion of the control system may be external to the patient s body for use by the attending physician to program the implanted controller and to monitor its performance. This external portion may include a programming wand which communicates with the implanted controller by means of telemetry via an internal antenna to transmit parameter values as may be selectively changed from time to time by subsequent programming selected at the programmer unit such as a computer. The programming wand also accepts telemetry data from the controller to monitor the performance of the therapy delivery device.

In embodiments where the controller enables a stimulation lead to deliver an electrical signal to the target site the electrical signal may be episodic continuous phasic in clusters intermittent upon demand by the patient or medical personnel or preprogrammed to respond to a sensor. Preferably the oscillating electrical signal is operated at a voltage between about 0.1 microvolts to about 20 V. More preferably the oscillating electrical signal is operated at a voltage between about 1 V to about 15 V. For microstimulation it is preferable to stimulate within the range of 0.1 microvolts to about 1 V. Preferably the electric signal source is operated at a frequency range between about 2 Hz to about 2500 Hz. More preferably the electric signal source is operated at a frequency range between about 2 Hz to about 200 Hz. Preferably the pulse width of the oscillating electrical signal is between about 10 microseconds to about 1 000 microseconds. More preferably the pulse width of the oscillating electrical signal is between about 50 microseconds to about 500 microseconds. Preferably the application of the oscillating electrical signal is monopolar when the stimulation lead is monopolar bipolar when the stimulation lead is bipolar and multipolar when the stimulation lead is multipolar. The waveform may be for example biphasic square wave sine wave or other electrically safe and feasible combinations. The electrical signal may be applied to multiple target sites simultaneously or sequentially.

In embodiments where the controller enables a drug port to deliver a chemical signal to the target site a chemical agent may be delivered to the target site prior to concurrent with subsequent to or instead of electrical neuromodulation. The chemical agent may be a neurotransmitter mimick neuropeptide hormone pro hormone antagonist agonist reuptake inhibitor or degrading enzyme thereof peptide protein therapeutic agent amino acid nucleic acid stem cell or any combination thereof and may be delivered by a slow release matrix or drug pump. The delivery of the chemical agent may be continuous intermittent chronic phasic or episodic. Different chemical agents may be utilized to affect different parts of the sympathetic nervous system. The chemical agents preferably work on one or more of the receptor sites of the autonomic nervous system such as the adrenergic receptors cholinergic receptors nicotinic and muscarinic purinergic and nitric oxide receptors. Non limiting examples of chemical agents include prazosin yohimbine atelenol sulbutamol and atropine.

The present invention also provides systems for treating medical conditions incorporating a closed loop feedback mechanism. Specifically in such embodiments the system comprises a therapy delivery device for applying a therapy signal which can be an electrical signal or a chemical signal on a target site of the cerebello thalamo cortical pathway and or a cortical ponto cerebellar pathway. The system further comprises a sensor for detecting a bodily activity associated with the medical condition and for generating a sensor signal. The system also includes a controller in communication with the therapy delivery device for activating the therapy delivery device to initiate application of the therapy signal to the target site or to adjust application of the therapy signal to the target site in response to the sensor signal. The bodily activity to be detected by the sensor is any characteristic or function of the body such as electrical or chemical activity and includes for example temperature respiratory function heart rate capillary pressure venous pressure perfusion oxygenation including blood oxygenation levels oxygen saturation levels oxygen consumption oxygen pressure water pressure nitrogen pressure carbon dioxide pressure in the tissue circulation including blood and lymphatic electrolyte levels in the circulation tissue diffusion or metabolism of various agents and molecules such as glucose neurotransmitter levels body temperature regulation blood pressure blood viscosity metabolic activity cerebral blood flow pH levels vital signs galvanic skin responses perspiration electrocardiogram electroencephalogram action potential conduction chemical production body movement response to external stimulation cognitive activity motor activity including muscle tone visual activity speech balance diaphragmatic movement chest wall expansion concentration of certain biological molecules substances in the body such as for example glucose liver enzymes electrolytes hormones creatinine medications concentration of various cells platelets or bacteria. These bodily activities can be measured utilizing a variety of methods including but not limited to chemical analysis mechanical measurements laser and fiber optic analysis.

In specific embodiments the sensors are located on or within the body and detect electrical and or chemical activity. Such activity may be detected by sensors located within or proximal to the target site distal to the target site but within the nervous system or by sensors located distal to the target site outside the nervous system. Examples of electrical activity detected by sensors located within or proximal to the target site include sensors that measure neuronal electrical activity such as the electrical activity characteristic of the signaling stages of neurons i.e. synaptic potentials trigger actions action potentials and neurotransmitter release at the target site and by afferent and efferent pathways and sources that project to and from or communicate with the target site. For example the sensors can measure at any signaling stage neuronal activity of any of the extensive connections of the target site. In particular the sensors may detect the rate and pattern of the neuronal electrical activity to determine the electrical signal to be provided to the lead.

Examples of chemical activity detected by sensors located within or proximal to the target site include sensors that measure neuronal activity such as the modulation of neurotransmitters hormones pro hormones neuropeptides peptides proteins electrolytes or small molecules by the target site and modulation of these substances by afferent and efferent pathways and sources that project to and from the target sites or communicate with the target sites.

With respect to detecting electrical or chemical activity of the body by sensors located distal to the target site but still within the nervous system such sensors could be placed in the brain the spinal cord cranial nerves and or spinal nerves. Sensors placed in the brain are preferably placed in a layer wise manner in the direction of increasing proximity to the target site. For example a sensor could be placed on the scalp i.e. electroencephalogram in the subgaleal layer on the skull in the dura mater in the sub dural layer and in the parenchyma i.e. in the frontal lobe occipital lobe parietal lobe temporal lobe to achieve increasing specificity of electrical and chemical activity detection. The sensors could measure the same types of chemical and electrical activity as the sensors placed within or proximal to the target site as described above.

With respect to detecting electrical or chemical activity by sensors located distal to the target site outside the nervous system such sensors may be placed in venous structures and various organs or tissues of other body systems such as the endocrine system muscular system respiratory system circulatory system urinary system integumentary system and digestive system or such sensors may detect signals from these various body systems. For example the sensor may be an external sensor such as a pulse oximeter or an external blood pressure heart and respiratory rate detector. All the above mentioned sensing systems may be employed together or any combination of less than all sensors may be employed together.

After the sensor s detect the relevant bodily activity associated with the medical condition according to the systems of the present invention the sensors generate a sensor signal. The sensor signal is processed by a sensor signal processor which in this embodiment is part of the controller. The controller generates a response to the sensor signal by activating the therapy delivery device to initiate application of the therapy signal or to adjust application of the therapy signal to the target site. The therapy deliver device then applies the therapy signal to the target site. In embodiments where the therapy delivery device is a stimulation lead and the therapy signal is an electrical signal activating the stimulation lead to adjust application of the electrical signal includes terminating increasing decreasing or changing the rate or pattern of a pulsing parameter of the electrical stimulation and the electrical signal can be the respective termination increase decrease or change in rate or pattern of the respective pulsing parameter. In embodiments where the therapy delivery device is a drug port and the therapy signal is a chemical signal activating the drug port to adjust application of the chemical signal can be an indication to terminate increase decrease or change the rate or pattern of the amount or type of chemical agent administered and the chemical signal can be the respective initiation termination increase decrease or change in the rate or pattern of the amount or type of chemical agent administered. The processing of closed loop feedback systems for electrical and chemical stimulation are described in more detail in respective U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 058 331 and 5 711 316 both of which are incorporated by reference herein.

Closed loop electrical stimulation according to the present invention can be achieved by a modified form of an implantable SOLETRA KINETRA RESTORE or SYNERGY signal generator available from Medtronic Minneapolis Minn. as disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 353 762 the teaching of which is incorporated herein in its entirety a controller as described in or utilization of CIO DAS 08 and CIO DAC 16 I processing boards and an IBM compatible computer available from Measurement Computing Middleboro Mass. with Visual Basic software for programming of alogorithms. With reference to an illustration of a non limiting example of a controller comprising a microprocessor such as an MSP430 microprocessor from Texas Instruments Technology analog to digital converter such as AD7714 from Analog Devices Corp. pulse generator such as CD1877 from Harris Corporation pulse width control lead driver digital to analog converter such as MAX538 from Maxim Corporation power supply memory and communications port or telemetry chip are shown. Optionally a digital signal processor is used for signal conditioning and filtering. Input leads and and output lead to lead therapeutic delivery device and drug delivery device therapeutic deliver device are also illustrated. Additional stimulation leads sensors and therapeutic delivery devices may be added to the controller as required. As a non limiting example inputs from sensors such as heart rate and blood pressure sensors are input to analog to digital converter . Microprocessor receiving the sensor inputs uses algorithms to analyze the biological activity of the patient and using PID Fuzzy logic or other algorithms computes an output to pulse generator and or drug delivery device drivers and respectively to neuromodulate the target site where the therapeutic delivery devices are placed. The output of analog to digital converter is connected to microprocessor through a peripheral bus including address data and control lines. Microprocessor processes the sensor data in different ways depending on the type of transducer in use. When the signal on the sensor indicates biological activity outside of threshold values for example elevated blood pressure or heart rate programmed by the clinician and stored in a memory the electrical signal applied through output drivers and of the controller will be adjusted. The output voltage or current from the controller are then generated in an appropriately configured form voltage current frequency and applied to the one or more therapeutic delivery devices placed at the target site for a prescribed time period to reduce elevated blood pressure or heart rate. If the patient s blood pressure or heart rate as monitored by the system is not outside of the normal threshold limits hypotensive or hypertensive bradycardic or tachycardic or if the controller output after it has timed out has resulted in a correction of the blood pressure or heart rate to within a predetermined threshold range no further electrical signal is applied to the target site and the controller continues to monitor the patient via the sensors. A block diagram of an algorithm which may be used in the present invention is shown in .

Referring to suitably conditioned and converted sensor data is input to the algorithm in block . The program computes at least one value of at least one biological activity related to a particular medical condition such as for example blood pressure heart rate or cardiac output and compares the measured value of the biological activity to a pre determined range of values which is determined in advance to be the desired therapeutic range of values. This range is programmed into the microprocessor via the telemetry or communications port of the controller. The algorithm compares and then determines whether or not the measured value lies outside the predetermined range of values . If the measured biological activity value is not outside the predetermined range of values the program continues to monitor the sensors and reiterates the comparison part of the algorithm. If the measured biological value is outside of the pre determined range of values a determination or comparison is made as to whether the value is too high or too low compared with the pre determined range. If the biological activity value is too high an adjustment to the therapeutic delivery device is made to lower the biological activity value of the patient by calculating an output signal for pulse generator or drug delivery device to deliver a sufficient amount of the pharmaceutical or electrical stimulation to lower the biological activity of the patient. The algorithm continues to monitor the biological activity following the adjustment. If the biological activity value is too low then an adjustment to the therapeutic delivery device is made to raise the biological activity value by calculating an output signal for the pulse generator or drug delivery device to deliver a sufficient amount of a pharmaceutical or electrical stimulation to raise the biological activity value of the patient. The algorithm continues to monitor the biological activity of the patient following the adjustment. The amount of adjustment made may be determined by proportional integral derivative algorithms of by implementation of Fuzzy logic rules.

With respect to the control of specific electrical parameters the stimulus pulse frequency may be controlled by programming a value to a programmable frequency generator using the bus of the controller. The programmable frequency generator provides an interrupt signal to the microprocessor through an interrupt line when each stimulus pulse is to be generated. The frequency generator may be implemented by model CDP 1878 sold by Harris Corporation. The amplitude for each stimulus pulse may be programmed to a digital to analog converter using the controller s bus. The analog output is conveyed through a conductor to an output driver circuit to control stimulus amplitude. The microprocessor of the controller may also program a pulse width control module using the bus. The pulse width control provides an enabling pulse of duration equal to the pulse width via a conductor. Pulses with the selected characteristics are then delivered from signal generator through a cable and lead to the target site or to a device such as a proportional valve or pump. The microprocessor executes an algorithm to provide stimulation with closed loop feedback control as shown in U.S. Pat. No. 5 792 186 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. For some types of sensors a microprocessor and analog to digital converter will not be necessary. The output from sensor can be filtered by an appropriate electronic filter in order to provide a control signal for signal generator. An example of such a filter is found in U.S. Pat. No. 5 259 387 Muscle Artifact Filter Issued to Victor de Pinto on Nov. 9 1993 incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

At the time the therapy delivery device is implanted the clinician programs certain key parameters into the memory of the implanted device via telemetry. These parameters may be updated subsequently as needed. The clinician may also program the the range of values for pulse width amplitude and frequency which the therapy delivery device may use to optimize the therapy. The clinician may also choose the order in which the parameter changes are made. Alternatively the clinician may elect to use default values or the microprocessor may be programmed to use fuzzy logic rules and algorithms to determine output from the therapeutic delivery device to the patient based on sensor data and threshold values for the biological activity.

Although the application of sensors to detect bodily activity are part of embodiments of systems of the present invention the present invention also contemplates the relevant bodily activity to be detected without sensors. In such case the neuromodulation parameters are adjusted manually in response to the clinical course of the disease or reporting by the patient.

The present invention also provides a method for enhancing memory learning and or cognitive capacity in a normal individual comprising placing a therapy delivery device on a target site of a cerebello thalamo cortical pathway and or the cortical ponto cerebellar pathway and activating the therapy delivery device to deliver therapy to the target site to enhance the memory learning and or cognitive capacity.

Neuromodulation of the target sites of the present invention can be temporary or short term such as less than 10 days intermediate 10 30 days or chronic greater than 30 days .

Although not wishing to be bound by the description of a particular procedure one exemplary procedure effectuating the methods of the present invention shall now be described with respect to electrical stimulation of a deep cerebellar target site. Generally the procedure begins with the patient having a stereotactic head frame mounted to the patient s skull although frameless techniques may also be used. The patient then typically undergoes a series of MRI and or CT sessions during which a series of two dimensional slice images of the patient s brain are built up into a quasi three dimensional map in virtual space. This map is then correlated to the three dimensional stereotactic frame of reference in the actual surgical field. In order to align these two coordinate frames both the instruments and the patient should be situated in correspondence to the virtual map. A current method of achieving this alignment is to rigidly mount to the head frame to the surgical table. Subsequently a series of reference points are established relative to aspects of the frame and patient s skull so that a computer can adjust and calculate the correlation between the actual surgical field of the patient s head and the virtual space model of the patient s brain MRI scans. Initial anatomical localization of the target site is achieved either directly using the MRI images or indirectly using interactive anatomical atlas programs that map the atlas image onto the stereotactic image of the brain. This indirect targeting approach involves entering the stereotactic anterior commissure AC and posterior commissure PC coordinates into a computer with a commercially available program containing digitized diagrams of sagittal brain sections from a standardized brain atlas. The program transcribes the patient s calculated AC PC intercommissural line onto the digitized map at the sagittal laterality of interest. On these maps the target sites can be localized. The subsequently generated map is overlaid onto a millimeter grid ruled in stereotactic coordinates in the anteroposterior and dorsoventral scales with a corresponding diagram of the target site.

Another method of localizing the target site involves the fusion of functional and structural medical imaging. Such methods for localizing targets in the body and guiding diagnostic or therapeutic instruments toward a target region in the body have been described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 368 331 issued on Apr. 9 2002 to Front et al. U.S. Patent Application Publication No. U.S. 2002 0032375 published Mar. 14 2002 by Bauch et al. and U.S. Patent Application Publication No. U.S. 2002 0183607 published Dec. 5 2002 by Bauch et al. all of which are hereby incorporated by reference in their entireties. Methods for target localization specifically within the nervous system including the brain have been described in U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 353 695 filed Feb. 1 2002 by Rezai et al. which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Specifically provided in U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 353 695 is a method of medical imaging comprising placing a fiducial marker proximate to an area of a body to be imaged obtaining a first image of the area of the body using a first medical imaging technique the first image including a first image of the fiducial marker obtaining a second image of the area of the body using a second medical imaging technique the second image including a second image of the fiducial marker the second medical imaging technique being different than the first medical imaging technique superimposing the first image of the area of the body and the second image of the area of the body and aligning the first image of the first fiducial marker with the second image of the fiducial marker. Useful medical imaging techniques to obtain functional images include but are not limited to functional MRI PET or MEG. Useful medical imaging techniques to obtain structural images include but are not limited to volumetric MRI and CT.

Subsequent to the stereotactic imaging or functional and structural imaging acquisition of the images and anatomical localization the patient is taken to the operating room. The surgery can be performed under either local or general anesthetic 

Physiological localization using single cell microelectrode recording can performed for definitively identifying the target site by neuronal firing patterns of individual neurons. Once the final target site has been identified in the actual spatial frame of reference the electrode is inserted into the target site and a hand held pulse generator Screener is used for intraoperative test stimulation. Various pole combinations and stimulation frequency pulse width and intensity are used to determine the thresholds for therapeutic and adverse effects. Thereafter the electrode is locked into a burr hold ring for example to prevent lead migration. The proximal portion of the electrode is then attached to a transcutaneous pacing wire for a test trial period. After the test period the patient may undergo implantation of a pulse generator or radio frequency coupled receiver.

If an implantable pulse generator is to be used such implantation is generally carried out with the patient under general anesthesia. The pulse generator is implanted in the infraclavicular space by tunneling from the frontal inicision to the infraclavicular space. The pulse generator can be powered by a battery and can be activated externally by an external transmitter.

Of course the above mentioned procedure is only exemplary and stimulation of target sites according to the present invention is not limited to any particular procedure. Further the foregoing description has been set forth merely to illustrate the invention and are not intended as being limiting. Each of the disclosed aspects and embodiments of the present invention may be considered individually or in combination with other aspects embodiments and variations of the invention. In addition unless otherwise specified none of the steps of the methods of the present invention are confined to any particular order of performance. Modifications of the disclosed embodiments incorporating the spirit and substance of the invention may occur to persons skilled in the art and such modifications are within the scope of the present invention. For example although methods of treating specific medical conditions are described target sites can be stimulated to treat medical conditions related to the skeletal system the immunological system the vascular hematological system the muscular connective tissue system the neurological system the visual system the auditory and vestibular system the dermatological system the endocrine system the olfactory system the cardiovascular system the genitourinary system the gastrointestinal system the respiratory system as well as treating mass lesions such as abscesses tumors and aneurysms. Furthermore all references cited herein are incorporated by reference in their entirety.

