---

title: System and method for immersive simulation of hearing loss and auditory prostheses
abstract: An immersive hearing loss and auditory prostheses simulator allows a person who listens through the simulation system to experience an actual shift in his or her thresholds for detecting ambient sounds, in a way that is similar to the shift in thresholds experienced by a hearing-impaired person. The simulator shifts the listener's thresholds while also processing the input signals for suprathreshold stimulation. With a controlled degree of auditory threshold shift with loudness recruitment, a hearing loss simulator is made valid and flexible.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07564980&OS=07564980&RS=07564980
owner: Sensimetrics Corporation
number: 07564980
owner_city: Somerville
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050421
---
The inventions described here were made with government support under Grant No. 2R44 DC005446 awarded by the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders. The government has rights in the invention.

Hearing loss may be due to many causes but most result in hearing loss that is conductive or sensorineural. Conductive hearing loss is a condition in which sound cannot easily pass through the outer or middle ear. This may happen for example if the eardrum is damaged the middle ear is infected or inflamed or the small bones in the middle ear cannot vibrate freely. People with conductive hearing impairment find it difficult to hear quiet sounds well but are able to hear clearly when sound is amplified.

Sensorineural hearing loss results from damage to the hair cells in the cochlea or in neural structures in the auditory system. People with sensorineural hearing loss cannot hear quiet sounds and may still have some problems hearing louder sounds comfortably and clearly. Typically sensorineural hearing loss is accompanied by a rapid growth in loudness as the sound level increases above the threshold of hearing. This rapid loudness growth is termed recruitment. 

Another frequent consequence of hearing impairment is tinnitus which is a perceived ringing or buzzing in one or both ears. Even though the apparent loudness of tinnitus may be low it can nevertheless be very annoying because it is constant.

In several audiological contexts it is desirable to demonstrate the disabilities associated with hearing loss to a person with normal hearing. Parents of a hearing impaired child for example find it instructive to experience their child s hearing and communicating difficulties. A hearing loss simulation can also vividly illustrate the need to speak clearly and to make one s face visible to a person with impaired hearing for lip reading.

Hearing loss can be demonstrated with recordings of sounds that are processed to simulate what a hearing impaired person would hear. These simulators can implement such processing in real time but do not convey to the listener a fundamental property of hearing loss which is the inability to hear soft sounds. Stated differently such hearing loss simulations and demonstrations do not raise the listener s thresholds for ambient sounds by controlled amounts. Earplugs and muffs alone do not provide good hearing loss simulation because they provide only a mild to moderate degree of hearing loss and this loss is of the conductive type only.

The systems and methods described here relate to achieving an immersive simulation of hearing loss and auditory prostheses. The term immersive in this context refers to the fact that the person who listens through the simulation system experiences an actual shift in his or her thresholds for detecting ambient sounds in a way that is similar to the shift in thresholds experienced by a hearing impaired person. The simulator shifts the listener s thresholds while also processing the input signals for suprathreshold stimulation. With a controlled degree of auditory threshold shift with loudness recruitment a hearing loss simulator can be made both valid and flexible.

With such a simulator the listener s thresholds can be verified to be shifted by a desired degree. When programmed the simulator can flexibly simulate a wide range of hearing loss characteristics. The system can be made wearable and portable allowing a listener to interact with real world sound sources in any environment. The simulation can combine hearing aids and cochlear implants along with hearing loss to provide further understanding of prosthetic options. The simulator s immersibility and interactivity along with extensive control of hearing loss and prosthesis characteristics can give users improved insight into auditory communication problems and differences in perception when using a prosthetic device.

The foregoing features and advantages of the system and method for immersive simulation of hearing loss and auditory prostheses will be apparent from the following more particular description of embodiments of the invention as illustrated in the accompanying drawings in which like reference characters refer to the same parts throughout the different views. The drawings are not necessarily to scale emphasis instead being placed upon illustrating the principles of the invention.

In the field of audiology it can be desirable to demonstrate the communication difficulties that accompany hearing loss as well as the improvements provided by prosthetic devices mainly hearing aids and cochlear implants. Such demonstrations can be used 1 to train audiologists and educators of the deaf 2 to educate people who work in high noise settings and the public generally about the need for hearing protection and careful use of audio devices 3 to help explain to family members of hearing impaired and deaf persons the communication obstacles they face and 4 to demonstrate options for prospective hearing aid users.

Referring to in one embodiment a hearing loss and prosthesis simulation system includes a head worn device with binaural microphones mounted on the outside of muffs that have respective earphones . Microphones receive ambient signals and provide them to a signal processing unit . Unit processes signals based on selected characteristics and provides processed signals to earphones respectively and thus to the wearer of device . The signal processing is mainly performed with a programmable digital signal processor DSP .

Signal processing unit has controls that allow the listener to select from among a set of simulation options and to adjust the volume of a prosthesis. The simulation options include characteristics of the hearing loss and tinnitus for the two ears and of the prostheses at the two ears. The system includes an interface to a personal computer for specifying hearing loss and prosthesis characteristics. Unit can be provided in a separate housing and connected to device through one or more cables or the functionality of unit can be formed within a housing of device . A user interface for an audiologist can have controls and features that can be used to specify hearing loss and characteristics of the prosthesis.

In the embodiment illustrated in the head worn device can be made from a modified hearing protective headset. Headsets that have microphones that receive signals process them and provide them to a wearer are generally known for workers in loud environments when it is desirable for example to block the sound of machinery but allow people to hear speech referred to as hear through devices . There are many possible variants in these components including other types of muffs insert or behind the ear devices or more than one set of microphones on each side.

Referring to a functional block diagram of a signal processing unit for achieving the simulation is shown for one channel of the system. A sound field signal P is picked up by a microphone and is processed according to prosthesis and hearing loss simulation . The simulation output is then delivered to an earphone producing audible sound P. Ideally the muff or other protective device would block all sound so the only sounds reaching the wearer s ear would be processed signals P. In actual devices however some ambient sound typically gets through to the listener. This direct acoustic transmission to the listener s ear denoted by the transmission path D in produces a direct component P that is added represented by summer to the earphone delivered processed signals Ps to result in the total sound pressure in the ear canal P. This addition of the direct path sound disrupts the ability to control the sound at the listener s ear.

In this embodiment the interference from the direct path signal is reduced and ideally minimized to enable the simulator to control most of the sound delivered to the listener s ear. This reduction is achieved with a combination of attenuation from the headset device additive masking noise and automatic gain control AGC . While all three approaches are used here a system could use different combinations of strategies. To achieve frequency specificity in both hearing loss simulations and prosthesis simulations the signal is processed in multiple frequency bands. The frequency bands may be for example the third octave bands that are standard in audio analysis systems.

The expanded portion of enclosed by dashed lines shows the signal processing performed in one frequency band of the hearing loss simulator. A bandpass filter an AGC and an amplifier are connected via interconnents and In each band as selected by the bandpass filter the AGC adjusts the gain of the amplifier to produce an amplified output signal . Additive noise N is introduced by the simulator via summer to partially mask the direct path signal . Processing in different frequency bands has the same form but there can be different parameters for the AGC and additive noise depending on the frequency.The resulting signals from all of the frequency bands are summed together by summer and output to a D A converter.

The circuitry of is shown in more detail in . As shown here each binaural microphone has two microphones shown here as front microphone and rear microphone . These microphones provide signals to respective preamplifiers and then to analog to digital converters ADC to digitize the signals from the microphones. One of the microphones can have an auxiliary input that is provided directly to ADC or combined in a summer with the amplified and received signal from front microphone . Such an auxiliary input is generally known already in the prior art in the field of hearing aids to allow sound to be provided directly to the device e.g. for providing music .

The digital signals are processed and summed in a directional processing block . In a manner that is already known block can use additive subtractive and delaying techniques to provide directionality. This feature is also generally known for use with hearing aids.

A directional output signal from block is filtered into multiple bands with bandpass filters . The next steps would be performed for each of the separate bands only one of which is shown. In prosthesis processing block the signals can be processed in different ways to simulate different types of prosthesis. To simulate a hearing aid the signals can be amplified either linearly or with controlled gain depending on the level of the sound referred to as compression . Processing for a cochlear implant is different. In this case as is generally known the envelope is removed from the signal to retain variations in the intensity of the sound while removing changes in pitch.

The prosthesis processed signals are provided to hearing loss simulation circuitry . The signals are provided to an AGC unit that controls the gain of an amplifier . Additive noise represented as Nis provided to a summer and added to the amplified signal to at least partially mask the direct path signal shown as D in . The resulting signals from all of the frequency bands are summed together and converted to an analog signal by a digital to analog converter DAC . The resulting analog signal is provided to an output amplifier and a receiver to produce the signal in the ear canal.

When the input signal level is at or below the shifted input threshold 70 dB in this example the direct component is masked by noise level N. As the input level increases and exceeds the shifted threshold both the processed and direct components rise above the noise masked threshold. However because the processed component is larger than the direct component shown as line the processed component dominates the total ear canal sound pressure in that frequency band. n this embodiment the AGC output characteristic has two straight line segments caused by the gain set by the AGC although the output could have more segments. The recruiting part of the processed curve the part below a knee point has variable gain such that the function rises from an output level of N or from 0 dB if N is below 0 dB to full recruitment i.e. the knee point over a recruitment range of approximately 20 dB. The second line segment of the AGC characteristic the part above the knee point extends from the knee point upwards with a fixed gain. The gain of the first segment is greater than the gain of the second segment and the slope of the second segment is in this embodiment equal to one. As a result the additive noise causes the wearer to have substantially no perception of the received signal below a first threshold input level as is typical for one with conductive or sensorineural hearing loss. As the input level rises above a threshold e.g. 70 dB there is a rapid increase in the AGC output characteristic which simulates the loudness recruitment that accompanies sensorineural hearing loss. Above a next threshold e.g. 90 dB the slope of the AGC characteristic goes to 1 reflecting the fact that loudness has fully recruited.

The time varying gain in the band is generated from the equations for the line describing the processed components as a function of the input level estimate. The input level estimate is obtained for example from a time average of the square of the bandpass filtered microphone signal. In one embodiment an exponential average of input level is made with a time constant of for example 14 msec.

Using a software interface at a personal computer the operator can create a set of hearing specifications and a set of prosthesis specifications for simulation. These specifications are then downloaded to the signal processor possibly by way of a remote control device. The operator would then give the simulator headset to the user to wear along with instructions for use. Different combinations of hearing and prosthesis specifications can then be selected from the set of available specifications. This selection can be done by the wearer or by the clinician. The wearer experiences the threshold shifts accompanying hearing loss and processing by the prosthesis while being exposed to sounds in the environment.

Referring to a number of settings can be established and provided to a remote control. The operator can set up to ten hearing profiles H H and up to ten prosthesis profiles P P .

In view of the wide variety of embodiments to which the principles of the present invention can be applied it should be understood that the illustrated embodiments are exemplary only and should not be taken as limiting the scope of the present invention. Various elements of the embodiments can be implemented in software circuitry other computer hardware or firmware and any desired combinations.

It will be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art that methods involved in the system for immersive simulation of hearing loss and auditory prostheses may be embodied in a computer program product that includes a computer usable medium. For example such a computer usable medium can include a readable memory device such as a hard drive device a CD ROM a DVD ROM or a computer diskette having computer readable program code segments stored thereon. The computer readable medium can also include a communications or transmission medium such as a bus or a communications link either optical wired or wireless having program code segments carried thereon as digital or analog data signals.

Other aspects modifications and embodiments are within the scope of the following claims. For example while the processing is preferably performed with a programmed DSP any suitable circuitry or special or general purpose computing device or combination of the foregoing could be used.

