---

title: Tuberculosis nucleic acids, polypeptides and immunogenic compositions
abstract: The present invention provides transcriptionally active Mtb polynucleotides, recombinant Mtb peptides and polypeptides, and immunogenic Mtb antigens. Immunogenic compositions are also provided that may be useful as recombinant, subunit and DNA vaccines. In addition, the invention provides diagnostic kits for Mtb.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07608277&OS=07608277&RS=07608277
owner: Gene Therapy Systems, Inc.
number: 07608277
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051130
---
The present application claims the benefit under 35 U.S.C. 119 e of the filing date of U.S. Application Ser. No. 60 632 573 filed on Dec. 1 2004 and 60 730 951 filed Oct. 26 2005 which is are incorporated herein by reference.

The research leading to the present invention was supported at least in part by a grant from the National Institute of Allergy And Infectious Diseases. Accordingly the Government may have certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to immunogenic Mtb peptides polypeptides polynucleotides encoding immunogenic Mtb peptides and polypeptides and immunogenic compositions comprising Mtb polypeptides or polynucleotides.

Traditional vaccine technology suffers from the problem that it often produces various degrees of immunogenicity in different hosts. Often the only reliably immunogenic composition is a pathogenic microorganism. But the manufacture and administration of the pathogenic organism carries a risk of infection by the very pathogen the vaccine is designed to treat. Furthermore recent well publicized problems with influenza vaccine production highlight the difficulties in producing large quantities of conventional vaccines and the precarious state of worldwide vaccine supplies. In light of general health concerns and the growing threat of bioterrorism there is a need to develop recombinant and subunit vaccines capable of inducing an appropriate immune response in the context of multiple and genetically diverse hosts. This approach requires the identification of a number of specific antigenic polypeptides. One of the most difficult tasks in developing a protective or therapeutic vaccine be it a recombinant or genetic subunit or multi valent vaccine is the identification of the appropriate antigens that can stimulate the most rapid sustained and efficacious immune responses against a particular pathogen for protection and or therapeutic effect. This is especially challenging when the genome of the pathogen is large and screening for immunogenic antigens is tedious.

Tuberculosis is a chronic infectious disease that kills approximately 3 million people per year. It has been estimated that two billion people are infected with worldwide including 7.5 million with active cases of tuberculosis. In recent years there has been an unexpected rise in tuberculosis cases.

In the U.S. tuberculosis continues to be a major problem especially among the homeless Native Americans African Americans immigrants and the elderly. Immunocompromised individuals are particularly susceptible to tuberculosis. Of the 88 million new cases of tuberculosis projected in this decade approximately 10 are expected to be attributable to HIV infection. The emergence of AIDS has reactivated millions of dormant cases of tuberculosis Mtb causing a sharp rise in the number of tuberculosis associated deaths.

The only available vaccine for tuberculosis BCG is both unpredictable and highly variable in protective efficacy. Hundreds of millions of children and newborns have been vaccinated with BCG yet this has not consistently stopped the spread of the disease. Tuberculosis has become one of the fastest spreading infectious diseases in both industrialized and developing countries worldwide. Doubtful efficacy of vaccination has spurred interest in developing effective alternatives to BCG.

The emergence of multi drug resistant strains of e.g. or Mtb has complicated matters further with some experts predicting a new tuberculosis epidemic. In the U.S. about 14 of isolates are resistant to at least one drug and approximately 3 are resistant to at least two drugs. Some strains have been isolated that are resistant to as many as seven drugs in the repertoire of drugs commonly used to combat tuberculosis. Resistant strains make treatment of tuberculosis extremely difficult leading to a mortality rate of about 90 which is one of the reasons it has gained priority as a defined CDC Category C Biodefense organism.

In the current age where treatment of tuberculosis is becoming more challenging and immunosuppressive diseases are more prevalent new vaccines are essential. Thus there is a need for developing and commercializing effective and reliable Mtb vaccines. In addition there is a considerable need for additional diagnostic tests or tests to detect active TB in the face of other diseases such as HIV.

The present invention provides isolated polynucleotides encoding a Mtb polypeptide that is antigenic in any mammal including SEQ ID NOS 46 64 110 121 and fragments thereof that encode antigenic polypeptides. The mammal can be for example a mouse rabbit non human primate or human. The invention also provides isolated polynucleotides encoding highly immunogenic Mtb antigens including SEQ ID NOS 46 64 110 121 and fragments thereof that encode highly immunogenic polypeptides. In some embodiments highly immunogenic Mtb antigens react with polyclonal antibodies directed to Mtb bacteria Mtb from at least two different species. In another embodiment highly immunogenic Mtb antigens are detected by ELISA Western blotting or both using polyclonal antibodies that are directed to Mtb bacteria.

The present invention also provides TAP polynucleotides e.g. polynucleotides produced by Transcriptionally Activated PCR TAP technology as described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 280 977 which is expressly incorporated herein by reference. Such polynucleotides include a 5 TAP polynucleotide sequence a Mtb polynucleotide sequence and a 3 TAP polynucleotide sequence. The Mtb polynucleotide sequence can for example comprise one of SEQ ID NOS 46 64 and 110 121. In some embodiments the 5 TAP polynucleotide sequence comprises a promoter. In certain embodiments the 5 TAP polynucleotide sequence is selected from SEQ ID NOS 2 3 6 and 84. In some embodiments the 3 TAP polynucleotide sequence comprises a terminator. In certain embodiments the 3 TAP polynucleotide sequence is selected from SEQ ID NOS 4 5 7 and 85.

The present invention also provides primer pairs for amplifying an Mtb polynucleotide. These primer pairs include SEQ ID NOS 8 and 9 10 and 11 12 and 13 14 and 15 16 and 17 18 and 19 20 and 21 22 and 23 24 and 25 26 and 27 28 and 29 30 and 31 32 and 33 34 and 35 36 and 37 38 and 39 40 and 41 42 and 43 44and 45 86 and 87 88 and 89 90 and 91 92 and 93 94 and 95 96 and 97 98 and 99 100 and 101 102 and 103 104 and 105 106 and 107 108 and 109.

Isolated antigenic Mtb peptides and polypeptides are encompassed by the invention including SEQ ID NOS 65 83 122 133 and fragments thereof. Isolated Mtb peptides and polypeptides that are highly immunogenic including SEQ ID NOS 65 83 122 133 and fragments thereof that are highly immunogenic are also included in the invention. In one embodiment immunogenic peptides and polypeptides react with polyclonal antibodies that are directed to Mtb bacteria Mtb . In one aspect of this embodiment the peptides and polypeptides react with polyclonal antibodies that are directed to Mtb bacteria from at least two different species. In another embodiment highly immunogenic peptides and polypeptides are detected by ELISA Western blotting or both using polyclonal antibodies that are directed to Mtb bacteria.

The present invention also includes recombinant Mtb peptides and polypeptides wherein the amino terminus of the peptide or polypeptide comprises an HA tag or a 6 His tag and the carboxy terminus of the polypeptide is selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID NOS 65 83 and 122 133. Also included are recombinant Mtb peptides and polypeptides wherein the carboxy terminus of the polypeptide comprises a HA tag or a His tag and the amino terminus of the polypeptide is selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID NOS 65 83 and 122 133. The peptides and polypeptides of the invention may be expressed in an appropriate in vitro transcription and translation system such as a T7 polymerase system.

Immunogenic compositions for inducing an immunological response in a mammalian host against Mtb are also included in the invention. In one embodiment the immunogenic compositions comprise nucleic acids that encode and express in vivo in a mammalian host cell at least one immunogenic peptide or polypeptide which may be any one of SEQ ID NOS 65 83 122 133 or immunogenic fragments thereof. The nucleic acids can be for example plasmids or TAP fragments. The compositions can induce either a humoral or cell mediated immune response. Furthermore the immunogenic compositions can include additional components such as adjuvants as well as other applications such as serodiagnostics.

Immunogenic compositions for inducing an immunological response in a mammalian host against Mtb of the invention can also comprise isolated Mtb peptides and or polypeptides such as SEQ ID NOS 65 83 122 133 and immunogenic fragments thereof. In one embodiment the immunogenic peptides and polypeptides are expressed in an in vitro transcription and translation system. The immunogenic peptide and polypeptide compositions can induce either a humoral or cell mediated immune response. Furthermore the immunogenic peptide and polypeptide compositions can include additional components such as adjuvants and include other applications such as diagnostics.

Similarly detection of Mtb its constituent proteins and or its immunologically reactive products e.g. antibodies is clinically relevant for the diagnosis of Mtb and to track the efficacy of therapeutic treatments for Mtb especially as translated to serodiagnostic tests. The present application therefore provides antigens for detection of Mtb for immune assays including humoral immune assays. These antigens are applicable to detection of active Mtb in the face of HIV and other Mycobacterial coinfections multi drug resistant infections by Mtb MDRI and rapidly mutating forms of Mtb depending on genetic makeup geographical location and immunocompetency status.

As such the present invention also provides diagnostic compositions including one or more antibodies directed against the peptide epitopes identified herein. Also the present invention provides diagnostic kits that include at least one or more of such antibodies.

In addition the invention provides a method of generating an immune response in a mammalian host against Mtb . The method includes administering to said mammalian host an immunogenic composition comprising at least one nucleic acid selected from the group of SEQ ID NO 46 64 110 121 fragments thereof or combinations thereof wherein said nucleic acid encodes and expresses in vivo at least one immunogenic peptide or polypeptide whereby said immune response against Mtb is generated.

Also the invention provides a method of generating an immune response in a mammalian host against Mtb the method including administering to said mammalian host an immunogenic composition comprising at least one nucleic acid encoding and expressing in vivo at least one immunogenic peptide or polypeptide selected from the group of SEQ ID NO 65 83 122 133 fragments thereof or combinations thereof whereby said immune response against Mtb is generated.

In addition the invention provides a method of generating an immune response in a mammalian host against Mtb comprising administering to said mammalian host an immunogenic composition comprising at least one immunogenic peptide or polypeptide selected from SEQ ID NO 65 83 122 133 fragment thereof or combinations thereof whereby said immune response against Mtb is generated.

Also the invention provides kits. In one embodiment the kits include at least one Mtb immunogenic composition selected from a nucleic acid selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID NO 46 64 110 121 fragments thereof or combinations thereof or a peptide selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID NO 65 83 122 133 fragments thereof or combinations thereof and an adjuvant. The kit may also include an expression system. In addition the kit may include at least 2 5 10 15 20 or more of said immunogenic compositions including nucleic acids and or peptides combinations or fragments thereof. In addition the kit may include controls e.g. positive and or negative controls.

Before proceeding further with a description of the specific embodiments of the present invention a number of terms will be defined and described in detail.

Unless specific definitions are provided the nomenclature utilized in connection with and the laboratory procedures techniques and methods described herein are those known in the art to which they pertain. Standard chemical symbols and abbreviations are used interchangeably with the full names represented by such symbols. Thus for example the terms carbon and C are understood to have identical meaning. Standard techniques may be used for chemical syntheses chemical analyses pharmaceutical preparation formulation delivery and treatment of patients. Standard techniques may be used for recombinant DNA methodology oligonucleotide synthesis tissue culture and the like. Reactions and purification techniques may be performed e.g. using kits according to manufacturer s specifications as commonly accomplished in the art or as described herein. The foregoing techniques and procedures may be generally performed according to conventional methods well known in the art and as described in various general or more specific references that are cited and discussed throughout the present specification. All references cited herein are incorporated by reference in their entirety and are not admitted to be prior art. See e.g. Sambrook et al. 3rd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Cold Spring Harbor N.Y. 2000 Harlow Lane Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Cold Spring Harbor N.Y. 1988 which are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety for any purpose.

The terms polynucleotide and nucleic acid molecule are used interchangeably to refer to polymeric forms of nucleotides of any length. The polynucleotides may contain deoxyribonucleotides ribonucleotides and or their analogs. Nucleotides may have any three dimensional structure and may perform any function known or unknown. The term polynucleotide includes single stranded double stranded and triple helical molecules. The following are non limiting embodiments of polynucleotides a gene a gene fragment exons introns mRNA tRNA rRNA ribozymes cDNA recombinant polynucleotides branched polynucleotides plasmids cosmids viruses and other vectors isolated DNA of any sequence isolated RNA of any sequence nucleic acid probes and primers. A nucleic acid molecule may also comprise modified nucleic acid molecules such as methylated nucleic acid molecules and nucleic acid molecule analogs. Analogs of purines and pyrimidines are known in the art and include but are not limited to aziridinylcytosine 4 acetylcytosine 5 fluorouracil 5 bromouracil 5 carboxymethylaminomethyl 2 thiouracil 5 carboxymethyl aminomethyluracil inosine N6 isopentenyladenine 1 methyladenine 1 methylpseudouracil 1 methylguanine 1 methylinosine 2 2 dimethylguanine 2 methyladenine 2 methylguanine 3 methylcytosine 5 methylcytosine pseudouracil 5 pentyluracil and 2 6 diaminopurine.

The use of uracil as a substitute for thymine in a deoxyribonucleic acid is also considered an analogous form of pyrimidine.

Sugar modifications e.g. 2 o methyl 2 fluoro and the like and phosphate backbone modifications e.g. morpholino PNA thioates dithioates and the like can be incorporated singly or in combination into the nucleic acid molecules of the present invention. In one embodiment for example a nucleic acid of the invention may comprise a modified sugar and a modified phosphate backbone. In another embodiment a nucleic acid of the invention may comprise modifications to sugar base and phosphate backbone.

 Oligonucleotide refers generally to polynucleotides of between 5 and about 100 nucleotides of single or double stranded nucleic acid typically DNA. Oligonucleotides are also known as oligomers or oligos and may be isolated from genes or synthesized e.g. chemically or enzymatically by methods known in the art. A primer refers to an oligonucleotide usually single stranded that provides a 3 hydroxyl end for the initiation of enzyme mediated nucleic acid synthesis.

 Peptide generally refers to a short chain of amino acids linked by peptide bonds. Typically peptides comprise amino acid chains of about 2 100 more typically about 4 50 and most commonly about 6 20 amino acids. Polypeptide generally refers to individual straight or branched chain sequences of amino acids that are typically longer than peptides. Polypeptides usually comprise at least about 100 to about 1000 amino acids in length more typically at least about 150 to about 600 amino acids and frequently at least about 200 to about 500 amino acids. Proteins include single polypeptides as well as complexes of multiple polypeptide chains which may be the same or different. Multiple chains in a protein may be characterized by secondary tertiary and quaternary structure as well as the primary amino acid sequence structure may be held together for example by disulfide bonds and may include post synthetic modifications such as without limitation glycosylation phosphorylation truncations or other processing. Antibodies such as IgG proteins for example are typically comprised of four polypeptide chains i.e. two heavy and two light chains that are held together by disulfide bonds. Furthermore proteins may include additional components such as associated metals e.g. iron copper and sulfur or other moieties. The definitions of peptides polypeptides and proteins include without limitation biologically active and inactive forms denatured and native forms as well as variant modified truncated hybrid and chimeric forms thereof. The peptides polypeptides and proteins of the present invention may be derived from any source or by any method including but not limited to extraction from naturally occurring tissues or other materials recombinant production in host organisms such as bacteria fungi plant insect or animal cells and chemical synthesis using methods that will be well known to the skilled artisan.

 Polyclonal antibodies or antisera are heterogeneous populations of antibody molecules derived from the sera of animals immunized with an antigen or an antigenic functional derivative thereof. For the production of polyclonal antibodies host animals such as rabbits mice and goats may be immunized by injection with an antigen or hapten carrier conjugate optionally supplemented with adjuvants. Polyclonal antibodies may also be derived from the sera of humans or non human animals exposed to a pathogen or vaccinated against a pathogen using a commercially available or experimental vaccine. An antiserum against TB Mtb for example may be obtained from a human patient vaccinated with a TBvaccine or from an animal such as a mouse rabbit goat or sheep immunized with Mtb bacteria or a Mtb preparation.

 Monoclonal antibodies which are abbreviated MAb are homogeneous populations of antibodies to a particular antigen may be obtained by any technique that provides for the production of antibody molecules by continuous cell lines in culture. These include but are not limited to the hybridoma technique of Kohler and Milstein 256 495 7 1975 and U.S. Pat. No. 4 376 110 the human B cell hybridoma technique Kosbor et al. 4 72 1983 Cote et al. 80 2026 30 1983 and the EBV hybridoma technique Cole et al. in Monoclonal Antibodies And Cancer Therapy Alan R. Liss Inc. New York pp. 77 96 1985 . Such antibodies may be of any immunoglobulin class including IgG IgM IgE IgA IgD and any subclass thereof. The hybridoma producing the MAb of this invention may be cultivated in vitro or in vivo. Production of high titers of MAbs in vivo makes this a presently preferred method of production.

In addition techniques developed for the production of chimeric antibodies Morrison et al. 81 6851 6855 1984 Takeda et al. 314 452 54 1985 by splicing the genes from a mouse antibody molecule of appropriate antigen specificity together with genes from a human antibody molecule of appropriate biological activity can be used. A chimeric antibody is a molecule in which different portions are derived from different sources such as those having a variable region derived from a murine MAb and a human immunoglobulin constant region. Humanized antibodies can also be generated in which certain parts e.g. framework regions of a non human antibody are altered to make the antibody more like a human antibody while retaining antigen binding features of the parent molecule.

Alternatively techniques described for the production of single chain antibodies U.S. Pat. No. 4 946 778 Bird 242 423 26 1988 Huston et al. 85 5879 83 1988 and Ward et al. 334 544 46 1989 can be adapted to produce single chain antibodies. Single chain antibodies are typically formed by linking the heavy and light chain fragments of the Fv region via an amino acid bridge resulting in a single chain polypeptide.

Antibody fragments that recognize specific epitopes may be generated by known techniques. For example such fragments include but are not limited to the Fab fragments that can be produced by papain digestion of the antibody molecule the F ab fragments that can be produced by pepsin digestion of the antibody molecule and the Fab fragments that can be generated by reducing the disulfide bridges of the F ab fragments. Alternatively Fab expression libraries may be constructed Huse et al. 246 1275 81 1989 to allow rapid and easy identification of monoclonal Fab fragments with the desired specificity.

The term hapten as used herein refers to a small proteinaceous or non protein antigenic determinant that is capable of being recognized by an antibody. Typically haptens do not elicit antibody formation in an animal unless part of a larger species. For example small peptide haptens are frequently coupled to a carrier protein such as keyhole limpet hemocyanin in order to generate an anti hapten antibody response. Antigens are macromolecules capable of generating an antibody response in an animal and being recognized by the resulting antibody. Both antigens and haptens comprise at least one antigenic determinant or epitope which is the region of the antigen or hapten that binds to the antibody. Typically the epitope on a hapten is the entire molecule.

By the terms specifically binding and specific binding as used herein is meant that an antibody or other molecule binds to a target such as an antigen with greater affinity than it binds to other molecules under the specified conditions of the present invention. Antibodies or antibody fragments as known in the art are polypeptide molecules that contain regions that can bind other molecules such as antigens. In various embodiments of the invention specifically binding may mean that an antibody or other specificity molecule binds to a target molecule with at least about a 10 fold greater affinity preferably at least about a 10 fold greater affinity more preferably at least about a 10 fold greater affinity and most preferably at least about a 10 fold greater affinity than it binds molecules unrelated to the target molecule. Typically specific binding refers to affinities in the range of about 10 fold to about 10 fold greater than non specific binding. In some embodiments specific binding may be characterized by affinities greater than 10 fold over non specific binding. Whenever a range appears herein as in 1 10 or one to ten the range refers without limitation to each integer or unit of measure in the given range. Thus by 1 10 it is meant that each of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 and any subunit in between.

 Immunogenic compositions of the present invention are preparations that when administered to a human or non human animal elicit a humoral and or cellular immune response. Vaccine as used herein refers to immunogenic compositions that are administered to a human or non human patient for the prevention amelioration or treatment of diseases typically infectious diseases. Traditional vaccines or whole vaccines typically may be live attenuated or killed microorganisms such as bacteria or viruses. Vaccines also encompass preparations that elicit or stimulate an immune response that may be useful in the prevention amelioration or treatment of non infectious diseases. For example a cancer cell vaccine may be administered to stimulate or supplement a patient s immune response to neoplastic disease. Subunit vaccines may be prepared from purified or partially purified proteins or other antigens from a microorganism cancer cell or other vaccine target. The term recombinant vaccine refers to any vaccine that is prepared using recombinant DNA technology and includes certain subunit vaccines for example where subunits are cloned and expressed in vitro prior to administration and polynucleotide vaccines such as DNA vaccines that may encode immunogenic polypeptides. Vaccines typically contain at least one immunogenic component e.g. a cell virus polypeptide polynucleotide and the like but may also include additional agents such as adjuvants which may enhance or stimulate the patient s immune response to the immunogenic component. In certain embodiments vaccines or components of vaccines may be conjugated e.g. to a polysaccharide or other molecule to improve stability or immunogenicity of one or more vaccine components.

As used herein the term promoter refers to a DNA sequence having a regulatory function which is recognized directly or indirectly and bound by a DNA dependent RNA polymerase during the initiation of transcription. Promoters are typically adjacent to the coding sequence of a gene and extend upstream from the transcription initiation site. The promoter regions may contain several short 

The term terminator refers to DNA sequences typically located at the end of a coding region that cause RNA polymerase to terminate transcription. As used herein the term terminator also encompasses terminal polynucleotide sequences that direct the processing of RNA transcripts prior to translation such as for example polyadenylation signals. Any type of terminator can be used for the methods and compositions of the invention. For example TAP terminator sequences can be derived from a prokaryote eukaryote or a virus including but not limited to animal plant fungal insect bacterial and viral sources. In one embodiment artificial mammalian transcriptional terminator elements are used. A nonexclusive list of terminator sequences that may be used in the present invention include the SV40 transcription terminator bovine growth hormone BGH terminator synthetic terminators rabbit globin terminator and the like. Terminators can also be a consecutive stretch of adenine nucleotides at the 3 end of a TAP fragment.

By pharmaceutically acceptable or pharmacologically acceptable is meant a material which is not biologically or otherwise undesirable i.e. the material may be administered to an individual in a formulation or composition without causing any undesirable biological effects or interacting in a deleterious manner with any of the components of the composition in which it is contained.

By serodiagnostic test or grammatical equivalents herein is meant diagnostic tests to detect Mtb by serum of infected organisms animals or patients.

By diagnostic test or grammatical equivalents herein is meant an assay or test to detect Mtb by any scientific technique from infected organisms animals or patients.

The present invention generally relates to Mtb polypeptide libraries methods of determining the immunogenic effect of Mtb polypeptides and methods of developing vaccines against Mtb as well as immunogenic and pharmaceutical compositions. The invention also provides immunogenic Mtb polypeptides and mixtures of polypeptides polynucleotides encoding immunogenic Mtb polypeptides and immunogenic compositions comprising Mtb polypeptides or polynucleotides.

According to a method of the present invention a library or array of Mtb polypeptides oligonucleotides or polynucleotides is generated. The immunogenicity of individual polypeptides in the library or array is determined by immunological screening where suitable highly immunogenic Mtb polypeptides are selected for vaccine development. Conveniently individual polypeptides in the library may be arranged in an array to facilitate screening in a rapid and high throughput manner.

The term array includes any arrangement wherein a plurality of different molecules compounds or other species are contained held presented positioned situated or supported. Arrays can be arranged on microtiter plates such as 48 well 96 well 144 well 192 well 240 well 288 well 336 well 384 well 432 well 480 well 576 well 672 well 768 well 864 well 960 well 1056 well 1152 well 1248 well 1344 well 1440 well or 1536 well plates tubes slides chips flasks or any other suitable laboratory apparatus. In one embodiment molecules arranged in an array are peptides polypeptides or proteins. In another embodiment the molecules are oligonucleotides or polynucleotides. In one aspect of the invention polypeptides or polynucleotides in solution are arranged in 96 well plate arrays. In another embodiment polypeptides or polynucleotides are immobilized on a solid support in an array format. Furthermore an array can be sub divided into a plurality of sub arrays as for example where multiple 96 well plates each an individual sub array are required to hold all of the samples of a single large array.

The term library is likewise to be construed broadly and includes any non naturally occurring collection of molecules whether arranged or not. A library therefore encompasses an array but the two terms are not necessarily synonymous.

Libraries of Mtb polypeptides may be prepared by any method known in the art. Conveniently GTS patented Transcriptionally Active PCR TAP products can be used to amplify DNA in preparation for producing Mtb polypeptide libraries. With TAP technology a particular polynucleotide of interest can be made transcriptionally active and ready for expression in less than one day. TAP fragments are transcriptionally active coding sequences prepared using TAP technology and the two terms can be used interchangeably. TAP fragments encompass polynucleotides that can be readily expressed for example by transfection into animal cells or tissues by any nucleic acid transfection technique without the need for subcloning into expression vectors or purification of plasmid DNA from bacteria. TAP fragments can be synthesized by amplification e.g. polymerase chain reaction or PCR of any polynucleotide of interest using nested oligonucleotide primers. Two polynucleotide sequences are typically incorporated into TAP fragments one of which comprises an active transcriptional promoter and the other comprises a transcriptional terminator.

TAP fragments and methods of making the same are described in detail in U.S. Pat. No. 6 280 977 entitled Method for Generating Transcriptionally Active DNA Fragments which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. In one embodiment methods for creating TAP fragments include the steps of i designing oligonucleotide primers ii amplifying TAP primary fragments and iii amplifying TAP expression fragments. illustrates one method for generating TAP fragments.

TAP fragments can be prepared using custom oligonucleotide primers designed to amplify a target polynucleotide sequence of interest from the Mtb genome. Primers complementary to the 5 and 3 ends of the polynucleotide of interest can be designed and synthesized using methods well known in the art and can include any suitable number of nucleotides to permit amplification of the coding region. Typically the polynucleotide sequence of interest is an open reading frame ORF that consists of an uninterrupted stretch of triplet amino acid codons without stop codons. In certain embodiments the polynucleotide is a Mtb polypeptide encoding sequence.

In one embodiment of the invention 5 custom oligonucleotide primers of about 41 42 43 44 45 or 46 nucleotides are designed and synthesized about 6 nucleotides of which comprise the 5 TAP end universal sequence 5 GAAGGAGATATACCATGCATCATCATCATCATCAT 3 SEQ ID NO 84 and about 15 to 20 nucleotides are complementary to the Mtb sequence. Accordingly the target specific sequence can be for example about 15 16 17 18 19 or 20 nucleotides in length. The 5 oligonucleotide may also incorporate a Kozak consensus sequence A GCCAUGG near an ATG start codon initiator methionine for more efficient translation of mRNA. In one embodiment an ATG start codon is included in the target specific primer sequence. In another embodiment an ATG start codon is incorporated into the custom 5 oligonucleotide when the target sequence encoding a polypeptide of interest lacks an initiation methionine codon at its 5 end.

In one embodiment of the invention 3 custom oligonucleotide primers comprise about 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 or 45 nucleotides of these about 20 nucleotides comprise the 3 TAP end universal sequence 5 TGATGATGAGAACCCCCCCC 3 SEQ ID NO 85 and about 20 nucleotides are complementary to the target Mtb sequence. In one aspect a stop codon sequence can be added to the end of the target Mtb sequence to achieve proper translational termination by incorporating a TCA TTA or CTA into the 3 custom oligonucleotide.

In one embodiment of the invention a bioinformatics approach is used to identify prioritize and select Mtb genes coding sequences ORFs and other sequences of interest for TAP amplification and to design custom 5 and 3 oligonucleotide primers. According to this approach a database of Mtb genomic information is compiled from available nucleic acid and amino acid sequence information including the polynucleotide gene locus polypeptide and protein names locations and sizes. In certain embodiments the location of known coding sequences is included in the database. The sequence information may also be analyzed for unidentified ORFs and putative coding sequences. Any method can be used to identify ORFs and coding sequences including free or commercially available sequence analysis software. For example the GLIMMER program may be used to predict putative coding regions or genes in prokaryotic nucleotide sequences. See e.g. Salzberg et al. 26 544 548 1998 Delcher et al. 27 4636 4641 1999 .

In certain aspects of the invention the genome database includes the entire genomic DNA sequence of Mtb . In one embodiment the sequence information is obtained from information that is in the public domain. In other embodiments some or all of the sequence information can be obtained by nucleotide and or amino acid sequencing.

As previously described in U.S. Ser. No. 10 159 428 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety the methods of the present invention particularly TAP technology enable the skilled artisan to prepare a library representing all or substantially all of the polypeptides expressed in an organism or cell type. In certain embodiments of the present invention however it may be preferable to prepare a library of polypeptides with selected properties. Thus one aspect of the present invention utilizes a set of ranking criteria to identify polypeptides predicted to have properties desirable e.g. for vaccine development. Polypeptide ranking criteria which may be identified using bioinformatics tools include but are not limited to the presence of membrane domains ORF size secreted proteins signatures signal sequences hydrophobicity B cell and T cell epitopes homology to human proteins protein and gene expression levels. The ranking criteria may be assigned a numerical score based on relative importance. Coding regions or putative coding regions identified in the database of Mtb sequences are then scored using the numerical ranking criteria and the sum of the scores for each sequence is used to establish a rank order. According to this aspect of the invention primers are designed to amplify Mtbpolynucleotides in rank order. A library may be constructed for example from the top 5 10 20 30 40 or 50 by rank of Mtb polynucleotides.

Using the custom 5 and 3 oligonucleotide primers TAP primary fragment may be amplified by methods well known in the art. The term TAP primary fragment refers to an amplified Mtb polynucleotide and in one embodiment relates to a polynucleotide sequence that has been amplified but is not transcriptionally active. Generation of TAP primary fragments involves performing PCR which generates a polynucleotide fragment that contains the Mtb polynucleotide sequence with 5 and 3 TAP universal end sequences and may contain other sequences incorporated into the custom 5 and 3 oligonucleotide primers. The 5 and 3 TAP universal end sequences are particularly useful for incorporating one or more nucleotide sequences into TAP primary fragment that confer transcriptional activity. In one embodiment these sequences can include TAP Express promoter and terminator fragments e.g. SEQ ID NOS 2 7 . The skilled artisan will be familiar with methods for amplifying polynucleotides e.g. by using PCR and can adjust the above methods in order to optimize the amplification reaction.

An additional step in the generation of TAP fragments involves incorporating at least one polynucleotide sequence that confers transcriptional activity into the TAP primary fragment. Typically at least one polynucleotide sequence is incorporated by performing a second PCR reaction. Examples of polynucleotide sequences that confer transcriptional activity are promoter sequences e.g. prokaryotic Pribnow boxes and eukaryotic TATA box sequences binding sites for transcription factors and enhancers. In one embodiment one promoter and one terminator sequence are added to the TAP fragment. These promoter and terminator sequences can be obtained in numerous ways. For example one can use restriction enzyme digestion of commercially available plasmids and cDNA molecules or one can synthesize these sequences with an automated DNA synthesizer by methods well known in the art.

The end product of the second PCR reaction is referred to as a TAP expression fragment which is a transcriptionally active polynucleotide and which is generally a transcriptionally active coding sequence. In certain embodiments the TAP expression fragments are used directly for in vivo or in vitro e.g. cell free expression. In other embodiments TAP expression fragments are transfected into cultured cells or injected into animals.

Generating TAP fragments is a rapid and efficient way of making a large number of polynucleotide sequences transcriptionally active. Accordingly a plurality of different genes from Mtb can be made transcriptionally active using TAP technology. Thus a library representing all substantially all or a selected subset of the coding sequences in the Mtb genome can be constructed using TAP technology.

As described above TAP technology provides powerful methods for amplifying and expressing Mtb polynucleotides. Coding sequences can be rendered transcriptionally active by the PCR mediated addition of promoter sequences enhancers terminators and other regulatory sequences.

In addition Mtb polynucleotides can be amplified with additional coding or non coding sequences that can facilitate rapid screening characterization purification and study of the polypeptides that they encode. These additional sequences include for example reporter genes affinity tags antibody tags PNA binding sites secretory signals and the like.

According to the present invention Mtb polynucleotides can be synthesized with an epitope tag. An epitope tag is a short stretch of polynucleotide sequence encoding an epitope. In one embodiment this epitope is preferably recognized by a well characterized antibody. By incorporating an epitope tag into TAP fragments the Mtb polynucleotide of interested can be fused in frame to an epitope encoding sequence. Expression of an epitope tagged TAP fragment produces a fusion protein comprising a tagged Mtb polypeptide. Suitable epitope tags will be well known to those skilled in the art including the hemagglutinin HA the 6 His epitope tag and the Flag epitope tag. The HA epitope tag is well characterized and highly immunoreactive. Upon transfection of an HA tagged TAP fragment into cells the resulting HA tagged polypeptides can be identified with commercially available anti HA antibodies. Epitope tagging of TAP fragments is useful for rapidly and conveniently detecting expression of TAP fragments. Epitope tagging of TAP fragments can also help determine the intracellular distribution of Mtb polypeptides and help characterize and purify the Mtb polypeptide. Furthermore epitope tagged expression products can be quickly captured and or purified using antibodies specific for the specific epitope. Antibodies directed against the HA epitope can used in the full range of immunological techniques for detection and analysis of tagged polypeptides including but not limited to Western blotting ELISAs radioimmune assays immunoprecipitation immunocytochemistry and imnuunofluorescence fluorescence assisted cell sorting FACS and immunoaffinity purification of the desired fusion polypeptides.

The present invention also provides Mtb polypeptides fused to affinity tags. For example a polynucleotide sequence encoding a histidine tag can be incorporated into the TAP fragment to enable the expressed gene product to be conveniently purified. These His tags consist of six consecutive histidine residues 6 His and are a powerful tool for recombinant polypeptide purification. The 6 His tag interacts with metals such as nickel. Thus polypeptides fused to a 6 His tag can be purified by metal affinity chromatography for example using a nickel nitrilotriacetic Ni NTA resin. The 6 His tag is much smaller than most other affinity tags and is uncharged at physiological pH. It rarely alters or contributes to polypeptide immunogenicity rarely interferes with polypeptide structure or function does not interfere with secretion does not require removal by protease cleavage and is compatible with denaturing buffer systems. Accordingly this tag is a powerful adjunct to expression and purification of recombinant proteins.

In one aspect of this embodiment TAP primers can be designed to include the nucleotide sequence encoding the 6 His epitope tag to add the 6 His epitope to the 5 end of a Mtb polynucleotide a sequence encoding histidine residues can be included along with the promoter containing primer to add the 6 His epitope to the 3 end the His sequence can be included in the terminator containing primer.

Commercially available nickel affinity resins can be used to purify 6 His tagged polypeptides. For example the well established QIAexpress Protein Expression and Purification Systems are based on the remarkable selectivity and affinity of patented nickel nitrilotriacetic acid Ni NTA metal affinity chromatography matrices for polypeptides tagged with 6 consecutive histidine residues 6 His tag available from QIAGEN Seattle Wash. . The QLAexpress System is based on the remarkable selectivity of Ni NTA nickel nitrilotriacetic acid for polypeptides with an affinity tag of six consecutive histidine residues the 6 His tag. This technology allows purification detection and assay of almost any 6 His tagged polypeptide from any expression system. Polypeptides with a 6 His tag can be purified through nickel nitrilotriacetic Ni NTA resin.

The HA and the 6 His epitope embodiments are not to be construed as limiting and are provided for illustrative purposes only. Those skilled in the art will appreciate that any type of tag can be attached to the expressed products such as for example a 7 8 9 or 10 histidine tag GST tag fluorescent protein tag and the like.

In addition to providing a convenient means for detection and purification of Mtb polypeptides various tags can provide a linker through which the polypeptides of the invention can be immobilized on a solid support. The term linker molecule as used herein encompasses any molecule that is capable of immobilizing the polypeptides to a solid support.

For many gene therapy and DNA vaccine applications it may be beneficial for the gene product to be secreted from the transfected cells. Thus one embodiment of the invention provides a version of the TAP system designed to express Mtb polypeptides containing a fused a secretory signal. A commonly used signal peptide is the first 23 amino acids from human tissue plasminogen activator tPA with the coding sequence as follows ATG GAT GCA ATG AAG AGA GGG CTC TGC TGT GTG CTG CTG CTG TGT GGA GCA GTC TTC GTT TCG CCC AGC. SEQ ID NO 1 This sequence can be built into the TAP promoter fragment to create a new TAP fragment in a fashion similar to the construction of the tagged polypeptides described above.

Once the function or immunogenicity of an Mtb polypeptide is identified it may be of desirable to clone the TAP fragment into a plasmid or other vector to facilitate further gene characterization and manipulation.

Standard cloning techniques can involve the use of restriction enzymes to digest the plasmid and the gene fragment to be inserted. Annealing and ligation of the compatible ends can lead to insertion of the gene into the vector. An alternative method of restriction ends directed cloning is to prepare a linearized plasmid with T overhangs on the 3 ends of the double stranded DNA to accommodate DNA fragments amplified with the aid of specific polymerases through PCR. This method is sometimes called T A cloning . Other methods of cloning TAP fragments will be well known to those of skill in the art.

In certain embodiments the TAP Cloning systems methods and kits can further simplify the cloning process by taking advantage of the universal 5 and 3 sequences that are present on the TAP Express fragment after the first or second PCR step. These regions overlap with the end sequences of our linearized TAP Express Cloning Vector. When the TAP fragment and the linearized plasmid are mixed together and directly electroporated into TAP Express Electro Comp cells endogenous bacterial recombinase activity recombines the two DNA fragments resulting in a plasmid with the inserted TAP Express fragment. This process can replace conventional cloning with two simple PCR steps. In some embodiments it does not require cutting pasting and ligating DNA fragments. In addition this process can be highly suited for fast and convenient cloning of TAP PCR fragments without having to resort to restriction enzymes DNA ligase Topo isomerase or other DNA modifying enzymes. TAP systems vectors and cells are readily available from Gene Therapy Systems Inc. San Diego Calif.

GeneGrip PNA compatible TAP system can also be used to couple polypeptides onto DNA through PNA Dependent Gene Chemistry thereby avoiding many of the limitations of previously described methodologies. GeneGrip is available through Gene Therapy Systems Inc. San Diego Calif. This approach takes advantage of the property of peptide nucleic acids PNA to hybridize with duplex DNA in a sequence specific and very high affinity manner. PNA binding sites can be used for attaching a series of peptides onto DNA in order to target the transfected plasmid and improve transgene expression for example. This can facilitate a rational approach to improve the efficiency and efficacy of gene delivery by adding elements intended to increase nuclear uptake facilitate endosomal escape or target gene delivery to the cell surface or to intracellular receptors.

Incorporating a GeneGrip site into TAP enables peptide nucleic acids PNAs to be hybridized to the TAP gene product. Ligands can then be attached to the PNA in order to improve the bioavailability and DNA vaccine potency of the gene.

In another embodiment of the invention a system can be used to perform every step involved in generating TAP fragments from a Tb and in particular the Mtb genome. Additionally each individual step is capable of being controlled by a system. For example a system can design customized PCR primers obtain said primers perform PCR reactions utilizing TAP technology attach promoters and terminators and attach sequences that encode linker molecules to the primary or expression fragment. The system can be either automated or non automated. In one embodiment of the invention the system comprises a computer program linked to robotic technologies for rapid and high throughput gene amplification of the genome.

TAP fragments can be used directly as templates in various expression systems in order to obtain the corresponding polypeptide for each coding sequence in the Mtb genome. The invention provides simple efficient methods for generating TAP fragments from Mtb that can be readily transfected into animal cells or tissues by any nucleic acid transfection technique. The methods of the invention can avoid the need for subcloning into expression vectors and for purification of plasmid DNA from bacteria. As skilled artisans can appreciate TAP fragments can be rapidly expressed using in vivo or in vitro e.g. cell free expression systems. For example the amplified TAP fragments can be directly transfected into a eukaryotic or prokaryotic cell for expression. Examples of eukaryotic cells that can be used for expression include mammalian insect e.g. Baculovirus expression systems yeast e.g. and the like. An example of a prokaryotic cell expression system includes

Alternatively expression can be accomplished in cell free systems for example a T7 transcription and translation system. Cell free translation systems can include extracts from rabbit reticulocytes wheat germ and . These systems can be prepared as crude extracts containing the macromolecular components 30S 70S or 80S ribosomes tRNAs aminoacyl tRNA synthetases initiation elongation and termination factors etc. required for translation of exogenous RNA. To promote efficient translation each extract can be supplemented with amino acids energy sources ATP GTP energy regenerating systems creatine phosphate and creatine phosphokinase for eukaryotic systems and phosphoenol pyruvate and pyruvate kinase for the lysate and other co factors Mg K etc. .

The use of TAP technology allows skilled artisans to rapidly express polypeptides from a plurality of polynucleotides. After a particular Mtb polynucleotide of interest is rendered transcriptionally active other Mtb polynucleotides can also be made to be transcriptionally active according to the methods of the invention. Accordingly in one embodiment of the invention a plurality of polynucleotides from Mtb are amplified and expressed in order to generate a library or array of Mtb polypeptides.

Other embodiments of the invention relate to expressing the product of a Mtb polynucleotide that encodes an epitope tag affinity tag or other tags and which may function as linkers. A polynucleotide sequence encoding a linker molecule can be incorporated into a TAP primary fragment or a TAP expression fragment. Accordingly the linker molecule can be expressed as a fusion to the Mtb polypeptide.

The generation of Mtb polypeptide libraries according to the methods of the invention allows skilled artisans to easily use them in subsequent research and study. For example it is possible to organize the expressed Mtb polypeptides into an array for further analysis. The expressed polypeptide arrays can be screened in order to identify for example new vaccine and drug targets against microbial neoplastic disease and the like. The expressed polypeptides can be used to screen antibody libraries to develop unique research reagents for functional proteomic studies and the like. These steps can be rapidly accomplished at rates far exceeding traditional methods.

In addition to amplifying Mtb polynucleotides of interest using TAP technology the present invention also encompasses amplifying Mtb polynucleotides using adapter technology . In some embodiments adapter technology is performed using a one step PCR reaction. The term adapter technology as used herein relates to methods of cloning a desired polynucleotide into a vector by flanking a desired nucleic acid sequence a Mtb TAP fragment for example with first and second adapter sequences. The resulting fragment can be contacted with the vector having sequences homologous to the first and second adapter sequences under conditions such that the nucleic acid fragment is incorporated into the vector by homologous recombination in vivo in a host cell. Accordingly adapter technology allows for fast and enzyme less cloning of nucleic acid fragments into vectors and can also be used for forced cloning selection for successful transformation. Adapter technology is described in more detail in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 836 436 entitled Fast and Enzymeless Cloning of Nucleic Acid Fragments U.S. Pat. No. 6 936 470 entitled Rapid and Enzymeless Cloning of Nucleic Acid Fragments and PCT Application No. PCTUS 02 12334 all of which are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety.

The nucleic acid fragment can be incorporated into any vector using adaptor technology. In certain embodiments the vector that the fragment is incorporated into can be for example a plasmid a cosmid a bacterial artificial chromosome BAC and the like. The plasmid can be CoE1 PR100 R2 pACYC and the like. The vector can also include a functional selection marker. The functional selection marker can be for example a resistance gene for kanamycin ampicillin blasticidin carbonicillin tetracycline chloramphenicol and the like. The vector further can include a dysfunctional selection marker that lacks a critical element and wherein the critical element is supplied by said nucleic acid fragment upon successful homologous recombination. The dysfunctional selection marker can be for example kanamycin resistance gene ampicillin resistance gene blasticidin resistance gene carbonicillin resistance gene tetracycline resistance gene chloramphenicol resistance gene and the like. Further the dysfunctional selection marker can be for example a reporter gene such as the lacZ gene and the like.

The vector can include a negative selection element detrimental to host cell growth. The negative selection element can be disabled by said nucleic acid fragment upon successful homologous recombination. The negative selection element can be inducible. The negative selection element can be for example a mouse GATA 1 gene. The vector can include a dysfunctional selection marker and a negative selection element.

The host cell used in adapter technology can be a bacterium. The bacterium can be capable of in vivo recombination. Examples of bacterium include JC8679 TB1 DH DH5 HB101 JM101 JM109 LE392 and the like. The plasmid can be maintained in the host cell under the selection condition selecting for the functional selection marker.

The first and second adapters can be any length sufficient to bind to the homologous sequences of the vector such that the desired nucleic acid sequence is incorporated into the vector. The first and second adapter sequences can be for example at least 11 bp 12 bp 13 bp 14 bp 15 bp 16 bp 17 bp 18 bp 19 bp 20 bp 21 bp 22 bp 23 bp 24 bp 25 bp 26 bp 27bp 28 bp 29 bp 30bp 31 bp 32 bp 33 bp 34bp 35 bp 36bp 37 bp 38 bp 40 bp 50 bp 60 bp and the like. Furthermore the first and second adapter sequences can be greater than 60 bp.

The first and second adapter sequences further can include a functional element. The functional element can include a promoter a terminator a nucleic acid fragment encoding a selection marker gene a nucleic acid encoding a linker molecule a nucleic acid fragment encoding a known protein a fusion tag a nucleic acid fragment encoding a portion of a selection marker gene a nucleic acid fragment encoding a growth promoting protein a nucleic acid fragment encoding a transcription factor a nucleic acid fragment encoding an autofluorescent protein e.g. GFP and the like.

When the common sequences on both the 5 and 3 ends of the nucleic acid fragment are complimentary with terminal sequences in a linearized empty vector and the fragment and linearized vector are introduced by electroporation for example together into a host cell they recombine resulting in a new expression vector with the fragment directionally inserted. In alternative embodiments the host cell can include the linearized empty vector so that only the nucleic acid fragment is introduced into the host cell. It should be noted that in alternative embodiments of the present invention the vector can be circularized and as used herein a vector can be either linearized or circular. The host cell is converted into an expression vector through homologous recombination. In principle this approach can be applied generally as an alternative to conventional cloning methods.

A nucleic acid fragment having first and second adapter sequences can be generated by methods well known to those of skill in the art. For example a gene of interest with known 5 and 3 sequences undergoes PCR along with overlapping 5 and 3 priming oligonucleotides. The priming oligonucleotides can be obtained by methods known in the art including manufacture by commercial suppliers. A primary fragment with adapter sequences can be generated. The adapter sequences flanking the gene of interest can be homologous to sequences on a vector or to sequences from other 5 or 3 fragments to be used in a subsequent PCR.

In some embodiments of the invention a particular polynucleotide of interest from can be amplified with an adapter sequence on both the 3 and 5 ends. In other embodiments adapters can be attached to a plurality of polynucleotides for example every coding region in the Mtb genome. In certain embodiments adapters can make the desired coding regions transcriptionally active. Once incorporated into the desired vector the Mtb coding region can be rapidly replicated and expressed such that a plurality of Mtb s genes for example every gene is expressed.

Pluralities of expression products can be stored in libraries or arrays and can be assayed for their immunogenic properties as will be discussed below. While most embodiments relating to the assay methodologies are discussed in terms of TAP technology all of the following assays can be used on adapter technology expression products as well. Once the appropriate assays are conducted on the adapter technology expression products methods of developing vaccines can be utilized. While most of the embodiments relating to developing vaccines discussed below pertain to TAP technology all of the vaccine embodiments can also be used with polypeptide libraries and arrays resulting from adapter technology.

Libraries and arrays of polypeptides prepared through TAP or adapter technology with subsequent expression can be useful in the development of polypeptide or nucleic acid subunit vaccines. DNA vaccines are effective vaccines that are inexpensive to manufacture easy and safe to deliver and can be widely distributed. It has been found that plasmid DNA when injected into mice without being associated with any adjuvant can generate antibody and CTL responses to viral antigens encoded by the plasmid DNA and elicit protective immunity against viral infection Ulmer at al. 259 1745 1993 . Starting from this there have been reported many research results regarding the induction of humoral and cellular immune responses resulting from the introduction of DNA vaccines containing various viral genes in animal models Chow et al. 71 169 1997 McClements et al. 93 11414 1996 Xiang et al. 199 132 1994 Wang et al. 211 102 1995 Lee etal. 17 473 1999 Lee etal. 72 8430 1998 . As well DNA delivery by electroporation techniques has been well described Heller et al. 2 2 1 14 2005 

One of the most difficult tasks in developing a DNA vaccine or any recombinant subunit vaccine to a pathogen such as Mtb is the identification of antigens that can stimulate the most effective immune response against the pathogen particularly when the genome of the organism is large.

A comprehensive means to accomplish this task which is embodied by the present invention is to obtain a plurality of polypeptides from the particular pathogen in the mode of a library or array. These polypeptides can be tested to determine their capability to evoke a humoral and or a cell mediated immune response. Polypeptides that evoke immunogenic responses can be tested individually or with other antigens for effectiveness as subunit vaccines. In addition nucleic acids that encode identified antigenic polypeptides can be used alone or with other nucleic acids that encode antigens to develop a recombinant vaccine such as a DNA vaccine for the particular pathogen.

One embodiment of the invention incorporates a Rapid High Throughput Vaccine Antigen Scanning approach using TAP Express that is able to systematically screen and identify all substantially all or a subset of the antigens in Mtb that give rise to a humoral and cell mediated immune response. The identification of the Mtb antigens allows for the development of a highly specific subunit vaccine

In certain methods of developing a Mtb vaccine a plurality of Mtb polynucleotides can be made transcriptionally active. In one embodiment all of the open reading frames from genome can be made transcriptionally active using TAP technology. The present invention thus provides Mtb polynucleotides SEQ ID NOS 46 64 110 121 that have been made transcriptionally active.

The resulting Mtb TAP fragments of the present invention can be purified and expressed in vitro or in vivo according to any method known in the art. The expression products which encompass SEQ ID NOS 65 83 122 133 can be assayed by various methods to determine their ability to evoke a humoral and or a cell mediated immunogenic response. Polypeptides that are identified as capable of evoking an immune response can be used as candidates to develop polynucleotide or polypeptide subunit vaccines. The complete method will be described in more detail below.

According to one embodiment of the present invention TAP fragments from Mtb are used to generate a DNA array and then if desired a protein array. In certain embodiments primers are designed for every gene in the Mtb genome. In another embodiment designing the primers allows a skilled artisan to make any given Mtb polynucleotide transcriptionally active using TAP technology. In yet another embodiment coding regions ORFs and other polynucleotide sequences of interest are ranked according to and the top Mtb polynucleotides are made transcriptionally active using TAP technology.

As mentioned above the custom PCR primers can be designed by using an automated system such as a computerized robotics system. For example in order to design custom primers for use in the TAP process a robotic workstation can be interfaced with a dual Pentium III CPU 1.4 GHz computer running the Linux operating system. In addition a customized MySQL database can manage the input sequence data from GenBank and from other sources. This database can track all the operations samples and analytical data generated by the robot. In another embodiment PCR primers PCR products and polypeptides can be tracked by the database. For example PCR primers PCR products and polypeptides can be tracked by using bar coded 96 well plates. While the embodiments below discuss using 96 well plates in certain embodiments those skilled in the art can appreciate that any sized well plate can be used. For example the well plates can consist of about 48 about 96 about 144 about 192 about 240 about 288 about 336 about 384 about 432 about 480 about 576 about 672 about 768 about 864 about 960 about 1056 about 1152 about 1248 about 1344 about 1440 about 1536 or more wells. In addition to well plates the PCR products and polypeptides can be tracked using any suitable receptacles for example test tubes.

Custom oligonucleotide pairs of the present invention SEQ ID NOS 8 and 9 10 and 11 12 and 13 14 and 15 16 and 17 18 and 19 20 and 21 22 and 23 24 and 25 26 and 27 28 and 29 30 and 31 32 and 33 34 and 35 36 and 37 38 and 39 40 and 41 42 and 43 44 and 45 86 and 87 88 and 89 90 and 91 92 and 93 94 and 95 96 and 97 98 and 99 100 and 101 102 and 103 104 and 105 106 and 107 108 and 109 which are needed for the TAP PCR reactions can be synthesized or obtained in order to perform the TAP technology. In certain embodiments the Mtb genome sequence data and primer design software e.g. Primer 3 can be used by the system to generate custom primer pairs for all substantially all or a subset of the genes in the Mtb genome. The primers can be organized into arrays of about 48 about 96 about 144 about 192 about 240 about 288 about 336 about 384 about 432 about 480 about 576 about 672 about 768 about 864 about 960 about 1056 about 1152 about 1248 about 1344 about 1440 or about 1536 5 primers and 3 primers according to polynucleotide size and GC content such PCR reaction conditions can be optimized on a plate by plate basis. The present invention further contemplates that sequences for each of the custom Mtb primer pairs can be sent to an oligonucleotide synthesis provider e.g. MWG Biotech Inc. High Point N.C. where they can be synthesized. Synthesized primers can be organized and dispensed into bar coded plates at a desired concentration such as 100 pmole l frozen and shipped to the practitioner. In one embodiment 600 Mtb specific PCR primers which are capable of amplifying 300 Mtb coding sequences are designed generated ordered and organized.

After obtaining or generating the custom Mtb PCR primers the Mtb polynucleotides of interest can be amplified. In one embodiment the primers can be organized into arrays of 96 5 primers and 96 3 primers according to polynucleotide size and placed onto a robotic workstation. The robot can be programmed to generate a plate of about 48 about 96 about 144 about 192 about 240 about 288 about 336 about 384 about 432 about 480 about 576 about 672 about 768 about 864 about 960 about 1056 about 1152 about 1248 about 1344 about 1440 about 1536 PCR reactions by mixing the appropriate 5 and 3 primers with Taq polymerase and Mtb genomic DNA. In addition to Taq any thermally stable polymerase can be used in the PCR reactions. For example Vent Pfu Tfl Tth and Tgo polymerases can be used. The robotic workstation can transfer the PCR reaction plate containing the mixed reagents to a PCR machine for amplification. In one embodiment the robotic workstation can use a robotic arm to transfer the PCR reaction plate to the PCR machine.

The first TAP PCR procedure can be run for any number of cycles. In one embodiment the PCR machine is run for about 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 or more cycles. The first TAP PCR reactions can be transferred robotically to a Millipore Montage 96 well cleanup kit for example when desired. Any method kit or system can however be used to purify the PCR products from these reactions. According to one embodiment a vacuum station of the robotic platform can carry out the purification step. In some embodiments an aliquot of the resulting product can be transferred robotically to an analysis plate containing the Pico Green fluorescent probe Molecular Probes Eugene Oreg. that reacts only with the dsDNA products. Depending on the number of wells the plate can be transferred to an about 48 about 96 about 144 about 192 about 240 about 288 about 336 about 384 about 432 about 480 about 576 about 672 about 768 about 864 about 960 about 1056 about 1152 about 1248 about 1344 about 1440 about 1536 or more well fluorescent plate reader. The fluorescent signal can be compared to a standard curve to determine the amount of double stranded PCR product generated in this first PCR step. Persons with skill in the art can adjust the above methods in order to optimize their particular PCR reaction should the need arise.

In addition to the first TAP PCR procedure a second TAP PCR reaction can be performed to add at least one sequence that confers transcriptional activity to the primary TAP primary fragment. In one embodiment a robot can be programmed to transfer an aliquot of each TAP primary fragment from the first TAP PCR reaction into a PCR reaction containing a promoter and a terminator containing primers. In a particular embodiment the promoter can be a T7 his tag promoter sequence and the terminator can be a T7 His tag terminator sequence. Those with skill in the art can appreciate that any promoter or terminator sequence can be added to the primary transcript. In addition any polynucleotide sequence that encodes a tag or linker allowing the expressed polypeptide to be detected or purified is also contemplated.

Like the first TAP PCR reaction the second TAP PCR reaction can be run for any desired number of cycles. In one embodiment the second TAP PCR reaction is run for about 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 cycles or more. Furthermore any type of thermally stable polymerase can be used for the second TAP PCR reaction. In a particular embodiment the polymerase can be Taq. In some embodiments Vent Pfu Tfl Tth and Tgo polymerases can be used. The resulting TAP Express PCR fragments from the second PCR reaction can be cleaned by any kit method or system. A particular kit that can be used to clean the resulting TAP fragments is a Millipore Montage 96 well cleanup kit. Additionally as discussed above the level of PCR product recovered can be determined using any detection agent for example Pico Green.

The resulting TAP fragments can be expressed by using any method of gene expression. In one embodiment the TAP fragments can be expressed using in vivo or in vitro e.g. cell free systems. For example the fragments can be directly transfected into any eukaryotic or prokaryotic cell for expression. Examples of eukaryotic cells that can be used for expression include mammalian insect yeast and the like. An example of a prokaryotic cell expression system includes . The TAP fragments can also be expressed by a cell free system. According to one embodiment of the invention the resulting TAP fragments can be expressed in a high throughput cell free expression machine such as for example the Roche RTS Rapid Translation System 100. In a further embodiment the TAP fragments can be incubated in Roche RTS 100 system at 30 C. for 5 hours. A person with skill in the art can readily appreciate the utility in following the particular cell free translation machine s instructions. If a T7 histadine promoter or terminator fragment is added to a primary transcript translation of the TAP fragment can result in histidine tagged polypeptides which can be purified as discussed below. As discussed herein any tag can be used.

The expressed Mtb polypeptides can be purified using any purification method for purifying expressed polypeptides. In one embodiment histidine tagged polypeptides can be purified with Qiagen nickel columns such as Ni NTA Superflow 96 Biorobot Kit. A person with skill in the art can readily appreciate the utility in following the instructions of the particular polypeptide purification system. Other methods that can be used to purify polypeptides include ultrafiltration extraction and chromatography.

The identity quantity and purity of the purified Mtb polypeptides can be verified by SDS gel electrophoresis. According to one embodiment of the invention MALDI TOF MS Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry can be employed to confirm the fidelity of the purified polypeptides. According to this embodiment aliquots of each polypeptide 1 2 g can be aliquoted into about 48 about 96 about 144 about 192 about 240 about 288 about 336 about 384 about 432 about 480 about 576 about 672 about 768 about 864 about 960 about 1056 about 1152 about 1248 about 1344 about 1440 about 1536 or more well plates and digested with modified trypsin. The resulting material can be mixed with matrix alpha cyano 4 hydroxycinnamic acid CHCA and spotted onto any target plate with a suitable number of spots for example 48 about 96 about 144 about 192 about 240 about 288 about 336 about 384 about 432 about 480 about 576 about 672 about 768 about 864 about 960 about 1056 about 1152 about 1248 about 1344 about 1440 about 1536 or more spots. In one embodiment a 384 spot anchor chip target plate Bruker Daltonics Billerica Mass. can be used. The plate can be transferred to the sample stage of a Bruker Autoflex MALDI TOF mass spectrometer. The spectrometer can be set up to automatically scan the plate and search the Mascot polypeptide database via the Internet. Accordingly a very rapid verification system can verify purity identity and quantity in less than a day for example depending on the amount of polypeptides. Purified polypeptides can be placed in libraries or organized into arrays for subsequent testing and analysis.

Use of the Mtb polypeptide libraries and arrays prepared for example according the methods above e.g. using TAP or adapter technology can be used to identify antigenic targets of humoral immunity in Mtb non human animals and human patients. A humoral immune response relates to the generation of antibodies and their ability to bind to a particular antigen. In general the humoral immune system uses white blood cells B cells which have the ability to recognize antigens to generate antibodies that are capable of binding to the antigens.

In one embodiment the Mtb polypeptides of the invention are generated according to the methods described above. In certain aspects of this embodiment additional polynucleotide sequences that encode linker molecules are added to the TAP primary fragment or the TAP expression fragment such that the expressed Mtb polypeptides are fused to a linker molecule. As discussed previously the term linker molecule encompasses molecules that are capable of immobilizing the polypeptides to a solid support.

In a particular embodiment a Mtb polynucleotide of interest is fused to a HA epitope tag such that the expressed product can include the Mtb gene product fused to the HA epitope. In another embodiment a Mtb polynucleotide of interest is combined with a histidine His coding sequence such that the expressed product can include the Mtb gene product and a 6 7 8 9 or 10 histidine tag. In other embodiments a Mtb polynucleotide is combined with a sequence that codes for a GST tag fluorescent protein tag or Flag tag. Using these methods it is possible to express and tag every Mtb polypeptide encoded by its genome. In another embodiment the tagged Mtb polypeptide can be attached to a solid support such as a 96 well plate. The immobilize polypeptides can be contacted with an antiserum or other fluid containing antibodies from an animal that has been immunized with one or more antigens from Mtb . In one embodiment ELISA and Western blot assays are performed in parallel to detect the presence of immunogenic Mtb polypeptides.

As an example of an ELISA assay tagged Mtb polypeptides can be immobilized on a solid support such as a 96 well plate. The immobilized Mtb polypeptides are then incubated with serum from an animal that has been immunized with one or more antigens from Mtb or has been infected directly with Mtb by inoculation aerosol delivery or the like. The reaction mixture can be washed to remove any unbound serum antibodies. The ability of the serum antibodies to bind to the bound Mtb polypeptides can then be detected using any one of a number of methods. For example enzyme linked secondary antibodies can be added to detect the presence of an antigen specific antibody. Any enzyme linked secondary antibody can be used in this invention depending on the source of the serum. For example if vaccinated mouse serum is used to provide the primary antibody enzyme linked anti mouse antibody can be used as a secondary antibody. Likewise if human serum is used to provide the primary antibody enzyme linked anti human serum can be used as a secondary enzyme.

Any suitable assay can be used to determine the amount of bound polypeptide specific antibody. Also skilled artisans can develop the enzyme assay to determine the amount of polypeptide specific antibody that is bound. In one embodiment the readout from an assay can show the presence of different levels of antibody in each of the 96 wells. For example while some Mtb polypeptides are not able to elicit any serum antibodies other Mtb polypeptides can elicit intermediate levels of antibodies and some can elicit high antibody levels. In one embodiment polypeptides that generate high antibody titers can be further researched to determine which polypeptides are present on the surface of the virus. In a particular embodiment of the invention Mtb polypeptides that generate high antibody titers and that are located on the surface of the virus are candidates for use in the development of a subunit Mtb vaccine.

In addition serodiagnostic tests may be developed using antigens identified and characterized by these methods. That is the peptide epitopes identified herein find use in detecting antibodies in serum from Mtb infected or exposed organisms animals or patients.

In one aspect of the present invention highly immunogenic Mtb antigens are detected by comparing the results of Western blotting analysis with ELISA. Western blotting and ELISA are two independent yet complementary methods that may be used to detect immunogenic Mtb in qualitative and quantitative ways. Western blotting is often used to examine the quality of a polypeptide or protein sample including such parameters as purity protein integrity and degradation. Western blotting detects polypeptides in their denatured form. In one aspect of this embodiment ELISA which detects native polypeptides is used to further examine Western positive Mtb polypeptides in a more quantitative fashion to illustrate the strength of the Mtb epitope s immunogenicity.

Use of the TAP expressed Mtb polypeptide libraries and arrays prepared according the methods above e.g. using TAP or adapter technology can also be exploited to identify the highly immunogenic targets of cell mediated immunity in Mtb vaccinated non human animals. In contrast to a humoral immune response where an antibody binds directly binding to an antigen a cell mediated immune response relates to T cells binding to the surface of other cells that display the antigen. When certain T cells come into contact with a presented antigen they produce and release cytokines such as interferon IFN or Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha TNF . Cytokines are cellular signals that can alter the behavior or properties of another cell. For example cytokines may inhibit viral replication induce increased expression of MHC class I and peptide transporter molecules in infected cells or activate macrophages. Accordingly cytokines released by T cells associated with the binding to an antigen can be used to identify and detect T cell antigen interactions.

Some cells have MHC molecules on their membranes to present antigens to T cells. Efficient T cell function relies on proper recognition of the MHC antigen complex. There are two types of MHC molecules Class I and Class II. The two different classes of MHC molecules bind peptides from different sources inside the cell for presentation at the cell surface to different classes of T cells. Any T cell can be used in the present invention and include for example both CD4 and CD8 T cells. CD8 cells cytotoxic T cells bind epitopes that are part of class I MHC molecules. CD4 T Cells which includes inflammatory CD4 T cells and helper CD4 T cells bind epitopes that are part of class II MHC molecules. Only specialized antigen presenting cells express class II molecules.

There are three main types of antigen presenting cells B cells macrophages and dendritic cells. Each of these cell types is specialized to process and present antigens from different sources to T cells and two of them the macrophages and the B cells are also the targets of subsequent actions of armed effector T cells. These three cell types can express the specialized co stimulatory molecules that enable them to activate na ve T cells although macrophages and B cells express those molecules only when suitably activated by infection.

Embodiments of the present invention relate to detecting Mtb polypeptides capable of evoking a cell mediated immune response in order to identify potential candidates for use in a subunit vaccine or other pharmaceutical composition. According to one method of detecting a cell mediated immune response an Mtb polypeptide is delivered to an antigen presenting cell where it can be presented in a manner that is recognized by antigen specific T cells. In another embodiment of the invention a transcriptionally active gene can be delivered to an antigen presenting cell where expressed and presented in a manner that can be recognized by antigen specific T cells. Mtb antigen specific T cells can be acquired from numerous sources. For example animals that have been infected or immunized with one or more antigens from Mtb virus are a good source of antigen specific T cells. Alternatively human Mtb patients and volunteers immunized with Mtb can be a source of antigen specific T cells.

In order to test the ability of Mtb polypeptides to elicit a cell mediated response a plurality of Mtb polynucleotides can be amplified and made transcriptionally active using TAP technology. In one embodiment about 10 about 20 about 30 about 40 about 50 about 60 about 70 about 80 about 90 about 100 about 110 about 120 about 130 about 140 about 150 about 160 about 170 about 180 about 190 about 200 about 210 about 220 about 230 about 240 about 250 about 260 about 266 Mtb polynucleotides are made transcriptionally active using TAP technology.

In one embodiment transcriptionally active Mtb polynucleotides can be transfected into an antigen presenting cell and expressed within the cell. In another embodiment instead of transfecting the genes into an antigen presenting cell the Mtb TAP fragments can be expressed in an in vivo or in vitro cell free expression system and the expressed polypeptide can be delivered into the antigen presenting cell. The polypeptide can be delivered into the antigen presenting cell according to any method. In one embodiment the polypeptide can be delivered using the technology described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 738046 entitled Intracellular Protein Delivery Reagent and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 141535 entitled Intracellular Protein Delivery Compositions and Methods of Use both of which are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety. The reagents described therein are capable of delivering any type of polypeptide into any type of cell. Furthermore the results of demonstrate that dendritic cells can present antigens to T cells supplied from an immunized host after antigenic polypeptides were delivered to the dendritic cells with reagents from the above mentioned applications.

In certain embodiments of the invention reagents used to deliver polypeptides into cultured cells can be a cationic lipid formulation. In one embodiment these reagents can deliver fluorescently labeled antibodies high and low molecular weight dextrans phycoerythrin BSA caspase 3 caspase 8 granzyme B and galactosidase into the cytoplasm of a variety of different adherent and suspension cells. Caspases delivered to cells with are functional since they can be shown to send cells into apoptosis. In one embodiment polypeptides are delivered into dendritic cells using these reagents.

Detecting a T cell s ability to bind to an antigen presenting cell after the antigen presenting cell has processed a particular polypeptide is useful in determining whether the particular polypeptide evokes a cell mediated immune response. Once a particular polypeptide is delivered into or expressed in the antigen presenting cell an assay can be performed to identify T cell interaction with the MHC antigen complex. In one embodiment it can be determined if T cells obtained from an animal that was immunized with Mtb can bind to a particular antigen presented by an antigen presenting cell. For example an ELIspot assay Enzyme Linked Immuno spotting ELIspot can be performed to identify antigen specific T cells. Similar immunoassays can be performed to identify Mtb antigens presented by an antigen presenting cells that stimulate T cells from active Mtb patients or immunized individuals.

One method of detecting a T cell antigen interaction is to measure the amount of a particular cytokine released by the T cell when it interacts with a MHC antigen complex. The skilled artisan can appreciate that other cellular signals can be used to indicate a cell mediated immune response. In one embodiment the levels of IFN released by T cells can indicate whether a particular peptide is capable of evoking a cell mediated immune response. In a particular embodiment an antibody specific for IFN can be coated onto a solid support. Unbound antibodies can be washed away and IFN obtained from the supernatant containing T cells plus antigen presenting cells or antigen transduced antigen presenting cells can be added to the wells. A biotinylated secondary antibody specific for IFN can be added. Excess secondary antibody can be removed and Streptavidin Peroxidase can be added to the mixture. Streptavidin Peroxidase is capable of binding to the biotinylated antibody to complete the four member immunoassay sandwich. Excess or unbound Streptavidin Peroxidase is easily removed from the mixture. In order to detect amount of bound Streptavidin Peroxidase a substrate solution can be added which reacts with the Streptavidin Peroxidase to produce color. The intensity of the colored product is directly proportional to the concentration of IFN present in the T cell antigen presenting cell supernatant. Kits for performing these types of immunoassay are readily available from many commercial suppliers or the necessary reagents composing such kits can be purchased separately or produced in house. In one embodiment processed and presented Mtb polypeptide that evokes T cells to produce a high level of IFN can be considered a strong candidate for use in developing a subunit vaccine.

Those with skill in the art will appreciate that other methods can be used to detect T cell Antigen interactions. These methods include bead based assays flow based assays RT PCR based assays cytokine ELISAs lymphoproliferation assays cytotoxic T cell assays or any other assay that can detect the interaction of a T cell with a responder cell e.g. macrophage .

A particular Mtb polypeptide that has been identified to elicit a humoral or cell mediated immune response can be further explored to determine its ability to be used in a subunit vaccine pharmaceutical composition or immunogenic composition. The terms subunit vaccine DNA vaccine recombinant vaccine and immunogenic composition encompass vaccines that are comprised of polypeptides nucleic acids or a combination of both. Further exploration of a Mtb polypeptide vaccine candidate includes testing the Mtb polypeptide or nucleic acid encoding the Mtb polypeptide in a large number of animal subjects volunteers or patients. In a particular embodiment surface antigens can be studied closely because of the likelihood that they can inhibit virus infectivity. In one embodiment every polypeptide encoded by the Mtb genome is assayed to determine its immunogenic effect. Polypeptides that elicit an immune response whether cell mediated or humoral can be more closely studied to determine potential use alone or in conjunction with other polypeptides and genes as a subunit vaccine pharmaceutical composition or immunogenic composition. Suitable methodologies for electing and detecting an immune response are well established in the art.

As noted previously the present invention provides peptide immunogens and nucleic acids encoding the immunogens. As such the present invention also provides methods of using the immunogens to generate an immune response in a mammalian host.

Methods of generating immune responses in a host are known in the art. However according to the present invention the method includes administering to the host an immunogenic composition. The immunogenic composition includes at least one nucleic acid selected from SEQ ID NO 46 64 and or 110 121. In addition fragments of these sequences can be used. Also it should be noted that combinations of these sequences may be used to generate an immune response against Mtb . When using nucleic acids to generate an immune response the nucleic acids preferably encode peptides found in SEQ ID NO 65 83 and or 122 133. In addition fragments of these sequences can be used. Also combinations of these sequences can be used.

When combinations of the above immunogenic compositions are to be used at least 2 3 4 or 5 or more of the nucleic acids or fragments thereof can be combined to generate an immunogenic composition. Any combination of the nucleic acids finds use in this method.

Also methods of generating an immune response include administering to the host at least one peptide selected from the peptides found in SEQ ID NO 65 83 and or 122 133. In addition fragments of these sequences can be used. Also it should be noted that combinations of these sequences may be used to generate an immune response against Mtb . When combinations of the above immunogenic compositions are to be used at least 2 3 4 or 5 or more of the nucleic acids or fragments thereof can be combined to generate an immunogenic composition. Any combination of screened nucleic acids finds use in this method.

Various nucleic acids and peptides have been identified that generate an immune response. As such the nucleic acids and peptides find use in kits. The kits of the invention are useful for a variety of applications including combining reagents necessary for producing vaccine compositions. Such vaccine compositions include the polypeptides and polynucleotides described herein as well as carriers diluents and other pharmaceutically acceptable carriers. It should be noted as described above that the kits may include fragments of the nucleic acids or peptides described herein as well as combinations of the nucleic acids and or peptides described herein. Preferably the kits include at least 2 3 5 10 15 20 25 30 or more nucleic acids or peptides described herein. Any combination of the nucleic acids or peptides can be used. In addition the kits may include adjuvants. In addition the kits may include instructions for preparing and administering the vaccines.

In addition the kits of the invention find use as diagnostic kits. In particular the kits find use as serodiagnostic kits. As such the kits include at least one peptide as described herein. Preferably however the kits include a plurality of peptides such as at least 2 3 5 10 15 or 20 or more peptides for diagnosis of Mtb infection or exposure of an organism animal or patient.

In some embodiments the nucleic acids encoding the polypeptides find use in diagnostic kits. The nucleic acids encoding the antigenic peptides find use as probes to detect complementary nucleic acids of Mtb . However in an alternative embodiment the kits include the polypeptides produced from the in vitro transcription translation reaction find use in detecting antibodies from an organism animal or patient exposed to Mtb .

A detailed procedure that is used to produce tagged T7 TAP Express fragments is as follows 96 different genes were amplified from a mixture of plasmid templates. A first PCR reaction was run with customized 5 and 3 primers. The 5 primers contained between 43 48 bases. In particular the T 7 His TAP ends contained 28 bases while the gene specific component contained between 15 20 bases. The 3 primers contained between 45 50 bases. Specifically the T7 terminator TAP ends contained 30 bases while the gene specific component contained between 15 20 bases. The reaction temperature and times for the first PCR reaction were 94 C. for 2 minutes followed by 28 cycles of 94 C. for 20 seconds 58 C. for 35 seconds and 70 C. for 2 minutes for genes that contained more than 2 kb 1 minute was added for each kb .

After the first PCR reaction was performed an aliquot of each PCR reaction from the previous step was transferred into a PCR reaction containing the T7 histidine promoter fragment and T7 terminator fragment. The T7 promoter primer contained 25 bases while the T7 promoter His tag fragment contained a 104 base EcoRV BglII fragment. The T7 terminator fragment was a 74 base oligonucleotide. The reaction temperature and times for the second PCR reaction were 94 C. for 2 minutes followed by 30 cycles of 94 C. for 20 seconds 60 C. for 35 seconds and 70 C. for 2 minutes for genes that contained more than 2 kb 1 minute was added for each kb .

The following is a method used to systematically screen and identify antigens in Mtb that give rise to a protective humoral immune response. A bioinformatics approach was used to order the polynucleotide sequences for amplification. The Mtb genome was first analyzed for hydrophobicity by the method of Doolittle. Hydrophilic polynucleotides sequences were then further grouped by size. Hydrophilic open reading frames coding regions longer than 500 bp were selected for TAP amplification. Initially three hundred Mtb genes were synthesized by TAP and 100 proteins were translated and purified in arrays as described below.

The PCR reactions were performed such that a nucleotide sequence encoding a 6 His tag was fused to these amplified transcriptionally active genes. The resulting His tagged TAP fragments were expressed to produce 100 Mtb polypeptides containing the His tag.

A detailed procedure that was used to produce tagged T7 TAP Express fragments is as follows groups of 96 Mtb polynucleotide sequences were amplified from Mtb genomic DNA. A first PCR reaction was performed using customized 5 and 3 primers as shown in Table 1 SEQ ID NOS 8 and 9 10 and 11 12 and 13 14 and 15 16 and 17 18 and 19 20 and 21 22 and 23 24 and 25 26 and 27 28 and 29 30 and 31 32 and 33 34 and 35 36 and 37 38 and 39 40 and 41 42 and 43 44 and 45 86 and 87 88 and 89 90 and 91 92 and 93 94 and 95 96 and 97 98 and 99 100 and 101 102 and 103 104 and 105 106 and 107 108 and 109 . The 5 primers contained between 43 48 bases. In particular the T 7 His TAP ends contained 28 bases while the gene specific component contained between 15 20 bases. The 3 primers contained between 45 50 bases. Specifically the T7 terminator TAP ends contained 30 bases while the gene specific component contained between 15 20 bases.

The PCR reactions contained 100 ng Mtb genomic DNA 25 nM final concentration of 5 and 3 primers. Polymerase PCR buffer and nucleotides were from Clontech. The reaction temperature and times for the first PCR reaction were 94 C. for 2 minutes followed by 30 cycles of 94 C. for 30 seconds 48 C. for 1 min. and 68 C. for 2.5 minutes.

Following the first PCR reaction an aliquot of each PCR reaction containing 100 ng of PCR product from the previous step was transferred into a PCR reaction containing the TAP promoter and terminator fragments. The sequences of these fragments were 

The reaction temperature and times for the second PCR reaction were 94 C. for 2 minutes followed by 30 cycles of 94 C. for 30 seconds 48 C. for 60 seconds and 68 C. for 2.5 minutes.

The TAP fragments generated by PCR were used as templates for in vitro protein expression using a Roche RTS100 transcription translation kit according to manufacturer s instructions. Approximately 0.5 1.0 g PCR product was used as template producing approximately 0.5 5.0 g of protein per template.

MagneHis nickel coated magnetic beads Promega were used to purify the expressed proteins. 15 l of Ni magnetic beads Promega were pipetted into each well of a microtiter plate. To each well 50 l wash buffer 50 mM NaHPO pHS8.0 300 mM NaCl 100 mM imidazole was added with mixing and the plates were placed on a magnetic stand. The supernatant was removed and wash was repeated. 50 l of the protein mixture was added with gentle pipetting. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 2 minutes. The beads were then separated using a magnetic stand washed 3 times with 150 l wash buffer and the bound protein was eluted from the beads with 50 l of 50 mM NaHPO pH 8.0 300 mM NaCl 250 mM imidazole.

15 l of the purified proteins were resolved on 4 12 SDS polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes The membranes were blocked in TBST 1 BSA followed by incubation with TBST 1 BSA containing 1000 fold diluted rabbit anti Mtb serum. The blots were washed and then incubated with alkaline phosphatase conjugated goat anti rabbit serum secondary antibody. Colorimetric development was used to develop the blots. The results of these analyses are shown in .

The wells of Nunc Immuno MaxiSorp 96 well plates were coated with 5 l of expressed protein diluted in 95 l PBS. The plates were mixed well on a shaker and then incubated overnight at 4 C. The plates were washed with PBS 0.05 Tween 20 for 5 min. with shaking at 200 rpm. 200 l of PBS 1 BSA blocking solution was added and the plates incubated for 1 hr at room temperature with shaking at 150 rpm. The blocking buffer was removed and 100 l primary antibody 04.E293.1.11.WCL LAM rabbit polyclonal antibodies 1 200000 diluted in blocking solution was added. Following 1 hr incubation at room temperature with shaking at 150 rpm the plates were washed 3 times with PBS 0.05 Tween 20. 100 l second antibody Anti Rabbit IgG H L HRP conjugated Promega diluted 1 2500 in blocking solution was added to each well and the plates were incubated for 1 hr at room temperature with shaking at 150 rpm. After washing 3 times 100 l TMB substrate solution Promega was added to each well and the blue color was allowed to develop for 15 min at room temperature without shaking. 100 l of 1N HCl was added to each well to stop the reaction and change the blue color to yellow. The plates were read in a specrophotometer at 450 nm after 30 min. The results of this analysis are shown in .

As shown in rabbit anti Mtb serum identified 19 and 12 proteins that were reactive to the anti serum Western blot and ELISA respectively. The results showed a strong correlation in hits between the two methods. In addition a few antigen proteins at low abundance exhibited high reactivity relative to the others suggesting the presence of strong B cell epitopes thus making them premier candidates for additional study.

The following is a method that is used to systematically screen and identify antigens in Mtb that give rise to a protective cell mediated immune response. Through the use of TAP technology coding sequences of the Mtb genome are amplified. The PCR reactions are performed such that each amplified coding sequence becomes transcriptionally active. The resulting TAP fragments are expressed to produce Mtb polypeptides. Each of the polypeptides is delivered into dendritic cells located in 96 well plates using a polypeptide delivery reagent. Serum from Mtb immunized humans is added to each of the different wells.

96 well plates are coated with Coating Antibody anti IFN g Clone 1 DIK at 10 15 g mL 100 L well and incubated at 4 C. overnight. Using aseptic technique plates are flicked to remove Coating Antibody and washed 6 times with RPMI 1640. Plates are blocked with 100 L well of RPMI 1640 10 FBS or Human AB serum for 1 2 hours at room temperature. Plates are flicked to remove blocking buffer and 100 L well of antigen specific or control peptides are added at a final concentration of 10 g well. Peripheral blood lymphocytes PBL are added at 4 105 well and 1 105 well. Plates are incubated at 37 C. 5 COfor 36 hours. Plates are flicked to remove cells and washed 6 times with PBS 0.05 Tween 20 at 200 250 L well. Plates are blot dried on paper towels.

Biotinylated antibody anti IFN g Clone 7 B6 1 diluted 1 1 000 in 1 PBS at 100 L well is added. The resulting solution is incubated for 3 hours at room temperature. Plates are flicked to remove biotinylated antibody and washed 6 times with PBS 0.05 Tween 20 at 200 250 L well. Plates are blot dried on paper towels. Streptavidin alkaline phosphatase is added at 100 L well diluted 1 1 000 in 1 PBS. The plates are incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Plates are flicked to remove the streptavidin alkaline phosphatase and washed 6 times with 0.05 Tween 20 at 200 250 L well. The plates are washed again 3 times with 1 PBS at 200 250 L well. The plates are blot dried on paper towels.

Substrate is added at 100 L well for 10 15 minutes at room temperature. The substrate is prepared according to manufacturer s protocol. The 25 substrate buffer is diluted in dH20 to a 1 concentration. Reagent A B are each diluted 1 100 in the 1 substrate buffer. Rinsing plates with generous amounts of tap water flooding plate and flicking several times stops colorimetric substrate. Plates are allowed to dry overnight at room temperature in the dark. Spots corresponding to IFN producing cells are determined visually using a stereomicroscope Zeiss KS ELIspot . Results can be expressed as the number of IFN secreting cells per 10spleen cells. Responses are considered positive if the response to test Mtb peptide epitope is significantly different p

A human volunteer was immunized with irradiated sporozoites from the infectious agent responsible for malaria. Dendritic cells from the volunteer were isolated and cultured. Recombinant CSP polypeptide from was delivered to dendritic cells with or without polypeptide delivery reagents described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 738046 entitled Intracellular Protein Delivery Reagent which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. T cells isolated from the immunized volunteer were added to the cultures. The EliSpotassay identified 120 CSP antigen specific T cells out of 250 000 T cells that were added to the culture when CSP was added to the culture together with said delivery reagents. When CSP was added without said delivery reagents the signal was barely above background.

Experiments were set up with five animals per group consisting of four week old BALB c female mice averaging 40 animals per experiment. These mice were immunized IM in each tibialis anterior muscle with 50 g plasmid DNA or transcriptionally active PCR fragment encoding selected Mtb antigens 3 times at 3 week intervals.

Sera was collected 10 days after each immunization for antibody studies. Blood samples 50 ul were collected from the mice by orbital bleed with a sterilized pasture pipette. The mice were bled about once a week at a volume of approximately 50 l.

Splenocytes were harvested at 14 days after the 3rd immunization and pooled for T cell studies such as IFN ELIspot assays. Tissue collections were performed on animals euthanized via CO SOP 98.19 at the end of the experiment. The experiments can be five animals group averaging 40 animals experiment x 4 experiments for a total of 160 mice.

Dendritic cells were ordered from Allcells Cat PB002 NPB Mononuclear Cells . The cells were in 50 mL buffer. The cells were counted immediately the total number was 312.5 10. The cells were pelleted and resuspended in 25 mL RPMI 1640 containing DNAse. This solution 30 g mL was incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature. The cells were washed twice with complete medium. The cells were resuspended at 10 10cells 3 mL. Twelve 10 mm dishes containing 10 mL complete medium in each dish were used. The cells were incubated at 37 C. for 3 hours. The non adherent cells were removed by gently shaking plates and aspirating the supernatant. Afterwards the dishes containing adherent cells were washed 3 times with 10 mL of RPMI 1640 containing 2 Human Serum. 10 mL of culture medium were added to each plate containing 50 ng mL GM CSF and 500 u mL IL 4. This culture medium was added until day 4. After day 4 culture medium without GM CSF and IL 4 was added. The transfection was done on day 5. The complete medium consisted of RPMI 1640 455 mL 5 Human AB Serum 25 mL Non essential Amino Acids 5 mL Sodium Pyruvate 5 mL L Glutamine 5 mL and Penicillin Streptomycin 5 mL .

Cells were taken from the bones of one mouse 2 femur and 2 tibiae without removing the macrophages . The red blood cells were obtained from the bone marrow and lysed. The cells were counted 51 10cells total and cultured in a growth medium 2.5 10cells plate 10 mL plate for 8 days before transfection. On day 4 another 10 mL of growth medium was added. On day 6 10 mL of the old medium was taken from each plate and the cells were pelleted. The cells were resuspended in 10 mL medium with 10 ng mL GM CSF and 2.5 ng mL IL 4. The cells were placed back into the culture. The cells were cultured until transfection on day 8. On the day of transfection 2.5 10cells were harvested from each dish. The growth medium for mbmDC contained DMEM Iscove 10 FCS 50 uM mercaptoethanol 1 Penicillin Streptomycin 2 mM L Glutamine 10 mM Hepes 1 Non essential amino acids 20 ng mL rmGM CSF and 5 ng mL rmIL 4.

Oligos were designed using TAP promoter and terminator fragments from pCMVm and pTP SV40 respectively and adding the nucleotide sequence encoding the HA epitope tag. For adding the HA epitope to the 5 end of the coding sequence the following sequences is used 

PCR is used to amplify a new HA promoter utilizing pCMVm as a template and a new HA terminator utilizing pTP SV40 as a template. The resulting PCR products are gel purified using QIAGEN QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit Qiagen Seattle Wash. . The PCR products and both plasmids pCMVm pTP SV40 are digested with EcoRV and BglII restriction enzymes. All digested products are gel purified using QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit. The HA promoter and HA terminator are ligated separately into the digested pCMVm and pTP SV40 plasmids. These plasmids are transformed into DH5 grown overnight on LB plates containing Kanamycin colonies are selected and grown in LB media containing Kanamycin. QIAGEN QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit is used to isolate plasmids. Plasmids are digested using EcoRV and BglII. Digests are run on a gel to identify clones containing plasmid with insert of correct size. The plasmids are sequenced to confirm inserts are correct. A prep culture is grown plasmids are isolated plasmids are digested with EcoRV and BglII and promoter and terminator fragments are gel purified. Epi TAP 5 HA and Epi TAP 3 HA kits are used.

Bone marrow derived dendritic cells BMDCs were prepared by culturing bone marrow cell suspensions with RPMI tissue culture media plus 10 fetal bovine serum and GM CSF 20 ng ml for 6 7 days at 37 C. 5 CO. Cells were then primed with 1 g ml of antigen for 4 hrs at 37 C. 5 CO.

Cell suspensions obtained from naive or infected mice were used as a source of CD4 T cells. CD4 T cells are isolated by magnetic cell sorting and overlaid onto BMDC primed with specific antigens and cultured at 37 C. for 24 hrs. After this time T cells were harvested and stained for CD3 CD4 intracellular IFN and analyzed by flow cytometry.

The sequences disclosed in Table 1 yielded positive results in at least one assay described herein e.g. Western blot ELISA or ICS.

A panel of immunogenic Mtb proteins discovered in Phase I studies that were recognized by rabbit anti TB sera was selected for further analysis to determine if these proteins could lead to enhanced induction of CD4 T cells. Thirty six purified Mtb proteins along with positive controls culture filtrate proteins CFP and recombinant ESAT 6 were included in the ICS assay. The results are summarized in Table 2 and demonstrate that 11 of the 36 proteins significantly stimulated CD4 T cell responses. Moreover with equal protein amounts used 6 Mtb proteins showed greater stimulatory activity than that of ESAT 6.

One g each from 36 purified Mtb proteins along with the control protein ESAT 6 were incubated with mouse dendritic cells for 24 hr. Spleen cells harvested from Mtb infected mice were added and incubated for an additional 72 hr. The splenocytes were labeled with cychrome conjugated anti CD4 antibody and then stained with fluorescein conjugated anti IFN. The cells were washed fixed and analyzed by flow cytometry. The T cells indicates the percentage of CD4 T cells that released IFN. Based on previous studies the percent value at or above 2.5 is significant.

