---

title: Raspberry cultivar ‘Cascade Bounty’
abstract: A new and distinct cultivar of raspberry (i.e., ). The cultivar forms medium sized, medium colored, tart flavored fruit. The fruit is round in shape with similar length and width. Based on trials on root rot infested soil, the cultivar appears to be highly tolerant of root rot, producing very high yields on these sites.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=PP018246&OS=PP018246&RS=PP018246
owner: Washington State University Research Foundation
number: PP018246
owner_city: Pullman
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050215
---
The invention was made in part with Federal formula funds pursuant to the Hatch Act and was part of Project WNP00640. The United States Government has certain rights in the invention.

This invention relates to a new and distinct cultivar of raspberry plant with a botanical name of and the cultivar designation Cascade Bounty .

Many cultivars of raspberry plant are known. For instance raspberry cultivars named Lauren Encore Prelude and WSU 1090 are described in U.S. Plant Pat. Nos. 10 610 11 746 11 747 and 14 522 respectively. The parents of the new and distinct cultivar of the present invention are Chief and WSU 984.

The instant plant Cascade Bounty originated from a hand pollinated cross of WSU 984 non patented the female parent Chief non patented the male parent made in 1992 at Washington State University Puyallup Research and Extension Center Puyallup Wash. Chief is a red raspberry cultivar released from the University of Minnesota in 1930. Chief produces round small to medium fruit that ripens early in the season. Chief is highly root rot tolerant and very winter hardy. WSU 984 is a red raspberry selection from the Washington State University breeding program. WSU 984 was highly productive has long fruiting laterals and produces long conic light colored fruit.

 Cascade Bounty is distinguished primarily by its high productivity and high level of tolerance to root rot. The fruit is rounded in shape and tart.

 Cascade Bounty is distinguished from its parent WSU 984 by having more rounded fruit darker fruit color and more acidic fruit.

 Cascade Bounty is distinguished from its parent Chief in having larger leaves with terminal distal lateral and basal lateral leaflets all being longer and wider than Chief. Cascade Bounty has larger fruit more drupelets per fruit greater drupelet weight larger seeds later harvest season and greater productivity than Chief .

 Boyne non patented and Killarney non patented are red raspberry cultivars that also have Chief as one of their parents. Cascade Bounty is distinguished from Boyne by a longer petiole greater length of terminal and basal lateral leaflets and sessile basal lateral leaflets for primocane leaves larger fruit more drupelets per fruit larger drupelets larger individual seed weight lighter fruit color and a later harvest season. Cascade Bounty is distinguished from Killarney by a longer petiole longer leaflets and sessile basal lateral leaflets for primocane leaves larger fruit more drupelets per fruit larger drupelets larger individual seed weight and a later harvest season.

 Cascade Bounty is distinguished from Meeker non patented in having sessile basal lateral leaflets shorter and narrower basal lateral leaflets for primocane leaves fewer drupelets per fruit larger drupelets larger seeds more acidic fruit more fruit per lateral more fruit per fruiting node and greater tolerance to root rot.

 Cascade Bounty is distinguished from Cascade Delight patented as WSU 1090 U.S. Plant Pat. No. 14 522 by in having sessile basal lateral leaflets smaller leaflets on primocanes lighter colored spines on the primocanes greater total number of buds flowers and developing fruit per lateral node and fruiting nodes greater number of fruit per lateral and fruit per fruiting node smaller length to width ratio of fruit fewer drupelets per fruit smaller drupelets smaller fruit and greater tolerance to root rot.

 Cascade Bounty is distinguished from Chilliwack non patented Comox non patented Cowichan non patented Encore U.S. Plant Pat. No. 11 747 Malahat non patented Tulameen non patented and Qualicum non patented by having greater tolerance to root rot in a replicated yield planting on a site with severe root rot. Cascade Bounty was very vigorous while most or all of the plants of these cultivars died on this site.

The seeds resulting from the controlled hybridization of Chief WSU 984 were germinated in a greenhouse during the winter of 1992 1993. Resulting seedlings were planted in the spring of 1993 at Puyallup Wash. The seedlings fruited in 1995 and one designated WSU 1162 was selected for its vigor on a poor site bright uniform sized fruit and apparent productivity.

During 1995 1996 the original plant selection was propagated asexually in a greenhouse at Puyallup Wash. by rooting cuttings derived from root material. A replicated planting of four replications of three plants each was established in spring 1996 at Puyallup Wash. Subsequently additional test plantings were established from asexually propagated plants that were propagated from root cuttings or micropropagated using meristem cultures from axillary buds of primocanes. Plantings were established in Puyallup and Burlington Wash. All asexually propagated plants have been observed to be true to type during all asexual multiplication and the vegetative and fruit characteristics of the original plants have been maintained. Plants fruited in the second or third season of growth after planting.

Test plantings have shown this new variety to be adapted to all tested locations in western Washington. There has been no observed winter damage but winter hardiness is unknown. Plants of the new variety have vigorous growth with long fruiting laterals.

When objects could be accurately measured with an 8 mm diameter measuring opening leaves and fruit color was measured with a Minolta Chroma Meter CR 200b which measure color in L a b color coordinates. Calibration was performed using a standard white plate supplied by the manufacturer. These L a b coordinates were converted and presented in Munsell color notation. For all the other color measurements color was compared with Royal Horticultural Society Colour Chart color plates and presented as Royal Horticultural Society Colour Chart designations.

The number of canes per hill diameter cane length number of nodes internode length and color are given in comparison to Meeker and Cascade Delight in Table 1. The planting with Cascade Bounty and Cascade Delight were planted in 2000. This site is highly infested with root rot and over 65 of the cultivars and selections in the planting dying from root rot within 4 years. Cascade Delight has some tolerance to root rot and was vigorous Meeker is susceptible to root rot and had collapsed by 2004. Data for Meeker was collected from an adjacent planting established in 2001 where plants of Meeker had not collapsed. Even in the 2000 planting Cascade Bounty produced many canes and was very vigorous FIG. . Plants have been grown in the hill system with 10 12 canes retained per hill and the primocanes pruned to 1.2 m in winter. The following summer fruiting plots were 175 cm tall with a width of 130 cm.

Primocane emergence was similar for Cascade Bounty and Cascade Delight and occurred approximately Mar. 15 2004. Bud break for Cascade Bounty and for Cascade Delight was Feb. 23 2004. When the floricanes were observed Mar. 17 2003 there were high levels of waxy bloom on the canes making the canes appear Greyed Purple group 186A . The color of the canes depended on the amount of wax on the canes. When the wax was rubbed off the color of the canes was Greyed Orange group 166B . The color of the bud scales were Greyed Purple group 183A . The midwinter color of canes is shown in FIG. . In midsummer Jul. 16 2004 the cane color was much greener Yellow Green Group 145B . At about 30 cm in height the canes had 20 40 spines per cm of cane FIG. . The distal portion of taller canes have fewer spines smaller spines and the pigmentation at the basal spot and lower portions of the spine decrease. The spine color is Greyed Purple Group 186A . The spines are straight and pointed toward the base of the canes. There are pigmented spots at the base of the spine that are the same color as the spines. The spine color is similar to Meeker and not as dark as Cascade Delight . The spines at 30 cm of a plant grown in the greenhouse measured Sep. 27 2004 were 2.4 mm long and the basal spot at the base of the spine was 0.9 mm. The canes are glabrous.

The upper surface of the leaves is glabrous with some pubescence at the leaf margin. The leaves are pubescent on the lower surface. The leaflets are generally flat in cross section. The petioles are pubescent and also have spines that are similar but smaller to those on the canes.

Characteristics of primocane leaves are given in Table 2. The petioles of Cascade Bounty are longer than Boyne Chief and Killarney . The length of the terminal leaflet and basal lateral leaflet of Boyne were less than Cascade Bounty . The leaves of Cascade Delight are larger than Cascade Bounty the length and width of the terminal distal lateral and width of the basal lateral leaflets. The leaves of Chief are smaller than Cascade Bounty the length and width of all leaflets. The leaflets of Killarney were shorter than the leaflets of Cascade Bounty . The leaves of Meeker were generally similar is size to Cascade Bounty except the basal lateral leaflets of Meeker were shorter and narrower than Cascade Bounty .

The primocane leaves of Cascade Bounty are pinnately compound with 5 leaflets FIG. . The leaves have 2 stipules. The distal lateral leaflets and the terminal leaflet overlap slightly. The leaflets are doubly serrated. The leaflets are generally ovate. The tips of all leaflets are acuminate to acute. The base of the terminal leaflet is rounded to cordate. The basal lateral leaflets are sessile and the bases are rounded and relatively symmetrical. The distal lateral leaflets are sessile with asymmetrical leaf bases.

Characteristics of floricane leaves are given in Table 3. There were few differences among cultivars for floricane leaf measurements. The basal lateral leaflets for Cascade Bounty and Chief were sessile while Boyne Cascade Delight Killarney and Meeker had petioles over 1 mm. The floricane leaves have 3 leaflets that do not overlap. The leaves have 3 leaflets and 2 stipules. The leaflets are generally ovate. The leaflet tips are acuminate to acute. The leaf bases for the terminal leaflet is cordate and the lateral leaflets are rounded.

Fruit of this variety ripens late in the season with the midpoint of harvest averaging July 12 and the length of the fruiting season averaging 27 days at Puyallup Wash. The midpoint of harvest for Meeker averaged July 13 with 23.5 days for the length of the fruiting season. Fruit production has not been observed on primocanes. Fruit releases easily from the receptacle. The fruit is medium sized averaging 3.4 over the season. Early in the fruiting season fruit was much larger averaging 5.29 g on Jun. 25 2004.

Although variable from year to year and among locations May 6 2004 was the date for the first open flowers of Cascade Bounty at Puyallup Wash. the same as for Cascade Delight . The lateral length number of nodes number of flowers flower diameter and color are given in Table 4. Cascade Bounty had a greater total number of buds flowers and developing fruit per lateral node and fruiting node than Cascade Delight . Flower morphology is typical of most red raspberry cultivars and is not useful to identify Cascade Bounty . The petals are White Group 155A sepals Yellow Green Group 147C and pedicels Greyed Purple Group 184A . The flowers are perfect with generally 5 sepals 5 petals and numerous stamens approximately 90 same as Cascade Delight and pistils approximately 85 based on the number of developed drupelets . The flowers are self fertile. The flowering trusses are cymose in elongate clusters and at each node on the fruiting lateral the flowers are predominantly borne singly or sometimes in clusters of two or more. The flowers have no discernable fragrance. The pedicel length number of fruit and number of fruiting nodes are given in Table 5. The pedicel length was similar in Cascade Bounty Cascade Delight and Meeker . Cascade Bounty had more fruit per lateral and number of fruit per fruiting node than Cascade Delight and Meeker . Differences between the number of flowers Table 4 and number of fruit Table 5 are within sampling errors.

Fruit morphological characteristics are given in Table 6. Fruit is round in shape and glossy FIG. . The width of the fruit of Boyne and Chief was greater than their length. The length of the fruit of Cascade Delight was greater than its width. The length and width of the fruit were similar for Cascade Bounty and Killarney and Meeker . The number of drupelets per fruit for Cascade Bounty was less than for Cascade Delight and Meeker and more than Boyne Chief and Killarney . The drupelet weight of Cascade Bounty was less than Cascade Delight but greater than Boyne Chief Killarney and Meeker . The individual seed weight of Cascade Bounty was greater than the five cultivars it was compared with. Fruit of WSU 984 one of the parents of Cascade Bounty is not available but in 1994 the shape of its fruit was conic to long conic with the length width ratio of 1.4 range 1.2 to 1.6 . This is much greater than the length width ratio of 1.07 for Cascade Bounty . The Munsell color value for fruit of WSU 984 in a 1994 sample was 6R3 6. This is much lighter than Cascade Bounty .

Fruit of Cascade Bounty is tart but with a good raspberry flavor. The pH titratable acidity soluble solids and anthocyanin concentration of processing ripe fruit are given in Table 7. Soluble solids content and pH of Cascade Bounty fruit did not differ from Willamette . The titratable aciditiy of Cascade Bounty did not differ from Cascade Delight . The anthocyanin content of Cascade Bounty fruit did not differ from Meeker . Although not analyzed in 2004 the fruit of WSU 984 one of the parents of Cascade Bounty was included in analyses in 1992. The anthocyanin concentration for WSU 984 was low 56 of the value of Meeker fruit harvested that same year in the same planting. In the 2003 comparison the anthocyanin concentration of Cascade Bounty was over 90 of the value of Meeker .

Because of the fruit acidity size and firmness Cascade Bounty probably is not well suited to fresh market use. Therefore fruit of Cascade Bounty were not evaluated for post harvest storage.

Fruit production was measured in two plantings replicated plots at Puyallup that were hand harvested. Both plantings were on sites with high levels of root rot. In the planting established in 1996 Cascade Bounty was compared to Comox Encore Malahat Meeker Tulameen and Willamette Table 8 . Cascade Bounty had the highest yield in 1998 and in 1999 but because of root rot in the plots there was considerable variability among plots. By 1999 all plots of Encore and Malahat had died. In the planting established in 2000 Cascade Bounty was compared to Cascade Delight Meeker Chilliwack Willamette Cowichan Malahat Qualicum and Tulameen . Before the 2003 harvests all plots of Cowichan Malahat Qualicum and Tulameen had died from root rot. In both 2003 and 2004 yield for these plots was set to 0 and missing values for other variables. Cascade Bounty was extremely productive and had higher yields than all other cultivars in each year. Fruit weight of Cascade Bounty was similar to Meeker in both plantings and both were smaller than Cascade Delight . Fruit firmness for Cascade Bounty was similar to Meeker in both years. The 5 50 and 95 harvest dates were similar for Cascade Bounty and Cascade Delight and Meeker except for the date of 95 of harvest in 2003 for Meeker . Cascade Bounty was also subjectively evaluated in plots established in 2003 that were machine harvested at Burlington Wash. Cascade Bounty machine harvested acceptably for bulk frozen puree or juice uses. There was some broken fruit and soft fruit so it may not be suitable for IQF fruit Individually Quick Frozen fruit .

 Cascade Bounty is susceptible to the large raspberry aphid the vector for the mosaic virus complex. It appears to be susceptible to raspberry bushy dwarf virus RBDV via pollen transmission. In unsprayed plots the canes had some spur blight Niessl Sacc. infections but with a low incidence. Cascade Bounty has been planted in areas with high levels of root rot var. Wilcox Duncan and has had high yields with vigorous plants. Cascade Bounty appears to have high levels of root rot tolerance.

While the invention has been described in connection with specific embodiments thereof it will be understood that it is capable of further modification and this application is intended to cover any variations uses or adaptations of the invention following in general the principles of the invention and including such departures from the present disclosure as come within known or customary practice in the art to which the invention pertains and as may be applied to the essential features hereinbefore set forth and as fall within the scope of the invention and the limits of the appended claims.

